========================================

THE VALET'S TRAGEDY AND OTHER STUDIES

By Andrew Lang




TO THE MARQUIS D'EGUILLES 'FOR THE LOVE OF THE MAID AND OF CHIVALRY'



CONTENTS

   PREFACE
   I.    THE VALET'S TRAGEDY
   II.   THE VALET'S MASTER
   III.  THE MYSTERY OF SIR EDMUND BERRY GODFREY
   IV.   THE FALSE JEANNE D'ARC.
   V.    JUNIUS AND LORD LYTTELTON'S GHOST
   VI.   THE MYSTERY OF AMY ROBSART
   VII.  THE VOICES OF JEANNE D'ARC
   VIII. THE MYSTERY OF JAMES DE LA CLOCHE
   IX.   THE TRUTH ABOUT 'FISHER'S GHOST'
   X.    THE MYSTERY OF LORD BATEMAN
   XI.   THE QUEEN'S MARIE
   XII.  THE SHAKESPEARE-BACON IMBROGLIO




PREFACE


These studies in secret history follow no chronological order. The
affair of James de la Cloche only attracted the author's attention after
most of the volume was in print. But any reader curious in the veiled
intrigues of the Restoration will probably find it convenient to peruse
'The Mystery of James de la Cloche' after the essay on 'The Valet's
Master,' as the puzzling adventures of de la Cloche occurred in the
years (1668-1669), when the Valet was consigned to lifelong captivity,
and the Master was broken on the wheel. What would have been done to
'Giacopo Stuardo' had he been a subject of Louis XIV., ''tis better only
guessing.' But his fate, whoever he may have been, lay in the hands
of Lord Ailesbury's 'good King,' Charles II., and so he had a good
deliverance.

The author is well aware that whosoever discusses historical mysteries
pleases the public best by being quite sure, and offering a definite and
certain solution. Unluckily Science forbids, and conscience is on the
same side. We verily do not know how the false Pucelle arrived at her
success with the family of the true Maid; we do not know, or pretend to
know, who killed Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey; or how Amy Robsart came by
her death; or why the Valet was so important a prisoner. It is only
possible to restate the cases, and remove, if we may, the errors and
confusions which beset the problems. Such a tiny point as the year
of Amy Robsart's marriage is stated variously by our historians. To
ascertain the truth gave the author half a day's work, and, at last,
he would have voted for the wrong year, had he not been aided by the
superior acuteness of his friend, Mr. Hay Fleming. He feels morally
certain that, in trying to set historians right about Amy Robsart, he
must have committed some conspicuous blunders; these always attend such
enterprises of rectification.

With regard to Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, Mr. A. W. Crawley-Boevey points
out to me that in an unpublished letter of Mr. Alexander Herbert Phaire
in 1743-44 (Addit. MSS. British Museum 4291, fol. 150) Godfrey is spoken
of in connection with his friend Valentine Greatrakes, the 'miraculous
Conformist,' or 'Irish Stroker,' of the Restoration. 'It is a pity,' Mr.
Phaire remarks, 'that Sir Edmund's letters, to the number of 104, are
not in somebody's hands that would oblige the world by publishing them.
They contain many remarkable things, and the best and truest secret
history in King Charles II.'s reign.' Where are these letters now? Mr.
Phaire does not say to whom they were addressed, perhaps to Greatrakes,
who named his second son after Sir Edmund, or to Colonel Phaire, the
Regicide. This Mr. Phaire of 1744 was of Colonel Phaire's family. It
does not seem quite certain whether Le Fevre, or Lee Phaire, was the
real name of the so-called Jesuit whom Bedloe accused of the murder of
Sir Edmund.

Of the studies here presented, 'The Valet's Master,' 'The Mystery of
Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey,' 'The False Jeanne d'Arc,' 'The Mystery of Amy
Robsart,' and 'The Mystery of James de la Cloche,' are now published for
the first time. Part of 'The Voices of Jeanne d'Arc,' is from a paper by
the author in 'The Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research.'
'The Valet's Tragedy' is mainly from an article in 'The Monthly Review,'
revised, corrected, and augmented. 'The Queen's Marie' is a recast of a
paper in 'Blackwood's Magazine'; 'The Truth about "Fisher's Ghost,"' and
'Junius and Lord Lyttelton's Ghost' are reprinted, with little change,
from the same periodical. 'The Mystery of Lord Bateman' is a recast of
an article in 'The Cornhill Magazine.' The earlier part of the essay on
Shakespeare and Bacon appeared in 'The Quarterly Review.' The author is
obliged to the courtesy of the proprietors and editors of these serials
for permission to use his essays again, with revision and additions.*


     *Essays by the author on 'The False Pucelle' and on 'Sir Edmund
Berry Godfrey' have appeared in The Nineteenth Century (1895) and in The
Cornhill Magazine, but these are not the papers here presented.

The author is deeply indebted to the generous assistance of Father
Gerard and Father Pollen, S.J.; and, for making transcripts of
unpublished documents, to Miss E. M. Thompson and Miss Violet Simpson.

Since passing the volume for the press the author has received from
Mr. Austin West, at Rome, a summary of Armanni's letter about Giacopo
Stuardo. He is led thereby to the conclusion that Giacopo was identical
with the eldest son of Charles II.--James de la Cloche--but conceives
that, at the end of his life, James was insane, or at least was a
'megalomaniac,' or was not author of his own Will.





I. THE VALET'S TRAGEDY



1. THE LEGEND OF THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK

The Mystery of the Man in the Iron Mask is, despite a pleasant saying
of Lord Beaconsfield's, one of the most fascinating in history. By a
curious coincidence the wildest legend on the subject, and the correct
explanation of the problem, were offered to the world in the same year,
1801. According to this form of the legend, the Man in the Iron Mask was
the genuine Louis XIV., deprived of his rights in favour of a child of
Anne of Austria and of Mazarin. Immured in the Isles Sainte-Marguerite,
in the bay of Cannes (where you are shown his cell, looking north to
the sunny town), he married, and begot a son. That son was carried to
Corsica, was named de Buona Parte, and was the ancestor of Napoleon. The
Emperor was thus the legitimate representative of the House of Bourbon.

This legend was circulated in 1801, and is referred to in a proclamation
of the Royalists of La Vendee. In the same year, 1801, Roux Fazaillac,
a Citoyen and a revolutionary legislator, published a work in which he
asserted that the Man in the Iron Mask (as known in rumour) was not one
man, but a myth, in which the actual facts concerning at least two men
were blended. It is certain that Roux Fazaillac was right; or that, if
he was wrong, the Man in the Iron Mask was an obscure valet, of French
birth, residing in England, whose real name was Martin.

Before we enter on the topic of this poor menial's tragic history,
it may be as well to trace the progress of the romantic legend, as it
blossomed after the death of the Man, whose Mask was not of iron, but
of black velvet. Later we shall show how the legend struck root and
flowered, from the moment when the poor valet, Martin (by his prison
pseudonym 'Eustache Dauger'), was immured in the French fortress of
Pignerol, in Piedmont (August 1669).

The Man, IN CONNECTION WITH THE MASK, is first known to us from a kind
of notebook kept by du Junca, Lieutenant of the Bastille. On September
18, 1698, he records the arrival of the new Governor of the Bastille,
M. de Saint-Mars, bringing with him, from his last place, the Isles
Sainte-Marguerite, in the bay of Cannes, 'an old prisoner whom he had at
Pignerol. He keeps the prisoner always masked, his name is not spoken...
and I have put him, alone, in the third chamber of the Bertaudiere
tower, having furnished it some days before with everything, by order
of M. de Saint-Mars. The prisoner is to be served and cared for by M. de
Rosarges,' the officer next in command under Saint-Mars.*


     *Funck-Brentano. Legendes et Archives de la Bastille, pp. 86, 87,
Paris, 1898, p. 277, a facsimile of this entry.

The prisoner's death is entered by du Junca on November 19, 1703. To
that entry we return later.

The existence of this prisoner was known and excited curiosity. On
October 15, 1711, the Princess Palatine wrote about the case to
the Electress Sophia of Hanover, 'A man lived for long years in the
Bastille, masked, and masked he died there. Two musketeers were by his
side to shoot him if ever he unmasked. He ate and slept in his mask.
There must, doubtless, have been some good reason for this, as otherwise
he was very well treated, well lodged, and had everything given to him
that he wanted. He took the Communion masked; was very devout, and read
perpetually.'

On October 22, 1711, the Princess writes that the Mask was an English
nobleman, mixed up in the plot of the Duke of Berwick against William
III.--Fenwick's affair is meant. He was imprisoned and masked that the
Dutch usurper might never know what had become of him.*


     * Op. cit. 98, note 1.

The legend was now afloat in society. The sub-commandant of the Bastille
from 1749 to 1787, Chevalier, declared, obviously on the evidence of
tradition, that all the Mask's furniture and clothes were destroyed at
his death, lest they might yield a clue to his identity. Louis XV. is
said to have told Madame de Pompadour that the Mask was 'the minister
of an Italian prince.' Louis XVI. told Marie Antoinette (according to
Madame de Campan) that the Mask was a Mantuan intriguer, the same
person as Louis XV. indicated. Perhaps he was, it is one of two possible
alternatives. Voltaire, in the first edition of his 'Siecle de Louis
XIV.,' merely spoke of a young, handsome, masked prisoner, treated with
the highest respect by Louvois, the Minister of Louis XIV. At last, in
'Questions sur l'Encyclopedie' (second edition), Voltaire averred that
the Mask was the son of Anne of Austria and Mazarin, an elder brother of
Louis XIV. Changes were rung on this note: the Mask was the actual
King, Louis XIV. was a bastard. Others held that he was James, Duke of
Monmouth--or Moliere! In 1770 Heiss identified him with Mattioli, the
Mantuan intriguer, and especially after the appearance of the book by
Roux Fazaillac, in 1801, that was the generally accepted opinion.

It MAY be true, in part. Mattioli MAY have been the prisoner who died in
the Bastille in November 1703, but the legend of the Mask's prison life
undeniably arose out of the adventure of our valet, Martin or Eustache
Dauger.



2. THE VALET'S HISTORY



After reading the arguments of the advocates of Mattioli, I could not
but perceive that, whatever captive died, masked, at the Bastille in
1703, the valet Dauger was the real source of most of the legends about
the Man in the Iron Mask. A study of M. Lair's book 'Nicholas Foucquet'
(1890) confirmed this opinion. I therefore pushed the inquiry into a
source neglected by the French historians, namely, the correspondence
of the English ambassadors, agents, and statesmen for the years 1668,
1669.* One result is to confirm a wild theory of my own to the effect
that the Man in the Iron Mask (if Dauger were he) may have been as great
a mystery to himself as to historical inquirers. He may not have
known WHAT he was imprisoned for doing! More important is the probable
conclusion that the long and mysterious captivity of Eustache Dauger,
and of another perfectly harmless valet and victim, was the mere
automatic result of the 'red tape' of the old French absolute monarchy.
These wretches were caught in the toils of the system, and suffered to
no purpose, for no crime. The two men, at least Dauger, were apparently
mere supernumeraries in the obscure intrigue of a conspirator known as
Roux de Marsilly.


     *The papers are in the Record Office; for the contents see the
following essay, 'The Valet's Master.'

This truly abominable tragedy of Roux de Marsilly is 'another story,'
narrated in the following essay. It must suffice here to say that, in
1669, while Charles II. was negotiating the famous, or infamous, secret
treaty with Louis XIV.--the treaty of alliance against Holland, and
in favour of the restoration of Roman Catholicism in England--Roux de
Marsilly, a French Huguenot, was dealing with Arlington and others, in
favour of a Protestant league against France.

When he started from England for Switzerland in February 1669, Marsilly
left in London a valet, called by him 'Martin,' who had quitted his
service and was living with his own family. This man is the 'Eustache
Dauger' of our mystery. The name is his prison pseudonym, as 'Lestang'
was that of Mattioli. The French Government was anxious to lay hands on
him, for he had certainly, as the letters of Marsilly prove, come and
gone freely between that conspirator and his English employers. How much
Dauger knew, what amount of mischief he could effect, was uncertain.
Much or little, it was a matter which, strange to say, caused the
greatest anxiety to Louis XIV. and to his Ministers for very many years.
Probably long before Dauger died (the date is unknown, but it was more
than twenty-five years after Marsilly's execution), his secret, if
secret he possessed, had ceased to be of importance. But he was now in
the toils of the French red tape, the system of secrecy which rarely
released its victim. He was guarded, we shall see, with such unheard-of
rigour, that popular fancy at once took him for some great, perhaps
royal, personage.

Marsilly was publicly tortured to death in Paris on June 22, 1669. By
July 19 his ex-valet, Dauger, had entered on his mysterious term of
captivity. How the French got possession of him, whether he yielded
to cajolery, or was betrayed by Charles II., is uncertain. The French
ambassador at St. James's, Colbert (brother of the celebrated Minister),
writes thus to M. de Lyonne, in Paris, on July 1, 1669:* 'Monsieur Joly
has spoken to the man Martin' (Dauger), 'and has really persuaded him
that, by going to France and telling all that he knows against Roux, he
will play the part of a lad of honour and a good subject.'


     *Transcripts from Paris MSS. Vol. xxxiii., Record Office.

But Martin, after all, was NOT persuaded!

Martin replied to Joly that HE KNEW NOTHING AT ALL, and that, once in
France, people would think he was well acquainted with the traffickings
of Roux, 'AND SO HE WOULD BE KEPT IN PRISON TO MAKE HIM DIVULGE WHAT HE
DID NOT KNOW.' The possible Man in the Iron Mask did not know his own
secret! But, later in the conversation, Martin foolishly admitted that
he knew a great deal; perhaps he did this out of mere fatal vanity.
Cross to France, however, he would not, even when offered a safe-conduct
and promise of reward. Colbert therefore proposes to ask Charles to
surrender the valet, and probably Charles descended to the meanness.
By July 19, at all events, Louvois, the War Minister of Louis XIV.,
was bidding Saint-Mars, at Pignerol in Piedmont, expect from Dunkirk a
prisoner of the very highest importance--a valet! This valet, now called
'Eustache Dauger,' can only have been Marsilly's valet, Martin, who, by
one means or another, had been brought from England to Dunkirk. It is
hardly conceivable, at least, that when a valet, in England, is 'wanted'
by the French police on July 1, for political reasons, and when by July
19 they have caught a valet of extreme political importance, the two
valets should be two different men. Martin must be Dauger.

Here, then, by July 19, 1669, we find our unhappy serving-man in the
toils. Why was he to be handled with such mysterious rigour? It is
true that State prisoners of very little account were kept with great
secrecy. But it cannot well be argued that they were all treated with
the extraordinary precautions which, in the case of Dauger, were not
relaxed for twenty-five or thirty years. The King says, according to
Louvois, that the safe keeping of Dauger is 'of the last importance to
his service.' He must have intercourse with nobody. His windows must be
where nobody can pass; several bolted doors must cut him off from the
sound of human voices. Saint-Mars himself, the commandant, must feed the
valet daily. 'YOU MUST NEVER, UNDER ANY PRETENCE, LISTEN TO WHAT HE MAY
WISH TO TELL YOU. YOU MUST THREATEN HIM WITH DEATH IF HE SPEAKS ONE WORD
EXCEPT ABOUT HIS ACTUAL NEEDS. He is only a valet, and does not need
much furniture.'*


     *The letters are printed by Roux Fazaillac, Jung, Lair, and others.

Saint-Mars replied that, in presence of M. de Vauroy, the chief officer
of Dunkirk (who carried Dauger thence to Pignerol), he had threatened
to run Dauger through the body if he ever dared to speak, even to him,
Saint-Mars. He has mentioned this prisoner, he says, to no mortal.
People believe that Dauger is a Marshal of France, so strange and
unusual are the precautions taken for his security.

A Marshal of France! The legend has begun. At this time (1669)
Saint-Mars had in charge Fouquet, the great fallen Minister, the richest
and most dangerous subject of Louis XIV. By-and-by he also held Lauzun,
the adventurous wooer of la Grande Mademoiselle. But it was not they, it
was the valet, Dauger, who caused 'sensation.'

On February 20,1672, Saint-Mars, for the sake of economy wished to use
Dauger as valet to Lauzun. This proves that Saint-Mars did not, after
all, see the necessity of secluding Dauger, or thought the King's fears
groundless. In the opinion of Saint-Mars, Dauger did not want to be
released, 'would never ask to be set free.' Then why was he so anxiously
guarded? Louvois refused to let Dauger be put with Lauzun as valet. In
1675, however, he allowed Dauger to act as valet to Fouquet, but with
Lauzun, said Louvois, Dauger must have no intercourse. Fouquet had then
another prisoner valet, La Riviere. This man had apparently been accused
of no crime. He was of a melancholy character, and a dropsical habit of
body: Fouquet had amused himself by doctoring him and teaching him to
read.

In the month of December 1678, Saint-Mars, the commandant of the prison,
brought to Fouquet a sealed letter from Louvois, the seal unbroken.
His own reply was also to be sealed, and not to be seen by Saint-Mars.
Louvois wrote that the King wished to know one thing, before giving
Fouquet ampler liberty. Had his valet, Eustache Dauger, told his other
valet, La Riviere, what he had done before coming to Pignerol? (de ce
a quoi il a ete employe auparavant que d'etre a Pignerol). 'His Majesty
bids me ask you [Fouquet] this question, and expects that you will
answer without considering anything but the truth, that he may know what
measures to take,' these depending on whether Dauger has, or has not,
told La Riviere the story of his past life.* Moreover, Lauzun was never,
said Louvois, to be allowed to enter Fouquet's room when Dauger was
present. The humorous point is that, thanks to a hole dug in the wall
between his room and Fouquet's, Lauzun saw Dauger whenever he pleased.


     *Lair, Nicholas Foucquet, ii. pp. 463, 464.

From the letter of Louvois to Fouquet, about Dauger (December 23, 1678),
it is plain that Louis XIV. had no more pressing anxiety, nine years
after Dauger's arrest, than to conceal WHAT IT WAS THAT DAUGER HAD DONE.
It is apparent that Saint-Mars himself either was unacquainted with this
secret, or was supposed by Louvois and the King to be unaware of it. He
had been ordered never to allow Dauger to tell him: he was not allowed
to see the letters on the subject between Louvois and Fouquet. We still
do not know, and never shall know, whether Dauger himself knew his own
secret, or whether (as he had anticipated) he was locked up for not
divulging what he did not know.

The answer of Fouquet to Louvois must have satisfied Louis that Dauger
had not imparted his secret to the other valet, La Riviere, for Fouquet
was now allowed a great deal of liberty. In 1679, he might see his
family, the officers of the garrison, and Lauzun--it being provided that
Lauzun and Dauger should never meet. In March 1680, Fouquet died, and
henceforth the two valets were most rigorously guarded; Dauger, because
he was supposed to know something; La Riviere, because Dauger might have
imparted the real or fancied secret to him. We shall return to these
poor serving-men, but here it is necessary to state that, ten months
before the death of their master, Fouquet, an important new captive had
been brought to the prison of Pignerol.

This captive was the other candidate for the honours of the Mask, Count
Mattioli, the secretary of the Duke of Mantua. He was kidnapped on
Italian soil on May 2, 1679, and hurried to the mountain fortress of
Pignerol, then on French ground. His offence was the betraying of the
secret negotiations for the cession of the town and fortress of Casal,
by the Duke of Mantua, to Louis XIV. The disappearance of Mattioli was,
of course, known to the world. The cause of his enlevement, and the
place of his captivity, Pignerol, were matters of newspaper comment at
least as early as 1687. Still earlier, in 1682, the story of Mattioli's
arrest and seclusion in Pignerol had been published in a work named 'La
Prudenza Trionfante di Casale.'* There was thus no mystery, at the time,
about Mattioli; his crime and punishment were perfectly well known to
students of politics. He has been regarded as the mysterious Man in the
Iron Mask, but, for years after his arrest, he was the least mysterious
of State prisoners.


     *Brentano, op. cit. p. 117.

Here, then, is Mattioli in Pignerol in May 1679. While Fouquet then
enjoyed relative freedom, while Lauzun schemed escapes or made insulting
love to Mademoiselle Fouquet, Mattioli lived on the bread and water of
affliction. He was threatened with torture to make him deliver up some
papers compromising to Louis XIV. It was expressly commanded that he
should have nothing beyond the barest necessaries of life. He was to
be kept dans la dure prison. In brief, he was used no better than the
meanest of prisoners. The awful life of isolation, without employment,
without books, without writing materials, without sight or sound of man
save when Saint-Mars or his lieutenant brought food for the day, drove
captives mad.

In January 1680 two prisoners, a monk* and one Dubreuil, had become
insane. By February 14, 1680, Mattioli was daily conversing with God and
his angels. 'I believe his brain is turned,' says Saint-Mars. In March
1680, as we saw, Fouquet died. The prisoners, not counting Lauzun
(released soon after), were now five: (1) Mattioli (mad); (2) Dubreuil
(mad); (3) The monk (mad); (4) Dauger, and (5) La Riviere. These two,
being employed as valets, kept their wits. On the death of Fouquet,
Louvois wrote to Saint-Mars about the two valets. Lauzun must be made
to believe that they had been set at liberty, but, in fact, they must be
most carefully guarded IN A SINGLE CHAMBER. They were shut up in one of
the dungeons of the 'Tour d'en bas.' Dauger had recently done something
as to which Louvois writes: 'Let me know how Dauger can possibly have
done what you tell me, and how he got the necessary drugs, as I cannot
suppose that you supplied him with them' (July 10, 1680).**


     *A monk, who may have been this monk, appears in the following
essay.


     **Lair, Nicholas Foucquet, ii. pp. 476, 477.

Here, then, by July 1680, are the two valets locked in one dungeon of
the 'Tour d'en bas.' By September Saint-Mars had placed Mattioli, with
the mad monk, in another chamber of the same tower. He writes: 'Mattioli
is almost as mad as the monk,' who arose from bed and preached naked.
Mattioli behaved so rudely and violently that the lieutenant of
Saint-Mars had to show him a whip, and threaten him with a flogging.
This had its effect. Mattioli, to make his peace, offered a valuable
ring to Blainvilliers. The ring was kept to be restored to him, if ever
Louis let him go free--a contingency mentioned more than once in the
correspondence.

Apparently Mattioli now sobered down, and probably was given a separate
chamber and a valet; he certainly had a valet at Pignerol later. By May
1681 Dauger and La Riviere still occupied their common chamber in the
'Tour d'en bas.' They were regarded by Louvois as the most important
of the five prisoners then at Pignerol. They, not Mattioli, were the
captives about whose safe and secret keeping Louis and Louvois were most
anxious. This appears from a letter of Louvois to Saint-Mars, of May 12,
1681. The gaoler, Saint-Mars, is to be promoted from Pignerol to Exiles.
'Thither,' says Louvois, 'the king desires to transport SUCH OF YOUR
PRISONERS AS HE THINKS TOO IMPORTANT TO HAVE IN OTHER HANDS THAN YOURS.'
These prisoners are 'THE TWO IN THE LOW CHAMBER OF THE TOWER,' the two
valets, Dauger and La Riviere.

From a letter of Saint-Mars (June 1681) we know that Mattioli was not
one of these. He says: 'I shall keep at Exiles two birds (merles) whom
I have here: they are only known as THE GENTRY OF THE LOW ROOM IN THE
TOWER; MATTIOLI MAY STAY ON HERE AT PIGNEROL WITH THE OTHER PRISONERS'
(Dubreuil and the mad monk). It is at this point that Le Citoyen Roux
(Fazaillac), writing in the Year IX. of the Republic (1801), loses
touch with the secret.* Roux finds, in the State Papers, the arrival
of Eustache Dauger at Pignerol in 1669, but does not know who he is,
or what is his quality. He sees that the Mask must be either Mattioli,
Dauger, the monk, one Dubreuil, or one Calazio. But, overlooking or not
having access to the letter of Saint-Mars of June 1681, Roux holds that
the prisoners taken to Les Exiles were the monk and Mattioli. One
of these must be the Mask, and Roux votes for Mattioli. He is wrong.
Mattioli beyond all doubt remained at Pignerol.


     *Recherches Historiques, sur l'Homme au Masque de Fer, Paris.  An
IX.

Mountains of argument have been built on these words, deux merles, 'two
gaol-birds.' One of the two, we shall see, became the source of the
legend of the Man in the Iron Mask. 'How can a wretched gaol-bird
(merle) have been the Mask?' asks M. Topin. 'The rogue's whole furniture
and table-linen were sold for 1 pound 19 shillings. He only got a new
suit of clothes every three years.' All very true; but this gaol-bird
and his mate, by the direct statement of Louvois, are 'the prisoners
too important to be entrusted to other hands than yours'--the hands
of Saint-Mars--while Mattioli is so unimportant that he may be left at
Pignerol under Villebois.

The truth is, that the offence and the punishment of Mattioli were well
known to European diplomatists and readers of books. Casal, moreover,
at this time was openly ceded to Louis XIV., and Mattioli could not
have told the world more than it already knew. But, for some inscrutable
reason, the secret which Dauger knew, or was suspected of knowing,
became more and more a source of anxiety to Louvois and Louis. What can
he have known? The charges against his master, Roux de Marsilly, had
been publicly proclaimed. Twelve years had passed since the dealings of
Arlington with Marsilly. Yet, Louvois became more and more nervous.

In accordance with commands of his, on March 2, 1682, the two valets,
who had hitherto occupied one chamber at Exiles as at Pignerol, were
cut off from all communication with each other. Says Saint-Mars, 'Since
receiving your letter I have warded the pair as strictly and exactly
as I did M. Fouquet and M. Lauzun, who cannot brag that he sent out
or received any intelligence. Night and day two sentinels watch their
tower; and my own windows command a view of the sentinels. Nobody speaks
to my captives but myself, my lieutenant, their confessor, and the
doctor, who lives eighteen miles away, and only sees them when I am
present.' Years went by; on January 1687 one of the two captives died;
we really do not know which with absolute certainty. However, the
intensified secrecy with which the survivor was now guarded seems more
appropriate to Dauger; and M. Funck-Brentano and M. Lair have no doubt
that it was La Riviere who expired. He was dropsical, that appears in
the official correspondence, and the dead prisoner died of dropsy.

As for the strange secrecy about Dauger, here is an example.
Saint-Mars, in January 1687, was appointed to the fortress of the Isles
Sainte-Marguerite, that sun themselves in the bay of Cannes. On January
20 he asks leave to go to see his little kingdom. He must leave Dauger,
but HAS FORBIDDEN EVEN HIS LIEUTENANT TO SPEAK TO THAT PRISONER. This
was an increase of precaution since 1682. He wishes to take the captive
to the Isles, but how? A sedan chair covered over with oilcloth seems
best. A litter might break down, litters often did, and some one might
then see the passenger.

Now M. Funck-Brentano says, to minimise the importance of Dauger, 'he
was shut up like so much luggage in a chair hermetically closed with
oilcloth, carried by eight Piedmontese in relays of four.'

Luggage is not usually carried in hermetically sealed sedan chairs, but
Saint-Mars has explained why, by surplus of precaution, he did not use
a litter. The litter might break down and Dauger might be seen. A new
prison was built specially, at the cost of 5,000 livres, for Dauger at
Sainte-Marguerite, with large sunny rooms. On May 3, 1687, Saint-Mars
had entered on his island realm, Dauger being nearly killed by twelve
days' journey in a closed chair. He again excited the utmost curiosity.
On January 8, 1688, Saint-Mars writes that his prisoner is believed
by the world to be either a son of Oliver Cromwell, or the Duc de
Beaufort,* who was never seen again, dead or alive, after a night battle
in Crete, on June 25, 1669, just before Dauger was arrested. Saint-Mars
sent in a note of the TOTAL of Dauger's expenses for the year 1687. He
actually did not dare to send the ITEMS, he says, lest they, if the bill
fell into the wrong hands, might reveal too much!


     *The Duc de Beaufort whom Athos releases from prison in Dumas's
Vingt Ans Apres.

Meanwhile, an Italian news-letter, copied into a Leyden paper, of August
1687, declared that Mattioli had just been brought from Pignerol to
Sainte-Marguerite. There was no mystery about Mattioli, the story of
his capture was published in 1682, but the press, on one point, was
in error: Mattioli was still at Pignerol. The known advent of the late
Commandant of Pignerol, Saint-Mars, with a single concealed prisoner, at
the island, naturally suggested the erroneous idea that the prisoner
was Mattioli. The prisoner was really Dauger, the survivor of the two
valets.

From 1688 to 1691 no letter about Dauger has been published. Apparently
he was then the only prisoner on the island, except one Chezut, who was
there before Dauger arrived, and gave up his chamber to Dauger while
the new cells were being built. Between 1689 and 1693 six Protestant
preachers were brought to the island, while Louvois, the Minister, died
in 1691, and was succeeded by Barbezieux. On August 13, 1691, Barbezieux
wrote to ask Saint-Mars about 'the prisoner whom he had guarded for
twenty years.' The only such prisoner was Dauger, who entered Pignerol
in August 1669. Mattioli had been a prisoner only for twelve years, and
lay in Pignerol, not in Sainte-Marguerite, where Saint-Mars now was.
Saint-Mars replied: 'I can assure you that nobody has seen him but
myself.'

By the beginning of March 1694, Pignerol had been bombarded by the
enemies of France; presently Louis XIV. had to cede it to Savoy. The
prisoners there must be removed. Mattioli, in Pignerol, at the end of
1693, had been in trouble. He and his valet had tried to smuggle out
letters written on the linings of their pockets. These were seized and
burned. On March 20, 1694, Barbezieux wrote to Laprade, now commanding
at Pignerol, that he must take his three prisoners, one by one, with all
secrecy, to Sainte-Marguerite. Laprade alone must give them their food
on the journey. The military officer of the escort was warned to ask
no questions. Already (February 26, 1694) Barbezieux had informed
Saint-Mars that these prisoners were coming. 'They are of more
consequence, one of them at least, than the prisoners on the island, and
must be put in the safest places.' The 'one' is doubtless Mattioli.
In 1681 Louvois had thought Dauger and La Riviere more important than
Mattioli, who, in March 1694, came from Pignerol to Sainte-Marguerite.
Now in April 1694 a prisoner died at the island, a prisoner who, like
Mattioli, HAD A VALET. We hear of no other prisoner on the island,
except Mattioli, who had a valet. A letter of Saint-Mars (January
6, 1696) proves that no prisoner THEN had a valet, for each prisoner
collected his own dirty plates and dishes, piled them up, and handed
them to the lieutenant.

M. Funck-Brentano argues that in this very letter (January 6, 1696)
Saint-Mars speaks of 'les valets de messieurs les prisonniers.' But in
that part of the letter Saint-Mars is not speaking of the actual state
of things at Sainte-Marguerite, but is giving reminiscences of Fouquet
and Lauzun, who, of course, at Pignerol, had valets, and had money, as
he shows. Dauger had no money. M. Funck-Brentano next argues that early
in 1694 one of the preacher prisoners, Melzac, died, and cites M. Jung
('La Verite sur le Masque de Fer,' p. 91). This is odd, as M. Jung says
that Melzac, or Malzac, 'DIED IN THE END OF 1692, OR EARLY IN 1693.'
Why, then, does M. Funck-Brentano cite M. Jung for the death of the
preacher early in 1694, when M. Jung (conjecturally) dates his decease
at least a year earlier?* It is not a mere conjecture, as, on March 3,
1693, Barbezieux begs Saint-Mars to mention his Protestant prisoners
under nicknames. There are three, and Malzac is no longer one of them.
Malzac, in 1692, suffered from a horrible disease, discreditable to one
of the godly, and in October 1692 had been allowed medical expenses.
Whether they included a valet or not, Malzac seems to have been
non-existent by March 1693. Had he possessed a valet, and had he died
in 1694, why should HIS valet have been 'shut up in the vaulted prison'?
This was the fate of the valet of the prisoner who died in April 1694,
and was probably Mattioli.


     *M. Funck-Brentano's statement is in Revue Historique, lvi. p. 298.
'Malzac died at the beginning of 1694,' citing Jung, p. 91. Now on P. 91
M. Jung writes, 'At the beginning of 1694 Saint-Mars had six prisoners,
of whom one, Melzac, dies.' But M. Jung (pp. 269, 270) later writes, 'It
is probable that Melzac died at the end of 1692, or early in 1693,' and
he gives his reasons, which are convincing. M. Funck-Brentano must have
overlooked M. Jung's change of opinion between his P. 91 and his pp.
269, 270.

Mattioli, certainly, had a valet in December 1693 at Pignerol. He went
to Sainte-Marguerite in March 1694. In April 1694 a prisoner with
a valet died at Sainte-Marguerite. In January 1696 no prisoner at
Sainte-Marguerite had a valet. Therefore, there is a strong presumption
that the 'prisonnier au valet' who died in April 1694 was Mattioli.

After December 1693, when he was still at Pignerol, the name of
Mattioli, freely used before, never occurs in the correspondence. But we
still often hear of 'l'ancien prisonnier,' 'the old prisoner.' He
was, on the face of it, Dauger, by far the oldest prisoner. In 1688,
Saint-Mars, having only one prisoner (Dauger), calls him merely 'my
prisoner.' In 1691, when Saint-Mars had several prisoners, Barbezieux
styles Dauger 'your prisoner of twenty years' standing.' When, in
1696-1698, Saint-Mars mentions 'mon ancien prisonnier,' 'my prisoner of
long standing,' he obviously means Dauger, not Mattioli--above all,
if Mattioli died in 1694. M. Funck-Brentano argues that 'mon ancien
prisonnier' can only mean 'my erstwhile prisoner, he who was lost and is
restored to me'--that is, Mattioli. This is not the view of M. Jung, or
M. Lair, or M. Loiseleur.

Friends of Mattioli's claims rest much on this letter of Barbezieux
to Saint-Mars (November 17, 1697): 'You have only to watch over the
security of all your prisoners, WITHOUT EVER EXPLAINING TO ANY ONE
WHAT IT IS THAT YOUR PRISONER OF LONG STANDING DID.' That secret, it is
argued, MUST apply to Mattioli. But all the world knew what Mattioli had
done! Nobody knew, and nobody knows, what Eustache Dauger had done.
It was one of the arcana imperii. It is the secret enforced ever since
Dauger's arrest in 1669. Saint-Mars (1669) was not to ask. Louis XIV.
could only lighten the captivity of Fouquet (1678) if his valet, La
Riviere, did not know what Dauger had done. La Riviere (apparently a
harmless man) lived and died in confinement, the sole reason being that
he might perhaps know what Dauger had done. Consequently there is the
strongest presumption that the 'ancien prisonnier' of 1697 is Dauger,
and that 'what he had done' (which Saint-Mars must tell to no one) was
what Dauger did, not what Mattioli did. All Europe knew what Mattioli
had done; his whole story had been published to the world in 1682 and
1687.

On July 19, 1698, Barbezieux bade Saint-Mars come to assume the command
of the Bastille. He is to bring his 'old prisoner,' whom not a soul is
to see. Saint-Mars therefore brought his man MASKED, exactly as another
prisoner was carried masked from Provence to the Bastille in 1695. M.
Funck-Brentano argues that Saint-Mars was now quite fond of his old
Mattioli, so noble, so learned.

At last, on September 18, 1698, Saint-Mars lodged his 'old prisoner'
in the Bastille, 'an old prisoner whom he had at Pignerol,' says the
journal of du Junca, Lieutenant of the Bastille. His food, we saw, was
brought him by Rosarges alone, the 'Major,' a gentleman who had always
been with Saint-Mars. Argues M. Funck-Brentano, all this proves that the
captive was a gentleman, not a valet. Why? First, because the Bastille,
under Louis XIV., was 'une prison de distinction.' Yet M. Funck-Brentano
tells us that in Mazarin's time 'valets mixed up with royal plots' were
kept in the Bastille. Again, in 1701, in this 'noble prison,' the Mask
was turned out of his room to make place for a female fortune-teller,
and was obliged to chum with a profligate valet of nineteen, and a
'beggarly' bad patriot, who 'blamed the conduct of France, and approved
that of other nations, especially the Dutch.' M. Funck-Brentano himself
publishes these facts (1898), in part published earlier (1890) by M.
Lair.* Not much noblesse here! Next, if Rosarges, a gentleman, served
the Mask, Saint-Mars alone (1669) carried his food to the valet, Dauger.
So the service of Rosarges does not ennoble the Mask and differentiate
him from Dauger, who was even more nobly served, by Saint-Mars.


     *Legendes de la Bastille, pp. 86-89.  Citing du Junca's Journal,
April 30, 1701.

On November 19, 1703, the Mask died suddenly (still in his velvet mask),
and was buried on the 20th. The parish register of the church names him
'Marchialy' or 'Marchioly,' one may read it either way; du Junca, the
Lieutenant of the Bastille, in his contemporary journal, calls him 'Mr.
de Marchiel.' Now, Saint-Mars often spells Mattioli, 'Marthioly.'

This is the one strength of the argument for Mattioli's claims to the
Mask. M. Lair replies, 'Saint-Mars had a mania for burying prisoners
under fancy names,' and gives examples. One is only a gardener, Francois
Eliard (1701), concerning whom it is expressly said that, as he is a
State prisoner, his real name is not to be given, so he is registered as
Pierre Maret (others read Navet, 'Peter Turnip'). If Saint-Mars, looking
about for a false name for Dauger's burial register, hit on Marsilly
(the name of Dauger's old master), that MIGHT be miswritten Marchialy.
However it be, the age of the Mask is certainly falsified; the
register gives 'about forty-five years old.' Mattioli would have been
sixty-three; Dauger cannot have been under fifty-three.

There the case stands. If Mattioli died in April 1694, he cannot be the
Man in the Iron Mask. Of Dauger's death we find no record, unless he
was the Man in the Iron Mask, and died, in 1703, in the Bastille. He was
certainly, in 1669 and 1688, at Pignerol and at Sainte-Marguerite, the
centre of the mystery about some great prisoner, a Marshal of France,
the Duc de Beaufort, or a son of Oliver Cromwell. Mattioli was no
mystery, no secret. Dauger is so mysterious that probably the secret of
his mystery was unknown to himself. By 1701, when obscure wretches were
shut up with the Mask, the secret, whatever its nature, had ceased to
be of moment. The captive was now the mere victim of cruel routine.
But twenty years earlier, Saint-Mars had said that Dauger 'takes things
easily, resigned to the will of God and the King.'

To sum up, on July 1, 1669, the valet of the Huguenot intriguer, Roux
de Marsilly, the valet resident in England, known to his master as
'Martin,' was 'wanted' by the French secret police. By July 19, a valet,
of the highest political importance, had been brought to Dunkirk, from
England, no doubt. My hypothesis assumes that this valet, though now
styled 'Eustache Dauger,' was the 'Martin' of Roux de Marsilly. He was
kept with so much mystery at Pignerol that already the legend began its
course; the captive valet was said to be a Marshal of France! We then
follow Dauger from Pignerol to Les Exiles, till January 1687, when one
valet out of a pair, Dauger being one of them, dies. We presume that
Dauger is the survivor, because the great mystery still is 'what he
HAS DONE,' whereas the other valet had done nothing, but may have known
Dauger's secret. Again, the other valet had long been dropsical, and the
valet who died in 1687 died of dropsy.

In 1688, Dauger, at Sainte-Marguerite, is again the source and centre
of myths; he is taken for a son of Oliver Cromwell, or for the Duc
de Beaufort. In June 1692, one of the Huguenot preachers at
Sainte-Marguerite writes on his shirt and pewter plate, and throws them
out of window.* Legend attributes these acts to the Man in the Iron
Mask, and transmutes a pewter into a silver plate. Now, in 1689-1693,
Mattioli was at Pignerol, but Dauger was at Sainte-Marguerite, and the
Huguenot's act is attributed to him. Thus Dauger, not Mattioli, is the
centre round which the myths crystallise: the legends concern HIM,
not Mattioli, whose case is well known, and gives rise to no legend.
Finally, we have shown that Mattioli probably died at Sainte-Marguerite
in April 1694. If so, then nobody but Dauger can be the 'old prisoner'
whom Saint-Mars brought, masked, to the Bastille, in September 1698, and
who died there in November 1703. However, suppose that Mattioli did not
die in 1694, but was the masked man who died in the Bastille in 1703,
then the legend of Dauger came to be attributed to Mattioli: these two
men's fortunes are combined in the one myth.


     *Saint-Mars au Ministre, June 4, 1692.

The central problem remains unsolved,

WHAT HAD THE VALET, EUSTACHE DAUGER, DONE?*


     *One marvels that nobody has recognised, in the mask, James Stuart
(James de la Cloche), eldest of the children of Charles II. He came to
England in 1668, was sent to Rome, and 'disappears from history.' See
'The Mystery of James de la Cloche.'




II. THE VALET'S MASTER



The secret of the Man in the Iron Mask, or at least of one of the two
persons who have claims to be the Mask, was 'WHAT HAD EUSTACHE DAUGER
DONE?' To guard this secret the most extraordinary precautions were
taken, as we have shown in the fore-going essay. And yet, if secret
there was, it might have got wind in the simplest fashion. In the
'Vicomte de Bragelonne,' Dumas describes the tryst of the Secret-hunters
with the dying Chief of the Jesuits at the inn in Fontainebleau. They
come from many quarters, there is a Baron of Germany and a laird from
Scotland, but Aramis takes the prize. He knows the secret of the Mask,
the most valuable of all to the intriguers of the Company of Jesus.

Now, despite all the precautions of Louvois and Saint-Mars, despite
sentinels for ever posted under Dauger's windows, despite arrangements
which made it impossible for him to signal to people on the hillside at
Les Exiles, despite the suppression even of the items in the accounts of
his expenses, his secret, if he knew it, could have been discovered, as
we have remarked, by the very man most apt to make mischievous use of
it--by Lauzun. That brilliant and reckless adventurer could see Dauger,
in prison at Pignerol, when he pleased, for he had secretly excavated
a way into the rooms of his fellow-prisoner, Fouquet, on whom Dauger
attended as valet. Lauzun was released soon after Fouquet's death. It is
unlikely that he bought his liberty by the knowledge of the secret, and
there is nothing to suggest that he used it (if he possessed it) in any
other way.

The natural clue to the supposed secret of Dauger is a study of the
career of his master, Roux de Marsilly. As official histories say next
to nothing about him, we may set forth what can be gleaned from the
State Papers in our Record Office. The earliest is a letter of Roux de
Marsilly to Mr. Joseph Williamson, secretary of Lord Arlington (December
1668). Marsilly sends Martin (on our theory Eustache Dauger) to bring
back from Williamson two letters from his own correspondent in Paris. He
also requests Williamson to procure for him from Arlington a letter of
protection, as he is threatened with arrest for some debt in which he
is not really concerned. Martin will explain. The next paper is endorsed
'Received December 28, 1668, Mons. de Marsilly.' As it is dated December
27, Marsilly must have been in England. The contents of this piece
deserve attention, because they show the terms on which Marsilly and
Arlington were, or, at least, how Marsilly conceived them.

(1) Marsilly reports, on the authority of his friends at Stockholm, that
the King of Sweden intends, first to intercede with Louis XIV. in favour
of the French Huguenots, and next, if diplomacy fails, to join in arms
with the other Protestant Powers of Europe.

(2) His correspondent in Holland learns that if the King of England
invites the States to any 'holy resolution,' they will heartily lend
forces. No leader so good as the English King--Charles II! Marsilly had
shown ARLINGTON'S LETTER to a Dutch friend, who bade him approach
the Dutch ambassador in England. He has dined with that diplomatist.
Arlington had, then, gone so far as to write an encouraging letter. The
Dutch ambassador had just told Marsilly that he had received the same
news, namely, that, Holland would aid the Huguenots, persecuted by Louis
XIV.

(3) Letters from Provence, Languedoc, and Dauphine say that the
situation there is unaltered.

(4) The Canton of Zurich write that they will keep their promises and
that Berne IS ANXIOUS TO PLEASE THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, and that
it is ready to raise, with Zurich, 15,000 men. They are not afraid of
France.

(5) Zurich fears that, if Charles is not represented at the next Diet,
Bale and Saint Gal will be intimidated, and not dare to join the Triple
Alliance of Spain, Holland, and England. The best plan will be
for Marsilly to represent England at the Diet of January 25, 1669,
accompanied by the Swiss General Balthazar. This will encourage friends
'TO GIVE HIS BRITTANIC MAJESTY THE SATISFACTION WHICH HE DESIRES, and
will produce a close union between Holland, Sweden, the Cantons, and
other Protestant States.'

This reads as if Charles had already expressed some 'desire.'

(6) Geneva grumbles at a reply of Charles 'through a bishop who is their
enemy,' the Bishop of London, 'a persecutor of our religion,' that is,
of Presbyterianism. However, nothing will dismay the Genevans, 'si S. M.
B. ne change.'

Then comes a blank in the paper. There follows a copy of a letter as
if FROM CHARLES II. HIMSELF, to 'the Right High and Noble Seigneurs of
Zurich.' He has heard of their wishes from Roux de Marsilly, whom he
commissions to wait upon them. 'I would not have written by my Bishop of
London had I been better informed, but would myself have replied to
your obliging letter, and would have assured you, as I do now, that I
desire....'

It appears as if this were a draft of the kind of letter which Marsilly
wanted Charles to write to Zurich, and there is a similar draft of a
letter for Arlington to follow, if he and Charles wish to send Marsilly
to the Swiss Diet. The Dutch ambassador, with whom Marsilly dined on
December 26, the Constable of Castille, and other grandees, are all of
opinion that he should visit the Protestant Swiss, as from the King of
England. The scheme is for an alliance of England, Holland, Spain, and
the Protestant Cantons, against France and Savoy.

Another letter of Marsilly to Arlington, only dated Jeudi, avers that he
can never repay Arlington for his extreme kindness and liberality. 'No
man in England is more devoted to you than I am, and shall be all my
life.'*


     *State Papers, France, vol. 125, 106.

On the very day when Marsilly drafted for Charles his own commission
to treat with Zurich for a Protestant alliance against France, Charles
himself wrote to his sister, Madame (Henriette d'Orleans). He spoke of
his secret treaty with France. 'You know how much secrecy is necessary
for the carrying on of the business, and I assure you that nobody does,
nor shall, know anything of it here, but myself and that one person
more, till it be fit to be public.'* (Is 'that one person' de la
Cloche?)


     *Madame, by Julia Cartwright, p. 275.

Thus Marsilly thought Charles almost engaged for the Protestant League,
while Charles was secretly allying himself with France against Holland.
Arlington was probably no less deceived by Charles than Marsilly was.

The Bishop of London's share in the dealing with Zurich is obscure.

It appears certain that Arlington was not consciously deceiving
Marsilly. Madame wrote, on February 12, as to Arlington, 'The man's
attachment to the Dutch and his inclination towards Spain are too well
known.'* Not till April 25, 1669, does Charles tell his sister that
Arlington has an inkling of his secret dealings with France; how he
knows, Charles cannot tell.** It is impossible for us to ascertain how
far Charles himself deluded Marsilly, who went to the Continent early in
spring, 1669. Before May 15/25 1669, in fact on April 14, Marsilly had
been kidnapped by agents of Louis XIV., and his doom was dight.


     *Madame, by Julia Cartwright, p. 281.


     **Ibid. p. 285.

Here is the account of the matter, written to ------ by Perwich in
Paris:

W Perwich to ------

Paris, May 25, '69.

Honored Sir,

. . . . . .

The Cantons of Switzerland are much troubled at the French King's having
sent 15 horsemen into Switzerland from whence the Sr de Maille,
the King's resident there, had given information of the Sr Roux de
Marsilly's being there negociating the bringing the Cantons into the
Triple League by discourses much to the disadvantage of France, giving
them very ill impressions of the French King's Government, who was
BETRAYED BY A MONK THAT KEPT HIM COMPANY and intercepted by the said
horsemen brought into France and is expected at the Bastille. I believe
you know the man.... I remember him in England.


Can this monk be the monk who went mad in prison at Pignerol, sharing
the cell of Mattioli? Did he, too, suffer for his connection with
the secret? We do not know, but the position of Charles was awkward.
Marsilly, dealing with the Swiss, had come straight from England, where
he was lie with Charles's minister, Arlington, and with the Dutch and
Spanish ambassadors. The King refers to the matter in a letter to his
sister of May 24, 1669 (misdated by Miss Cartwright, May 24, 1668.)*

'You have, I hope, received full satisfaction by the last post in the
matter of Marsillac [Marsilly], for my Ld. Arlington has sent to Mr.
Montague [English ambassador at Paris] his history all the time he was
here, by which you will see how little credit he had here, and that
particularly my Lord Arlington was not in his good graces, because he
did not receive that satisfaction, in his negotiation, he expected, and
that was only in relation to the Swissers, and so I think I have said
enough of this matter.'


     *Madame, by Julia Cartwright, p. 264.

Charles took it easily!

On May 15-25 Montague acknowledged Arlington's letter to which Charles
refers; he has been approached, as to Marsilly, by the Spanish resident,
'but I could not tell how to do anything in the business, never having
heard of the man, or that he was employed by my Master [Charles] in any
business. I have sent you also a copy of a letter which an Englishman
writ to me that I do not know, in behalf of Roux de Marsilly, but that
does not come by the post,' being too secret.*


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

France had been well informed about Marsilly while he was in England.
He then had a secretary, two lackeys, and a valet de chambre, and was
frequently in conference with Arlington and the Spanish ambassador to
the English Court. Colbert, the French ambassador in London, had written
all this to the French Government, on April 25, before he heard of
Marsilly's arrest.*


     *Bibl. Nat., Fonds Francais, No. 10665.

The belief that Marsilly was an agent of Charles appears to have been
general, and, if accepted by Louis XIV., would interfere with Charles's
private negotiations for the Secret Treaty with France. On May 18 Prince
d'Aremberg had written on the subject to the Spanish ambassador in
Paris. Marsilly, he says, was arrested in Switzerland, on his way to
Berne, with a monk who was also seized, and, a curious fact, Marsilly's
valet was killed in the struggle. This valet, of course, was not Dauger,
whom Marsilly had left in England. Marsilly 'doit avoir demande la
protection du Roy de la Grande Bretagne en faveur des Religionaires
(Huguenots) de France, et passer en Suisse AVEC QUELQUE COMMISSION DE SA
PART.' D'Aremberg begs the Spanish ambassador to communicate all this to
Montague, the English ambassador at Paris, but Montague probably, like
Perwich, knew nothing of the business any more than he knew of Charles's
secret dealings with Louis through Madame.*


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

To d'Aremberg's letter is pinned an unsigned English note, obviously
intended for Arlington's reading.

'Roux de Marsilly is still in the Bastille though they have a mind to
hang him, yet they are much puzzled what to do with him. De Lionne has
beene to examine him twice or thrice, but there is noe witnes to prove
anything against him. I was told by one that the French king told it
to, that in his papers they find great mention of the DUKE OF BUCKS: AND
YOUR NAME, and speak as if he were much trusted by you. I have enquired
what this Marsilly is, and I find by one Mr. Marsilly that I am
acquainted withall, and a man of quality, that this man's name is onely
Roux, and borne at Nismes and having been formerly a soldier in his
troope, ever since has taken his name to gain more credit in Switserland
where hee, Marsilly, formerly used to bee employed by his Coll: the
Mareschall de Schomberg who invaded Switserland.'

We next find a very curious letter, from which it appears that the
French Government inclined to regard Marsilly as, in fact, an agent
of Charles, but thought it wiser to trump up against him a charge of
conspiring against the life of Louis XIV. On this charge, or another,
he was executed, while the suspicion that he was an agent of English
treachery may have been the real cause of the determination to destroy
him. The Balthazar with whom Marsilly left his papers is mentioned with
praise by him in his paper for Arlington, of December 27, 1668. He is
the General who should have accompanied Marsilly to the Diet.

The substance of the letter (given in full in Note I.) is to the
following effect. P. du Moulin (Paris, May 19-29, 1669) writes to
Arlington. Ever since Ruvigny, the late French ambassador, a Protestant,
was in England, the French Government had been anxious to kidnap Roux
de Marsilly. They hunted him in England, Holland, Flanders, and
Franche-Comte. As we know from the case of Mattioli, the Government of
Louis XIV. was unscrupulously daring in breaking the laws of nations,
and seizing hostile personages in foreign territory, as Napoleon did
in the affair of the Duc d'Enghien. When all failed, Louis bade Turenne
capture Roux de Marsilly wherever he could find him. Turenne sent
officers and gentlemen abroad, and, after four months' search, they
found Marsilly in Switzerland. They took him as he came out of the house
of his friend, General Balthazar, and carried him to Gex. No papers were
found on him, but he asked his captors to send to Balthazar and get 'the
commission he had from England,' which he probably thought would give
him the security of an official diplomatic position. Having got this
document, Marsilly's captors took it to the French Ministers.
Nothing could be more embarrassing, if this were true, to Charles's
representative in France, Montague, and to Charles's secret
negotiations, also to Arlington, who had dealt with Marsilly. On his
part, the captive Marsilly constantly affirmed that he was the envoy
of the King of England. The common talk of Paris was that an agent
of Charles was in the Bastille, 'though at Court they pretend to know
nothing of it.' Louis was overjoyed at Marsilly's capture, giving out
that he was conspiring against his life. Monsieur told Montague that he
need not beg for the life of a would-be murderer like Marsilly. But as
to this idea, 'they begin now to mince it at Court,' and Ruvigny assured
du Moulin 'that they had no such thoughts.' De Lyonne had seen Marsilly
and observed that it was a blunder to seize him. The French Government
was nervous, and Turenne's secretary had been 'pumping' several
ambassadors as to what they thought of Marsilly's capture on foreign
territory. One ambassador replied with spirit that a crusade by
all Europe against France, as of old against the Moslems, would be
necessary. Would Charles, du Moulin asked, own or disown Marsilly?

Montague's position was now awkward. On May 23, his account of the case
was read, at Whitehall, to the Foreign Committee in London. (See Note
II. for the document.) He did not dare to interfere in Marsilly's
behalf, because he did not know whether the man was an agent of Charles
or not. Such are the inconveniences of a secret royal diplomacy carried
on behind the backs of Ministers. Louis XV. later pursued this method
with awkward consequences.* The French Court, Montague said, was
overjoyed at the capture of Marsilly, and a reward of 100,000 crowns, 'I
am told very privately, is set upon his head.' The French ambassador in
England, Colbert, had reported that Charles had sent Marsilly 'to draw
the Swisses into the Triple League' against France. Montague had
tried to reassure Monsieur (Charles's brother-in-law), but was himself
entirely perplexed. As Monsieur's wife, Charles's sister, was working
with Charles for the secret treaty with Louis, the State and family
politics were clearly in a knot. Meanwhile the Spanish ambassador kept
pressing Montague to interfere in favour of Marsilly. After Montague's
puzzled note had been read to the English Foreign Committee on May 23,
Arlington offered explanations. Marsilly came to England, he said, when
Charles was entering into negotiations for peace with Holland, and when
France seemed likely to oppose the peace. No proposition was made to him
or by him. Peace being made, Marsilly was given money to take him out
of the country. He wanted the King to renew his alliance with the Swiss
cantons, but was told that the cantons must first expel the regicides
of Charles I. He undertook to arrange this, and some eight months later
came back to England. 'He was coldly used, and I was complained of for
not using so important a man well enough.'


     *Cf. Le Secret du Roi, by the Duc de Broglie.

As we saw, Marsilly expressed the most effusive gratitude to Arlington,
which does not suggest cold usage. Arlington told the complainers that
Marsilly was 'another man's spy,' what man's, Dutch, Spanish, or even
French, he does not explain. So Charles gave Marsilly money to go away.
He was never trusted with anything but the expulsion of the regicides
from Switzerland. Arlington was ordered by Charles to write a letter
thanking Balthazar for his good offices.

These explanations by Arlington do not tally with Marsilly's
communications to him, as cited at the beginning of this inquiry.
Nothing is said in these about getting the regicides of Charles I.
out of Switzerland: the paper is entirely concerned with bringing the
Protestant Cantons into anti-French League with England, Holland, Spain,
and even Sweden. On the other hand, Arlington's acknowledged letter
to Balthazar, carried by Marsilly, may be the 'commission' of which
Marsilly boasted. In any case, on June 2, Charles gave Colbert, the
French ambassador, an audience, turning even the Duke of York out of the
room. He then repeated to Colbert the explanations of Arlington, already
cited, and Arlington, in a separate interview, corroborated Charles.
So Colbert wrote to Louis (June 3, 1669); but to de Lyonne, on the same
day, 'I trust that you will extract from Marsilly much matter for the
King's service. IT SEEMED TO ME THAT MILORD D'ARLINGTON WAS UNEASY ABOUT
IT [EN AVAIT DE L'INQUIETUDE].... There is here in England one Martin'
(Eustace Dauger), 'who has been that wretch's valet, and who left him
in discontent.' Colbert then proposes to examine Martin, who may know
a good deal, and to send him into France. On June 10, Colbert writes to
Louis that he expects to see Martin.*


     *Bibl. Nat., Fonds Francais, No. 10665.

On June 24, Colbert wrote to Louis about a conversation with Charles.
It is plain that proofs of a murder-plot by Marsilly were scanty or
non-existent, though Colbert averred that Marsilly had discussed the
matter with the Spanish Ministers. 'Charles knew that he had had much
conference with Isola, the Spanish ambassador.' Meanwhile, up to July 1,
Colbert was trying to persuade Marsilly's valet to go to France, which
he declined to do, as we have seen. However, the luckless lad, by nods
and by veiled words, indicated that he knew a great deal. But not by
promise of security and reward could the valet be induced to return to
France. 'I might ask the King to give up Martin, the valet of Marsilly,
to me,' Colbert concludes, and, by hook or by crook, he secured the
person of the wretched man, as we have seen. In a postscript, Colbert
says that he has heard of the execution of Marsilly.

By July 19, as we saw in the previous essay, Louvois was bidding
Saint-Mars expect, at Pignerol from Dunkirk, a prisoner of the highest
political importance, to be guarded with the utmost secrecy, yet a
valet. That valet must be Martin, now called Eustache Dauger, and his
secret can only be connected with Marsilly. It may have been something
about Arlington's negotiations through Marsilly, as compromising Charles
II. Arlington's explanations to the Foreign Committee were certainly
incomplete and disingenuous. He, if not Charles, was more deeply engaged
with Marsilly than he ventured to report. But Marsilly himself avowed
that he did not know why he was to be executed.

Executed he was, in circumstances truly hideous. Perwich, June 5, wrote
to an unnamed correspondent in England: 'They have all his papers,
which speak much of the Triple Alliance, but I know not whether they
can lawfully hang him for this, having been naturalised in Holland, and
taken in a privileged country' (Switzerland). Montague (Paris, June
22, 1669) writes to Arlington that Marsilly is to die, so it has been
decided, for 'a rape which he formerly committed at Nismes,' and after
the execution, on June 26, declares that, when broken on the wheel,
Marsilly 'still persisted that he was guilty of nothing, nor did know
why he was put to death.'

Like Eustache Dauger, Marsilly professed that he did not know his own
secret. The charge of a rape, long ago, at Nismes, was obviously trumped
up to cover the real reason for the extraordinary vindictiveness with
which he was pursued, illegally taken, and barbarously slain. Mere
Protestant restlessness on his part is hardly an explanation. There was
clearly no evidence for the charge of a plot to murder Louis XIV., in
which Colbert, in England, seems to have believed. Even if the French
Government believed that he was at once an agent of Charles II., and at
the same time a would-be assassin of Louis XIV., that hardly accounts
for the intense secrecy with which his valet, Eustache Dauger, was
always surrounded. Did Marsilly know of the Secret Treaty, and was it
from him that Arlington got his first inkling of the royal plot? If
so, Marsilly would probably have exposed the mystery in Protestant
interests. We are entirely baffled.

In any case, Francis Vernon, writing from Paris to Williamson (?) (June
19-29 1669), gave a terrible account of Marsilly's death. (For the
letter, see Note V.) With a broken piece of glass (as we learn from
another source), Marsilly, in prison, wounded himself in a ghastly
manner, probably hoping to die by loss of blood. They seared him with a
red-hot iron, and hurried on his execution. He was broken on the wheel,
and was two hours in dying (June 22). Contrary to usage, a Protestant
preacher was brought to attend him on the scaffold. He came most
reluctantly, expecting insult, but not a taunt was uttered by the
fanatic populace. 'He came up the scaffold, great silence all about.'
Marsilly lay naked, stretched on a St. Andrew's cross. He had seemed
half dead, his head hanging limp, 'like a drooping calf.' To greet the
minister of his own faith, he raised himself, to the surprise of all,
and spoke out loud and clear. He utterly denied all share in a scheme to
murder Louis. The rest may be read in the original letter (Note V.).

So perished Roux de Marsilly; the history of the master throws no light
on the secret of the servant. That secret, for many years, caused the
keenest anxiety to Louis XIV. and Louvois. Saint-Mars himself must
not pry into it. Yet what could Dauger know? That there had been a
conspiracy against the King's life? But that was the public talk of
Paris. If Dauger had guilty knowledge, his life might have paid for it;
why keep him a secret prisoner? Did he know that Charles II. had been
guilty of double dealing in 1668-1669? Probably Charles had made some
overtures to the Swiss, as a blind to his private dealings with Louis
XIV., but, even so, how could the fact haunt Louis XIV. like a ghost? We
leave the mystery much darker than we found it, but we see reason good
why diplomatists should have murmured of a crusade against the cruel
and brigand Government which sent soldiers to kidnap, in neighbouring
states, men who did not know their own crime.

To myself it seems not improbable that the King and Louvois were but
stupidly and cruelly nervous about what Dauger MIGHT know. Saint-Mars,
when he proposed to utilise Dauger as a prison valet, manifestly did not
share the trembling anxieties of Louis XIV. and his Minister; anxieties
which grew more keen as time went on. However, 'a soldier only has
his orders,' and Saint-Mars executed his orders with minute precision,
taking such unheard-of precautions that, in legend, the valet blossomed
into the rightful king of France.

                    *          *          *

APPENDIX.

ORIGINAL PAPERS IN THE CASE OF ROUX DE MARSILLY.*

Note I. Letter of Mons. P. du Moulin to Arlington.**

                                 Paris, May ye 19-29, 1669.

My Lord,

. . . . . .

Ever since that Monsieur de Ruvigny was in England last, and upon the
information he gave, this King had a very great desire to seize if it
were possible this Roux de Marsilly, and several persons were sent to
effect it, into England, Holland, Flanders, and Franche Comte: amongst
the rest one La Grange, exempt des Gardes, was a good while in Holland
with fifty of the guards dispersed in severall places and quarters;
But all having miscarried the King recommended the thing to Monsieur de
Turenne who sent some of his gentlemen and officers under him to find
this man out and to endeavour to bring him alive. These men after foure
months search found him att last in Switzerland, and having laid waite
for him as he came out from Monsr Balthazar's house (a commander well
knowne) they took him and carryed him to Gex before they could be
intercepted and he rescued. This was done only by a warrant from
Monsieur de Turenne but as soone as they came into the french dominions
they had full powers and directions from this court for the bringing of
him hither. Those that tooke him say they found no papers about him, but
that he desired them to write to Monsr Balthazar to desire him to take
care of his papers and to send him THE COMMISSION HE HAD FROM ENGLAND
and a letter being written to that effect it was signed by the prisoner
and instead of sending it as they had promised, they have brought it
hither along with them. THEY DO ALL UNANIMOUSLY REPORT THAT HE DID
CONSTANTLY AFFIRME THAT HE WAS IMPLOYED BY THE KING OF GREAT BRITTAIN
AND DID ACT BY HIS COMMISSION; so that the general discourse here in
towne is that one of the King of England's agents is in the Bastille;
though att Court they pretend to know nothing of it and would have the
world think they are persuaded he had no relacion to his Majesty. Your
Lordship hath heard by the publique newes how overjoyed this King was
att the bringing of this prisoner, and how farr he expressed his thanks
to the cheife person employed in it, declaring openly that this man had
long since conspired against his life, and agreable to this, Monsieur,
fearing that My lord Ambr. was come to interpose on the prisoner's
behalfe asked him on Friday last att St. Germains whether that was the
cause of his coming, and told him that he did not think he would speake
for a man that attempted to kill the King. The same report hath been
hitherto in everybody's mouth but they begin now to mince it att court,
and Monsieur de Ruvigny would have persuaded me yesterday, they had no
such thoughts. The truth is I am apt to believe they begin now to be
ashamed of it: and I am informed from a very good hand that Monsieur de
Lionne who hath been at the Bastille to speake with the prisoner hath
confessed since that he can find no ground for this pretended attempting
to the King's life, and that upon the whole he was of opinion that this
man had much better been left alone than taken, and did look upon what
he had done as the intemperancy of an ill-settled braine. And to satisfy
your Lordship that they are nettled here, and are concerned to know what
may be the issue of all this, Monsieur de Turenne's secretary was on
Munday last sent to several forreigne Ministers to pump them and to
learne what their thoughts were concerning this violence committed in
the Dominions of a sovereign and an allye whereupon he was told by one
of them that such proceedings would bring Europe to the necessity of
entering into a Croisade against them, as formerly against the infidels.
If I durst I would acquaint your Lordship with the reflexions of all
publique ministers here and of other unconcerned persons in relation
to his Majesty's owning or disowning this man; but not knowing the
particulars of his case, nor the grounds his Ma'ty may go upon, I shall
forbeare entering upon this discourse.. ..

                                      Your Lordships' etc.

                                           P. Du MOULIN.


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

     **Ibid.

                              ------

Note II. Paper endorsed 'Mr. Montague originally in Cypher. Received May
19, '69. Read in foreigne Committee, 23 May. Roux de Marsilli.'*

I durst not venture to sollicite in Monsr Roux Marsilly's behalfe
because I doe not know whether the King my Master hath imployed him or
noe; besides he is a man, as I have beene told by many people here of
worth, that has given out that hee is resolved to kill the French king
at one time or other, and I think such men are as dangerous to one
king as to another: hee is brought to the Bastille and I believe may be
proceeded against and put to death, in very few daies. There is great
joy in this Court for his being taken, and a hundred thousand crownes,
I am told very privately, set upon his head; the French Ambassador in
England watcht him, and hee has given the intelligence here of his being
employed by the King, and sent into Switzerland by my Master to draw the
Swisses into the Triple League. Hee aggravates the business as much
as hee can to the prejudice of my Master to value his owne service the
more, and they seeme here to wonder that the King my Master should have
imployed or countenanced a man that had so base a design against the
King's Person, I had a great deal of discourse with Monsieur about it,
but I did positively say that he had noe relation to my knowledge to the
King my Master, and if he should have I make a question or noe whither
in this case the King will owne him. However, my Lord, I had nothing to
doe to owne or meddle in a buisines that I was so much a stranger to....

This Roux Marsilly is a great creature of the B. d'Isola's, wch makes
them here hate him the more. The Spanish Resident was very earnest with
mee to have done something in behalfe of Marsilly, but I positively
refused.


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

                              ------

Note III. [A paper endorsed 'Roux de Marsilli. Read in for. Committee,
23d May.']*

Roux de Marsilly came hither when your Majesty had made a union with
Holland for making the Peace betwixt the two Crownes and when it was
probable the opposition to the Peace would bee on the side of France.

Marsilly was heard telling of longe things but noe proposition made to
him or by him.

Presently the Peace was made and Marsilly told more plainly wee had no
use of him. A little summe of money was given him to returne as he said
whither he was to goe in Switzerland. Upon which hee wishing his Ma'ty
would renew his allience wth the Cantons hee was answerd his M'ty would
not enter into any comerce with them till they had sent the regicides
out of their Country, hee undertooke it should bee done. Seven or
eight months after wth out any intimation given him from hence or
any expectation of him, he comes hither, but was so coldly used I was
complained off for not using so important a man well enough. I answerd
I saw noe use the King could make of him, because he had no credit in
Switzerlande and for any thing else I thought him worth nothing to us,
but above all because I knew by many circumstances HEE WAS ANOTHER MAN'S
SPY and soe ought not to be paid by his Majesty. Notwithstanding this
his Ma'ty being moved from compassion commanded hee should have some
money given him to carry him away and that I should write to Monsieur
Balthazar thanking him in the King's name for the good offices hee
rendered in advancing a good understanding betwixt his Ma'ty and the
Cantons and desiring him to continue them in all occasions.

The man was always looked upon as a hot headed and indiscreete man,
and soe accordingly handled, hearing him, but never trusting him with
anything but his own offered and undesired endeavours to gett the
Regicides sent out of Switzerland.


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

                              ------

Note IV. Letter of W. Perwich to ------ .*

                                            Paris:  June 5, 1669.

Honored Sir,

. . . . . .

Roux Marsilly has prudently declared hee had some what of importance to
say but it should bee to the King himselfe wch may be means of respiting
his processe and as he hopes intercession may bee made for him; but
people talk so variously of him that I cannot tell whether hee ought to
bee owned by any Prince; the Suisses have indeed the greatest ground to
reclayme him as being taken in theirs. They have all his papers which
speak much of the Triple Alliance; if they have no other pretext of
hanging him I know not whether they can lawfully for this, hee having
been naturallised in Holland and taken in a priviledged Country....


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

                              ------

Note V. Francis Vernon to [Mr. Williamson?].*

                                           Paris:  June 19-29 1669.

Honored Sir,

My last of the 26th Currt was soe short and soe abrupt that I fear you
can peck butt little satisfaction out of it.

. . . . . .

I did intend to have written something about Marsilly but that I had
noe time then. In my letter to my Lord Arlington I writt that Friday 21
Currt hee wounded himself wch he did not because hee was confronted with
Ruvigny as the Gazettes speake. For he knew before hee should dye, butt
he thought by dismembering himself that the losse of blood would carry
him out of the world before it should come to bee knowne that he had
wounded himselfe. And when the Governor of the Bastille spied the blood
hee said It was a stone was come from him which caused that effusion.
However the governor mistrusted the worst and searcht him to see what
wound he had made. So they seared him and sent word to St. Germaines
which made his execution be hastened. Saturday about 1 of the clock
hee was brought on the skaffold before the Chastelet and tied to St.
Andrew's Crosse all wch while he acted the Dying man and scarce stirred,
and seemed almost breathlesse and fainting. The Lieutenant General
presst him to confesse and ther was a doctor of the Sorbon who was a
counsellr of the Castelet there likewise to exhort him to disburthen
his mind of any thing which might be upon it. Butt he seemed to take no
notice and lay panting.

Then the Lieutenant Criminel bethought himself that the only way to
make him speake would bee to sende for a ministre soe hee did to Monsr
Daillie butt hee because the Edicts don't permitt ministres to come
to condemned persons in publique butt only to comfort them in private
before they goe out of prison refused to come till hee sent a huissier
who if hee had refused the second time would have brought him by force.
At this second summons hee came butt not without great expectations
to bee affronted in a most notorious manner beeing the first time a
ministre came to appeare on a scaffold and that upon soe sinister an
occasion. Yet when he came found a great presse of people. All made way,
none lett fall soe much as a taunting word. Hee came up the Scaffold,
great silence all about. Hee found him lying bound stretched on St
Andrew's Crosse, naked ready for execution. Hee told him hee was
sent for to exhort him to die patiently and like a Christian. Then
immediately they were all surprized to see him hold up his head wch he
lett hang on one side before like a drooping calfe and speake as loud
and clear as the ministre, to whom he said with a chearful air hee was
glad to see him, that hee need not question butt that hee would dye like
a Christian and patiently too. Then hee went and spoke some places of
Scripture to encourage him which he heard with great attention. They
afterward came to mention some things to move him to contrition, and
there hee tooke an occasion to aggravate the horrour of a Crime of
attempting against the King's person. Hee said hee did not know what hee
meant. For his part hee never had any evill intention against the Person
of the King.

The Lieutenant Criminel stood all the while behind Monsieur Daillie and
hearkened to all and prompted Monsr Daillie to aske him if hee had said
there were 10 Ravillacs besides wch would doe the King's businesse. Hee
protested solemnly hee never said any such words or if hee did hee never
remembred, butt if hee had it was with no intention of Malice.
Then Monsieur Daillie turned to the people and made a discourse in
vindication of those of the Religion that it was no Principle of theirs
attempts on the persons of King[s] butt only loyalty and obedience. This
ended hee went away; hee staid about an hour in all, and immediately as
soon as he was gone, they went to their worke and gave him eleven blows
with a barre and laid him on the wheele. Hee was two houres dying. All
about Monsr Daillie I heard from his own mouth for I went to wait on him
because it was reported hee had said something concerning the King of
England butt hee could tell mee nothing of that. There was a flying
report that he should say going from the Chastelet--The Duke of
York hath done mee a great injury--The Swisses they say resented his
[Marsilly's] taking and misst butt half an hour to take them which
betrayed him [the monk] after whom they sent. When he was on the wheele
hee was heard to say Le Roy est grand tyrant, Le Roy me traitte d'un
facon fort barbare. All that you read concerning oaths and dying en
enrage is false all the oaths hee used being only asseverations to Monsr
Daillie that he was falsely accused as to the King's person.

                                             Sr I am etc

                                                FRANS. VERNON.


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

                              ------


Note VI. The Ambassador Montague to Arlington.*

                                          Paris:  June 22, 1669.

My Lord,

. . . . . .

The Lieutenant criminel hath proceeded pretty farre with Le Roux
Marsilly. The crime they forme their processe on beeing a rape which he
had formerly committed at Nismes soe that he perceiving but little hopes
of his life, sent word to the King if hee would pardon him he could
reveale things to him which would concerne him more and be of greater
consequence to him, than his destruction.


     *State Papers, France, vol. 126.

                              ------

Note VII. The same to the same.

                                           Paris:  June 26, '69.
My Lord,

. . . . . .

I heard that Marsilly was to be broke on the wheel and I gave order then
to one of my servants to write Mr. Williamson word of it, soe I suppose
you have heard of it already: they hastened his execution for feare he
should have dyed of the hurt he had done himself the day before; they
sent for a minister to him when he was upon the scaffold to see if he
would confesse anything, but he still persisted that he was guilty of
nothing nor DID NOT KNOW WHY HE WAS PUT TO DEATH....




III. THE MYSTERY OF SIR EDMUND BERRY GODFREY



When London was a pleasanter place than it is to-day, when anglers
stretched their legs up Tottenham Hill on their way to fish in the Lee;
when the 'best stands on Hackney river' were competed for eagerly by
bottom fishers; when a gentleman in St. Martin's Lane, between the
hedges, could 'ask the way to Paddington Woods;' when a hare haunted
Primrose Hill and was daily pursued by a gallant pack of harriers;
enfin, between three and four on the afternoon of October 17, 1678, two
common fellows stepped into the White House tavern in the fields north
of Marylebone, a house used as a club by a set of Catholic tradesmen.
They had been walking in that region, and, as the October afternoon was
drawing in, and rain was falling, they sought refuge in the White House.
It would appear that they had not the means of assuaging a reasonable
thirst, for when they mentioned that they had noticed a gentleman's
cane, a scabbard, a belt, and some add a pair of gloves, lying at the
edge of a deep dry ditch, overgrown with thick bush and bramble,
the landlord offered the new comers a shilling to go and fetch the
articles.* But the rain was heavy, and probably the men took the
shilling out in ale, till about five o'clock, when the weather held up
for a while.


     *A rather different account by the two original finders, Bromwell
and Walters, is in L'Estrange's Brief History, iii. pp. 97, 98. The
account above is the landlord's. Lords' MSS., Hist. MSS. Com., xi. pp.
2, 46, 47.

The delay was the more singular if, as one account avers, the men had
not only observed the cane and scabbard outside of the ditch, on the
bank, but also a dead body within the ditch, under the brambles.* By
five o'clock the rain had ceased, but the tempestuous evening was dark,
and it was night before Constable Brown, with a posse of neighbours on
foot and horseback, reached the ditch. Herein they found the corpse of a
man lying face downwards, the feet upwards hung upon the brambles; thus
half suspended he lay, and the point of a sword stuck out of his back,
through his black camlet coat.** By the lights at the inn, the body was
identified as that of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, a Justice of the Peace
for Westminster, who had been missing since Saturday October 12. It is
an undeniable fact that, between two and three o'clock, before the
body was discovered and identified, Dr. Lloyd, Dean of St. Asaph's,
and Bishop Burnet, had heard that Godfrey had been found in Leicester
Fields, with his own sword in his body. Dr. Lloyd mentioned his
knowledge in the funeral sermon of the dead magistrate. He had the story
from a Mr. Angus, a clergyman, who had it from 'a young man in a grey
coat,' in a bookseller's shop near St. Paul's, about two o'clock in the
afternoon. Angus hurried to tell Bishop Burnet, who sent him on to Dr.
Lloyd.*** Either the young man in the grey coat knew too much, or a mere
rumour, based on a conjecture that Godfrey had fallen on his own sword,
proved to be accurate by accident; a point to be remembered. According
to Roger Frith, at two o'clock he heard Salvetti, the ambassador of the
Duke of Tuscany, say: 'Sir E. Godfrey is dead... the young Jesuits are
grown desperate; the old ones would do no such thing.' This again may
have been a mere guess by Salvetti.****


     *Pollock, Popish Plot, pp. 95, 96.

     **Brown in Brief History, iii. pp. 212-215, 222.

     ***L'Estrange, Brief History, iii. pp. 87-89.

     ****Lords' MSS. p. 48, October 24.

In the circumstances of the finding of the body it would have been
correct for Constable Brown to leave it under a guard till daylight and
the arrival of surgical witnesses, but the night was threatening, and
Brown ordered the body to be lifted; he dragged out the sword with
difficulty, and had the dead man carried to the White House Inn. There,
under the candles, the dead man, as we said, was recognised for Sir
Edmund Berry Godfrey, a very well-known justice of the peace and wood
and coal dealer. All this occurred on Thursday, October 17, and
Sir Edmund had not been seen by honest men and thoroughly credible
witnesses, at least, since one o'clock on Saturday, October 12. Then he
was observed near his house in Green Lane, Strand, but into his house he
did not go.

Who, then, killed Sir Edmund?

The question has never been answered, though three guiltless men were
later hanged for the murder. Every conceivable theory has been tried;
the latest is that of Mr. Pollock: Godfrey was slain by 'the Queen's
confessor,' Le Fevre, 'a Jesuit,' and some other Jesuits, with lay
assistance.* I have found no proof that Le Fevre was either a Jesuit or
confessor of the Queen.


     *Pollock, The Popish Plot, Duckworth, London, 1903.

As David Hume says, the truth might probably have been discovered, had
proper measures been taken at the moment. But a little mob of horse and
foot had trampled round the ditch in the dark, disturbing the original
traces. The coroner's jury, which sat long and late, on October 18 and
19, was advised by two surgeons, who probably, like the rest of the
world, were biassed by the belief that Godfrey had been slain 'by the
bloody Papists.' In the reign of mad terror which followed, every one
was apt to accommodate his evidence, naturally, to that belief. If they
did not, then, like the two original finders, Bromwell and Walters, they
might be thrown, heavily ironed, into Newgate.*


     *Lords' MSS. P. 47, note 1.

But when the Popish Plot was exploded, and Charles II. was firm on his
throne, still more under James II., every one was apt to be biassed in
the opposite direction, and to throw the guilt on the fallen party
of Oates, Bedloe, Dugdale, and the other deeply perjured and infamous
informers. Thus both the evidence of 1678-1680, and that collected in
1684-1687, by Sir Roger L'Estrange, J.P. (who took great trouble and was
allowed access to the manuscript documents of the earlier inquiries),
must be regarded with suspicion.*


     *L'Estrange, Brief History of the Times, London, 1687.

The first question is cui bono? who had an interest in Godfrey's death?
Three parties had an interest, first, the Catholics (IF Godfrey knew
their secrets); next, the managers of the great Whig conspiracy in
favour of the authenticity of Oates's Popish Plot; last, Godfrey
himself, who was of an hereditary melancholy (his father had suicidal
tendencies), and who was involved in a quandary whence he could scarcely
hope to extricate himself with life and honour.

Of the circumstances of Godfrey's quandary an account is to follow. But,
meanwhile, the theory of Godfrey's suicide (though Danby is said to have
accepted it) was rejected, probably with good reason (despite the doubts
of L'Estrange, Hume, Sir George Sitwell, and others), by the coroner's
jury.*


     *Sitwell, The First Whig, Sacheverell.

Privately printed, 1894, Sir George's book--a most interesting volume,
based on public and private papers--unluckily is introuvable. Some years
have passed since I read a copy which he kindly lent me.

The evidence which determined the verdict of murder was that of two
surgeons. They found that the body had been severely bruised, on
the chest, by kicks, blows of a blunt weapon, or by men's knees. A
sword-thrust had been dealt, but had slipped on a rib; Godfrey's own
sword had then been passed through the left pap, and out at the back.
There was said to be no trace of the shedding of fresh living blood on
the clothes of Godfrey, or about the ditch. What blood appeared was old,
the surgeons averred, and malodorous, and flowed after the extraction of
the sword.

L'Estrange (1687) argues at great length, but on evidence collected
later, and given under the Anti-Plot bias, that there was much more
'bloud' than was allowed for at the inquest. But the early evidence
ought to be best. Again, the surgeons declared that Godfrey had been
strangled with a cloth (as the jury found), and his neck dislocated.
Bishop Burnet, who viewed the body, writes (long after the event):
'A mark was all round his neck, an inch broad, which showed he was
strangled.... And his neck was broken. All this I saw.'*


     *Burnet, History of his own Time, ii. p. 741. 1725.


L'Estrange argued that the neck was not broken (giving an example of a
similar error in the case of a dead child), and that the mark round the
neck was caused by the tightness of the collar and the flow of blood
to the neck, the body lying head downwards. In favour of this view
he produced one surgeon's opinion. He also declares that Godfrey's
brothers, for excellent reasons of their own, refused to allow a
thorough post-mortem examination. 'None of them had ever been opened,'
they said. Their true motive was that, if Godfrey were a suicide,
his estate would be forfeited to the Crown, a point on which they
undoubtedly showed great anxiety.

Evidence was also given to prove that, on Tuesday and Wednesday, October
15 and 16, Godfrey's body was not in the ditch. On Tuesday Mr. Forsett,
on Wednesday Mr. Harwood had taken Mr. Forsett's harriers over the
ground, in pursuit of the legendary hare. They had seen no cane or
scabbard; the dogs had found no corpse. L'Estrange replied that, as to
the cane, the men could not see it if they were on the further side of
the bramble-covered ditch. As to the dogs, they later hunted a wood
in which a dead body lay for six weeks before it was found. L'Estrange
discovered witnesses who had seen Godfrey in St. Martin's Lane on the
fatal Saturday, asking his way to Paddington Woods, others who had seen
him there or met him returning thence. Again, either he or 'the Devil in
his clothes' was seen near the ditch on Saturday afternoon. Again,
his clerk, Moore, was seen hunting the fields near the ditch, for his
master, on the Monday afternoon. Hence L'Estrange argued that Godfrey
went to Paddington Woods, on Saturday morning, to look for a convenient
place of suicide: that he could not screw his courage to the sticking
place; that he wandered home, did not enter his house, roamed out again,
and, near Primrose Hill, found the ditch and 'the sticking place.' His
rambles, said L'Estrange, could neither have been taken for business nor
pleasure. This is true, if Godfrey actually took the rambles, but the
evidence was not adduced till several years later; in 1678 the witnesses
would have been in great danger. Still, if we accept L'Estrange's
witnesses for Godfrey's trip to Paddington and return, perhaps we ought
not to reject the rest.*


     *Brief History, iii. pp. 252, 300, 174, 175; State Trials, viii. pp.
1387, 1392, 1393, 1359-1389.

On the whole, it seems that the evidence for murder, not suicide, is
much the better, though even here absolute certainty is not attained.
Granting Godfrey's constitutional hereditary melancholy, and the double
quandary in which he stood, he certainly had motives for suicide. He was
a man of humanity and courage, had bravely faced the Plague in London,
had withstood the Court boldly on a private matter (serving a writ, as
Justice, on the King's physician who owed him money in his capacity as a
coal dealer), and he was lenient in applying the laws against Dissenters
and Catholics.

To be lenient was well; but Godfrey's singular penchant for Jesuits, and
especially for the chief Catholic intriguer in England, was probably the
ultimate cause of his death, whether inflicted by his own hand or those
of others.

2.

We now study Godfrey's quandary. On June 23, 1678, the infamous
miscreant Titus Oates had been expelled from the Jesuit College of St.
Omer's, in France. There he may readily have learned that the usual
triennial 'consult' of English Jesuits was to be held in London on April
24, but WHERE it was held, namely in the Duke of York's chambers in
St. James's Palace, Oates did not know, or did not say. The Duke, by
permitting the Jesuits to assemble in his house, had been technically
guilty of treason in 'harbouring' Jesuits, certainly a secret of great
importance, as he was the head and hope of the Catholic cause, and the
butt of the Whigs, who were eager to exclude him from the succession.
Oates had scraps of other genuine news. He returned to London after
his expulsion from St. Omer's, was treated with incautious kindness by
Jesuits there, and, with Tonge, constructed his monstrous fable of a
Popish plot to kill the King and massacre the Protestant public.
In August, Charles was apprised of the plot, as was Danby, the Lord
Treasurer; the Duke of York also knew, how much he knew is uncertain.
The myth was little esteemed by the King.

On September 6, Oates went to Godfrey, and swore before him, as a
magistrate, to the truth of a written deposition, as to treason. But
Godfrey was not then allowed to read the paper, nor was it left in his
hands; the King, he was told, had a copy.* The thing might have passed
off, but, as King James II. himself writes, he (being then Duke of York)
'press'd the King and Lord Treasurer several times that the letters'
(letters forged by Oates) 'might be produced and read, and the business
examined into at the Committee of Foreign Affairs.'** Mr. Pollock calls
the Duke's conduct tactless. Like Charles I., in the mystery of 'the
Incident,' he knew himself guiltless, and demanded an inquiry.


     *Kirkby, Complete Narrative, pp. 2, 3, cited by Mr. Pollock.  At the
time, it was believed that Godfrey saw the depositions.

    **Clarke's Life
of James II. i. p. 518. Cited from the King's original Memoirs.

On September 28, Oates was to appear before the Council. Earlier on that
day he again visited Godfrey, handed to him a copy of his deposition,
took oath to its truth, and carried another copy to Whitehall. As we
shall see, Oates probably adopted this course by advice of one of the
King's ministers, Danby or another. Oates was now examined before the
King, who detected him in perjury. But he accused Coleman, the secretary
of the Duchess of York, of treasonable correspondence with La Chaise,
the confessor of Louis XIV.: he also said that, on April 24, he himself
was present at the Jesuit 'consult' in the White Horse Tavern, Strand,
where they decided to murder the King! This was a lie, but they HAD met
on ordinary business of the Society, on April 24, at the palace of the
Duke of York. Had the Jesuits, when tried, proved this, they would not
have saved their lives, and Oates would merely have sworn that they met
AGAIN, at the White Horse.

Godfrey, having Oates's paper before him, now knew that Coleman was
accused. Godfrey was very intimate with many Jesuits, says Warner, who
was one of them, in his manuscript history.* With Coleman, certainly
a dangerous intriguer, Godfrey was so familiar that 'it was the form
arranged between them for use when Godfrey was in company and Coleman
wished to see him,' that Coleman should be announced under the name of
Mr. Clarke.**


     * Pollock, p. 91, note 1.

     **Ibid. p. 151, note 3. Welden's evidence before the Lords' Committee,
House of Lords MSS., p. 48. Mr. Pollock rather overstates the case. We
cannot be certain, from Welden's words, that Coleman habitually used the
name 'Clarke' on such occasions.

It is extraordinary enough to find a rigid British magistrate engaged
in clandestine dealings with an intriguer like Coleman, who, for the
purpose, receives a cant name. If that fact came out in the inquiry into
the plot, Godfrey's doom was dight, the general frenzy would make men
cry for his blood. But yet more extraordinary was Godfrey's conduct on
September 28. No sooner had he Oates's confession, accusing Coleman, in
his hands, than he sent for the accused. Coleman went to the house of
a Mr. (or Colonel) Welden, a friend of Godfrey's, and to Godfrey it was
announced that 'one Clarke' wished to see him there. 'When they were
together at my house they were reading papers,' said Welden later, in
evidence.* It cannot be doubted that, after studying Oates's deposition,
Godfrey's first care was to give Coleman full warning. James II. tells
us this himself, in his memoirs. 'Coleman being known to depend on the
Duke, Sir Edmund Bury (sic) Godfrey made choice of him, to send to his
Highness an account of Oates's and Tongue's depositions as soon as he
had taken them,' that is, on September 28.** Apparently the Duke had
not the precise details of Oates's charges, as they now existed, earlier
than September 28, when they were sent to him by Godfrey.


     *See previous note (Pollock, p. 151, note 3.)

     **Life of James II. i, p. 534.

It is Mr. Pollock's argument that, when Godfrey and Coleman went over
the Oates papers, Coleman would prove Oates's perjury, and would to this
end let out that, on April 24, the Jesuits met, not as Oates swore, at a
tavern, but at the Duke of York's house, a secret fatal to the Duke and
the Catholic cause. The Jesuits then slew Godfrey to keep the secret
safe.*


     *Pollock, p. 153.

Now, first, I cannot easily believe that Coleman would blab this secret
(quite unnecessarily, for this proof of Oates's perjury could not be,
and was not, publicly adduced), unless Godfrey was already deep in the
Catholic intrigues. He may have been, judging by his relations with
Coleman. If Godfrey was not himself engaged in Catholic intrigues,
Coleman need only tell him that Oates was not in England in April, and
could not have been, as he swore he was, at the 'consult.' Next, Godfrey
was not the man (as Mr. Pollock supposes) to reveal his knowledge to the
world, from a sense of duty, even if the Court 'stifled the plot.' Mr.
Pollock says: 'Godfrey was, by virtue of his position as justice of
the peace, a Government official.... Sooner or later he would certainly
reveal it.... The secret... had come into the hands of just one of the
men who could not afford, even if he might wish, to retain it.'* Mr.
Pollock may conceive, though I do not find him saying so, that Godfrey
communicated Oates's charges to Coleman merely for the purpose of
'pumping' him and surprising some secret. If so he acted foolishly.


     *Pollock, p. 154.

In fact, Godfrey was already 'stifling the plot.' A Government official,
he was putting Coleman in a posture to fly, and to burn his papers; had
he burned all of them, the plot was effectually stifled. Next, Godfrey
could not reveal the secret without revealing his own misprision of
treason. He would be asked 'how he knew the secret.' Godfrey's lips were
thus sealed; he had neither the wish nor the power to speak out, and
so his knowledge of the secret, if he knew it, was innocuous to the
Jesuits. 'What is it nearer?' Coleman was reported, by a perjured
informer, to have asked.*


     *State Trials, vii. 1319.  Trial of Lord Stafford, 1680.

To this point I return later. Meanwhile, let it be granted that Godfrey
knew the secret from Coleman, and that, though, since Godfrey could
not speak without self-betrayal--though it was 'no nearer'--still the
Jesuits thought well to mak sikker and slay him.

Still, what is the evidence that Godfrey had a mortal secret? Mr.
Pollock gives it thus: 'He had told Mr. Wynnel that he was master of
a dangerous secret, which would be fatal to him. "Oates," he said, "is
sworn and is perjured."'* These sentences are not thus collocated in
the original. The secret was not, as from Mr. Pollock's arrangement it
appears to be, that Oates was perjured.


     *Pollock, p. 150.

The danger lay, not in knowledge that Oates was perjured--all the
Council knew the King to have discovered that. 'Many believed it,' says
Mr. Pollock. 'It was not an uncommon thing to say.'* The true peril, on
Mr. Pollock's theory, was Godfrey's possession of PROOF that Oates was
perjured, that proof involving the secret of the Jesuit 'consult' of
April 14, AT THE DUKE OF YORK'S HOUSE. But, by a singular oversight,
Mr. Pollock quotes only part of what Godfrey said to Wynell (or Wynnel)
about his secret. He does not give the whole of the sentence uttered by
Wynell. The secret, of which Godfrey was master, on the only evidence,
Wynell's, had nothing to do with the Jesuit meeting of April 24. Wynell
is one of L'Estrange's later witnesses. His words are:

Godfrey: 'The (Catholic) Lords are as innocent as you or I. Coleman will
die, but not the Lords.'

Wynell: 'If so, where are we then?'

Godfrey: 'Oates is sworn and is perjured.'

                    *          *          *

'Upon Wynell's asking Sir Edmund some time why he was so melancholy, his
answer has been, "he was melancholy because he was master of a dangerous
secret that would be fatal to him, THAT HIS SECURITY WAS OATE'S
DEPOSITION, THAT THE SAID OATES HAD FIRST DECLARED IT TO A PUBLIC
MINISTER, AND SECONDLY THAT HE CAME TO SIR EDMUND BY HIS (the
Minister's) DIRECTION."**


     *Pollock, p. 152.

    **L'Estrange, part iii. p. 187.

We must accept all of Mr. Wynell's statement or none; we cannot accept,
like Mr. Pollock, only Godfrey's confession of owning a dangerous
secret, without Godfrey's explanation of the nature of the danger.
Against THAT danger (his knowing and taking no action upon what Oates
had deposed) Godfrey's 'security' was Oates's other deposition, that his
information was already in the Minister's hands, and that he had come to
Godfrey by the Minister's orders. The invidiousness of knowing and
not acting on Oates's 'dangerous secret,' Godfrey hoped, fell on the
Minister rather than on himself. And it did fall on Danby, who was later
accused of treason on this very ground, among others. Such is Wynell's
evidence, true or false. C'est a prendre ou a laisser in bulk, and in
bulk is of no value to Mr. Pollock's argument.

That Godfrey was in great fear after taking Oates's deposition, and
dealing with Coleman, is abundantly attested. But of what was he afraid,
and of whom? L'Estrange says, of being made actual party to the plot,
and not of 'bare misprision' only, the misprision of not acting on
Oates's information.* It is to prove this point that L'Estrange cites
Wynell as quoted above. Bishop Burnet reports that, to him, Godfrey said
'that he believed he himself should be knocked on the head.'** Knocked
on the head by whom? By a frightened Protestant mob, or by Catholic
conspirators? To Mr. Robinson, an old friend, he said, 'I do not fear
them if they come fairly, and I shall not part with my life tamely.'
Qu'ils viennent! as Tartarin said, but who are 'they'? Godfrey said that
he had 'taken the depositions very unwillingly, and would fain have
had it done by others.... I think I shall have little thanks for my
pains.... Upon my conscience I believe I shall be the first martyr.'***
He could not expect thanks from the Catholics: it was from the frenzied
Protestants that he expected 'little thanks.'


     *L'Estrange, iii. p. 187.

     **Burnet, ii. p. 740.

    ***State Trials, vii. pp. 168, 169.

Oates swore, and, for once, is corroborated, that Godfrey complained 'of
receiving affronts from some great persons (whose names I name not now)
for being so zealous in this business.' If Oates, by 'great persons,'
means the Duke of York, it was in the Duke's own cause that Godfrey had
been 'zealous,' sending him warning by Coleman. Oates added that others
threatened to complain to Parliament, which was to meet on October 21,
that Godfrey had been 'too remiss.' Oates was a liar, but Godfrey, in
any case, was between the Devil and the deep sea. As early as October
24, Mr. Mulys attested, before the Lords, Godfrey's remark, 'he had
been blamed by some great men for not having done his duty, and by
other great men for having done too much.' Mulys corroborates Oates.*
If Godfrey knew a secret dangerous to the Jesuits (which, later, was a
current theory), he might be by them silenced for ever. If his conduct,
being complained of, was examined into by Parliament, misprision of
treason was the lowest at which his offence could be rated. Never was
magistrate in such a quandary. But we do not know, in the state of the
evidence, which of his many perils he feared most, and his possession of
'a dangerous secret' (namely, the secret of the consult of April 24) is
a pure hypothesis. It is not warranted, but refuted, by Godfrey's own
words as reported by Wynell, when, unlike Mr. Pollock, we quote Wynell's
whole sentence on the subject. (see previous exchange between Godfrey
and Wynell.)


     *Lords' MSS., P. 48.

3.

The theories of Godfrey's death almost defy enumeration. For suicide,
being a man of melancholic temperament, he had reasons as many and as
good as mortal could desire. That he was murdered for not being active
enough in prosecuting the plot, is most improbable. That he was taken
off by Danby's orders, for giving Coleman and the Duke of York early
warning, is an absurd idea, for Danby could have had him on THAT score
by ordinary process of law. That he was slain by Oates's gang, merely to
clinch the fact that a plot there veritably was, is improbable. At the
same time, Godfrey had been calling Oates a perjurer: he KNEW that Oates
was forsworn. This was an unsafe thing for any man to say, but when
the man was the magistrate who had read Oates's deposition, he invited
danger. Such were the chances that Godfrey risked from the Plot party.
The Catholics, on the other hand, if they were aware that Godfrey
possessed the secret of the Jesuit meeting of April 24, and if they
deemed him too foolish to keep the secret in his own interest, could not
but perceive that to murder him was to play into the hands of the Whigs
by clinching the belief in a Popish plot. Had they been the murderers,
they would probably have taken his money and rings, to give the idea
that he had been attacked and robbed by vulgar villains. If they 'were
not the damnedest fools' (thus freely speaks L'Estrange), they would
not have taken deliberate steps to secure the instant discovery of the
corpse. Whoever pitched Godfrey's body into the bramble-covered
ditch, meant it to be found, for his cane, scabbard, and so on were
deliberately left outside of the ditch. Your wily Jesuit would have
caused the body to disappear, leaving the impression that Godfrey had
merely absconded, as he had the best reasons for doing. On the other
hand, Oates's gang would not, if they first strangled Godfrey, have run
his own sword through his body, as if he had committed suicide--unless,
indeed, they calculated that this would be a likely step for your wily
Jesuit to take, in the circumstances. Again, an educated 'Jesuit,' like
Le Fevre, 'the Queen's confessor,' would know that the sword trick was
futile; even a plain man, let alone a surgeon, could detect a wound
inflicted on a corpse four or five days old.

Two other theories existed, first, that Godfrey hanged himself, and that
his brothers and heirs did the sword trick, to suggest that he had not
committed suicide by strangulation, but had been set on and stabbed with
his own sword. In that case, of course, the brothers would have removed
his rings and money, to prove that he had been robbed. The other theory,
plausible enough, held that Godfrey was killed by Catholics, NOT because
he took Oates's deposition (which he was bound to do), but because
he officiously examined a number of persons to make discoveries. The
Attorney-General at the trial of Godfrey's alleged murderers (February
1679), declared that Sir Edmund had taken such examinations: 'we have
proof that he had some... perhaps some more than are now extant'* This
theory, then, held that he was taken off to prevent his pursuing his
zealous course, and to seize the depositions which he had already
taken. When this was stated to Charles II., on November 7, 1678, by the
perjured Bedloe, the King naturally remarked: 'The parties were still
alive' (the deponents) 'to give the informations.' Bedloe answered, that
the papers were to be seized 'in hopes the second informations taken
from the parties would not have agreed with the first, and so the thing
would have been disproved.'** This was monstrously absurd, for the
slayers of Godfrey could not have produced the documents of which they
had robbed him.


     *State Trials, vii. p. 163.

     **Pollock, p. 385.

The theory that Sir Edmund was killed because Coleman had told him too
many secrets did not come to general knowledge till the trial of
Lord Stafford in 1680. The hypothesis--Godfrey slain because, through
Coleman, he knew too many Catholic secrets--is practically that of Mr.
Pollock. It certainly does supply a motive for Godfrey's assassination.
Hot-headed Catholics who knew, or suspected, that Godfrey knew too much,
MAY have killed him for that reason, or for the purpose of seizing his
papers, but it is improbable that Catholics of education, well aware
that, if he blabbed, Godfrey must ruin himself, would have put their
hands into his blood, on the mere chance that, if left alive, he might
betray both himself and them.

4.

It is now necessary to turn backward a little and see what occurred
immediately after the meeting of Coleman and Godfrey on September 28.
On that day, Oates gave his lying evidence before the Council: he was
allowed to go on a Jesuit drive, with warrants and officers; he caught
several of the most important Jesuits. On September 29, the King heard
his tale, and called him a 'lying knave.' None the less he was sent on
another drive, and, says Mr. Pollock, 'before dawn most the Jesuits of
eminence in London lay in gaol.' But Le Fevre, 'the Queen's confessor,'
and the other 'Jesuits' whom Mr. Pollock suspects of Godfrey's murder,
were not taken. Is it likely (it is, of course, possible) that they
stayed on in town, and killed Godfrey twelve days later?

Meanwhile Coleman, thanks to Godfrey's warning, had most of September
28, the night of that day, and September 29, wherein to burn his papers
and abscond. He did neither; if he destroyed some papers, he left others
in his rooms, letters which were quite good enough to hang him for high
treason, as the law stood. Apparently Coleman did not understand his
danger. On Sunday night, September 29, a warrant for his apprehension
was issued, and for the seizure of his papers. 'He came voluntarily in
on Monday morning,' having heard of the warrant. This is not the conduct
of a man who knows himself guilty. He met the charges with disdain,
and made so good a case that, instead of being sent to Newgate, he was
merely entrusted to a messenger, who was told 'to be very civil to Mr.
Coleman.'

Charles II. went to the Newmarket Autumn Meeting, Coleman's papers were
examined, and 'sounded so strange to the Lords' that they sent him to
Newgate (October 1). The papers proved that Coleman, years before, had
corresponded (as Oates had sworn) with the confessor of Louis XIV. and
had incurred the technical guilt of treason. Either Coleman did not
understand the law and the measure of his offence (as seems probable),
or he thought his papers safely hidden. But the heather was on fire. The
belief in Oates's impossible Plot blazed up, 'hell was let loose'.*


     *State Trials, vii. p. 29.

Coleman had thought himself safe, says James II., then Duke of York.
'The Duke perceiving' (from Godfrey's information of September 28)
'Oates had named Coleman, bade him look to himself, for he was sure to
find no favour, and therefore, if he had any papers that might hurt him,
to secure them immediately; but he, apprehending no danger, let them
be seized, however kept close himself, and sent to advise with the Duke
whether he should deliver himself up or not. The Duke replyd, "He knew
best what was in his papers; if they contain'd any expression which
could be wrested to an ill sence, he had best not appear, otherwise
the surrendering himself would be an argument of innocency." He did
accordingly,' and was condemned in November, and hanged.*


     *Life of James II., i. p. 534.

King James's tale agrees with the facts of Coleman's surrender. 'He came
in voluntarily.' He did not appreciate the resources of civilisation at
the service of the English law of treason: he had dabbled in intrigue
without taking counsel's advice, and knowing for certain that Oates
was an inconsistent liar, Coleman took his chance with a light heart.
However, not only did some of his letters bring him (though he could
not understand the fact) within the elastic law of treason; but Oates's
evidence was accepted when conspicuously false; Coleman was not
allowed to produce his diary and prove an alibi as to one of Oates's
accusations, and a new witness, Bedloe, a perjurer who rivalled Oates,
had sprung up out of the filth of London streets. So Coleman swung for
it, as Godfrey, according to Wynell, had prophesied that he would.

Coleman's imprisonment began twelve days before Godfrey's disappearance.
At Coleman's trial, late in November, a mere guess was given that
Godfrey was slain to prevent him (a Protestant martyr) from blabbing
Catholic secrets. This cause of Godfrey's taking off was not alleged by
Bedloe. This man, a notorious cosmopolitan rogue, who had swindled his
way through France and Spain, was first heard of in the Godfrey case at
the end of October. He wrote to the Secretaries of State from Bristol
(L'Estrange says from Newbury on his way to Bristol), offering
information, as pardon and reward had been promised to contrite
accomplices in the murder. He came to town, and, on November 7, gave
evidence before the King. Bedloe gave himself out as a Jesuit agent;
concerning the Plot he added monstrous inventions to those of Oates.

'As to Sir Edmund Godfrey; was promised 2,000 guineas to be in it by
Le Fere' (Le Fevre, 'the Queen's confessor),' [by] 'my Lord Bellasis
gentleman, AND THE YOUNGEST OF THE WAITERS IN THE QUEENE'S CHAPEL, IN A
PURPLE GOWN, and to keep the people orderly.'*


     *See Pollock, pp. 384, 387.  The report is from Secretary Coventry's
MSS., at Longleat. The evidence as to Bedloe's deposition before the
King (November 7) is in a confused state. Mr. Pollock prints (pp. 383,
384, cf. p. 110) a document from 'Brit. Mus. Addit. MS. 11058, f. 244.'
This is also given, with the same erroneous reference, by Mr. Foley, in
Records of the English Province of the Society of Jesus, vol. v. p. 30,
note. The right reference is 11055. The document is quite erroneously
printed, with variations in error, by Mr. Foley and Mr. Pollock. Bedloe
really said that Godfrey was lured into Somerset House Yard, not into
'some house yard' (Foley), or 'into a house yard' (Pollock). Bedloe, so
far, agreed with Prance, but, in another set of notes on his deposition
(Longleat MSS., Coventry Papers, xi. 272-274, Pollock, 384-387), he
made Somerset House the scene of the murder. There are other errors. Mr.
Pollock and Mr. Foley make Bedloe accuse Father Eveley, S.J., in whom
I naturally recognised Father Evers or Every, who was then at Tixall in
Staffordshire. The name in the MS. is 'Welch,' not Eveley. The MS. was
manifestly written not before September 12. It does not appear that
Bedloe, on November 7, knew the plot as invented by Oates, on which
compare Mr. Pollock, p. 110, who thinks that 'it is quite possible that
Charles II. deceived him,' Bishop Burnet, 'intentionally,' on this head
(Burnet, ii. 745-746, 1725). By printing 'he acquainted' instead of 'he
acquainteth the Lords,' in the British Museum MS., and by taking the
document, apparently, to be of November 7, Mr. Pollock has been led
to an incorrect conclusion. I am obliged to Father Gerard, S.J., for a
correct transcript of the British Museum MS.; see also Note iii., 'The
Jesuit Murderers,' at the end of this chapter, and Father Gerard's The
Popish Plot and its Latest Historian (Longman's, 1903).

Bedloe here asserts distinctly that one accomplice was an official of
the Queen's chapel, in her residence, Somerset House: a kind of verger,
in a purple gown. This is highly important, for the man whom he later
pretended to recognise as this accomplice was not a 'waiter,' did not
'wear a purple gown;' and, by his own account, 'was not in the chapel
once a month.' Bedloe's recognition of him, therefore, was worthless. He
said that Godfrey was smothered with a pillow, or two pillows, in a room
in Somerset House, for the purpose of securing 'the examinations' that
Godfrey had taken. 'Coleman and Lord Bellasis advised to destroy him.'
His informant was Le Fevre. One Walsh (a 'Jesuit'), Le Fevre, Lord
Bellasis's man, and 'the chapel keeper' did the deed. The chapel keeper
carried him' (Godfrey) 'off.' 'HE DID NOT SEE HIM' (Godfrey) 'AFTER HE
WAS DEAD.'

On the following day Bedloe told his tale at the bar of the House of
Lords. He now, contradicting himself, swore THAT HE SAW GODFREY'S DEAD
BODY IN SOMERSET HOUSE. He was offered 2,000 guineas to help to carry
him off. This was done by chairmen, 'retainers to Somerset House,' on
Monday night (October 14).*


     *Pollock, p. 387, Lords' Journals, xiii. p. 343.

On that night, Bedloe saw Samuel Atkins, Mr. Pepys's clerk, beside the
corpse, by the light of a dark lantern. Atkins had an alibi, so Bedloe
shuffled, and would not swear to him.

On November 14, before the Lords' Committee, Bedloe again gave evidence.
The 2,100 pounds were now 4,000 pounds offered to Bedloe, by Le Fevre,
early in October, to kill a man. The attendant in the Queen's chapel
was at the scene (a pure figment) of the corpse exposed under the dark
lantern. The motive of the murder was to seize Godfrey's examinations,
which he said he had sent to Whitehall. At a trial which followed in
February 1679, Mr. Robinson, who had known Godfrey for some forty years,
deposed that he had said to him, 'I understand you have taken several
examinations.' 'Truly,' said he, 'I have.' 'Pray, Sir, have you the
examinations about you, will you please to let me see them?' 'No, I have
them not, I delivered them to a person of quality.'*


     *State Trials, vii. 168.

This person of quality was not the Duke of York, for it may be noted
that, on the day before his disappearance, Godfrey had, in fact,
received back from the Lord Chief Justice the original copy of Oates's
depositions. This copy was found in his house, after his death, and
handed over by his brother to the Government.* To get the examinations
was always the motive of the murder, with Bedloe. The hour of Godfrey's
death was now 2 P.M.; now 3, or 4, or 5 P.M., on October 12. The body
was hidden in various rooms of Somerset House, or under the high altar
in the Queen's Chapel. The discrepancies never affected the faith given
to Bedloe.


     *Lords' MSS., Hist. MSS. Commission Report, xi. Appendix, part ii.,
pp. 2,3.

At the end of December came in a new accomplice-witness. This was
an Irishman, Miles Prance, a silversmith, who had a business among
Catholics, and worked for the Queen's Chapel. Unlike all the other
informers, Prance had hitherto been an ordinary fellow enough, with a
wife and family, not a swindling debauchee. He was arrested on December
21, on information given by John Wren, a lodger of his, with whom he had
quarrelled. Wren had noticed that Prance lay out of his own house while
Godfrey was missing, which Prance admitted to be true.*


     *Op. cit. p. 51.  Prance both said, and denied, that he slept out
while Sir Edmund was missing. He was flurried and self-contradictory.

Bedloe, passing through a room in the House of Commons, saw Prance in
custody, and at once pretended to recognise in him the 'chapel keeper,'
'under waiter,' or 'man in the purple gown,' whom he had seen by the
light of a dark lantern, beside Godfrey's body, in a room of Somerset
House, on October 14. 'There was very little light' on that occasion,
Bedloe had said, and he finally refused, we saw, to swear to Atkins,
who had an alibi. But, as to Prance, he said: 'This is one of the rogues
that I saw with a dark lantern about the body of Sir Edmund, but he was
then in a periwig.'* The periwig was introduced in case Prance had an
alibi: Oates had used the same 'hedge,' 'a periwig doth disguise a man
very much,' in Coleman's case.**


     *L'Estrange, iii. pp. 52, 53, 65.

     **State Trials, vii. 27.

What was Bedloe's recognition of Prance worth? Manifestly nothing! He
had probably seen Prance (not as a 'waiter') in the Queen's Chapel. Now
he found him in custody. Cautious as regards Atkins, six weeks earlier,
Bedloe was emboldened now by a train of successes. He had sworn away
Coleman's life. His self-contradictions had been blindly swallowed. If
Prance could prove an alibi, what was that to Bedloe? The light of the
dark lantern had been very bad; the rogue, under that light, had worn a
periwig, which 'doth disguise a man very much.' Bedloe could safely say
that he had made an innocent error. Much worse blunders had not impaired
his credit; later he made much worse blunders, undetected. He saw his
chance and took it.

Prance, who denied everything, was hurried to Newgate, and thrown,
without bed or covering, into the freezing 'condemned hole,' where he
lay perishing of cold through the night of December 21, December 22,
and the night of that day. On December 23, he offered, no wonder, to
confess. He was examined by the Lords, and (December 24) by the Council.

Prance knew, all the world knew, the details about Godfrey's bruises;
the state of his neck, and the sword-thrusts. He knew that Bedloe had
located the murder in Somerset House. As proclamations for the men
accused by Bedloe had long been out, he MAY have guessed that Le Fevre,
Walsh, and Pritchard were wanted for Godfrey's murder, and had been
denounced by Bedloe. But this is highly improbable, for nothing about
Godfrey's murder is hinted at in the proclamation for Le Fevre, Walsh,
and Pritchard.* We have no reason, then, to suppose that Prance knew
who the men were that Bedloe had accused; consequently he had to select
other victims, innocent men of his acquaintance. But, as a tradesman of
the Queen, Prance knew her residence, Somerset House, the courts, outer
stairs, passages, and so on. He knew that Bedloe professed to have
recognised him there in the scene of the dark lantern.


     *Lords' Journals, xiii. p. 346; Lords' MSS., p. 59.

Prance had thus all the materials of a confession ready made, but not of
a confession identical with Bedloe's. He was 'one of the most acute
and audacious of the Jesuit agents,' says Mr. Pollock.* Yet Mr. Pollock
argues that for Prance to tell the tale which he did tell, in his
circumstances of cold and terror, required a most improbable 'wealth
of mental equipment,' 'phenomenal powers of memory, imagination, and
coolness,' if the tale was false.** Therefore Prance's story of the
murder was true, except in the details as to the men whom he accused.
On December 24, he was taken to the places which he described (certainly
lying in his tale), and preserved consistency, though, after long
search, he could not find one of the rooms in which he said that the
corpse was laid.***


     *Pollock, p.166.

     **Ibid. p. 146.

    ***Lords' Journals, xii. pp. 436-438.

As Prance, by Mr. Pollock's theory, was one of the most acute of Jesuit
agents, and as he had all the materials, and all the knowledge necessary
for a confession, he had, obviously, no difficulty in making up his
evidence. Even by Mr. Pollock's showing, he was cool and intellectual
enough; for, on that showing, he adapted into his narrative, very
subtly, circumstances which were entirely false. If, as Mr. Pollock
holds, Prance was astute enough to make a consistent patchwork of fact
and lie, how can it be argued that, with the information at his command,
he could not invent a complete fiction?

Again, Prance, by misstating dates wildly, hoped, says Mr. Pollock, to
escape as a mere liar.* But, when Prance varied in almost every detail
of time, place, motive, and person from Bedloe, Mr. Pollock does not see
that his own explanation holds for the variations. If Prance wished
to escape as a babbling liar, he could not do better than contradict
Bedloe. He DID, but the Protestant conscience swallowed the
contradictions. But again, if Prance did not know the details of
Bedloe's confession, how could he possibly agree with it?


     *Pollock, p. 160.

The most essential point of difference was that Bedloe accused
'Jesuits,' Le Fevre, Walsh, and Pritchard, who had got clean away.
Prance accused two priests, who escaped, and three hangers on of
Somerset House, Hill, Berry (the porter), and Green. All three were
hanged, and all three confessedly were innocent. Mr. Pollock reasons
that Prance, if guilty (and he believes him guilty), 'must have known
the real authors' of the crime, that is, the Jesuits accused by Bedloe.
'He must have accused the innocent, not from necessity, but from choice,
and in order to conceal the guilty.' 'He knew Bedloe to have exposed the
real murderers, and... he wished to shield them.'* How did he know whom
Bedloe had exposed? How could he even know the exact spot, a room in
Somerset House, where Bedloe placed the murder? Prance placed it in
Somerset YARD.


     *Pollock, p. 148.

It is just as easy to argue, on Mr. Pollock's other line, that Prance
varied from Bedloe in order that the inconsistencies might prove his
own falsehood. But we have no reason to suppose that Prance did know
the details of Bedloe's confession, as to the motive of the murder,
the hour, the exact spot, and the names of the criminals. Later he told
L'Estrange a palpable lie: Bedloe's confession had been shown to him
before he made his own. If that were true, he purposely contradicted
Bedloe in detail. But Mr. Pollock rejects the myth. Then how did Prance
know the details given by Bedloe?* Ignorant of Bedloe's version, except
in two or three points, Prance could not but contradict it. He thus
could not accuse Bedloe's Jesuits. He did not name other men, as Mr.
Pollock holds, to shield the Jesuits. Practically they did not need
to be shielded. Jesuits with seven weeks' start of the law were safe
enough. Even if they were caught, were guilty, and had the truth
extracted from them, involving Prance, the truth about HIM would come
out, whether he now denounced them or not. But he did not know that
Bedloe had denounced them.


     *Pollock, pp. 142, 143.

Mr. Pollock's theory of the relation of Bedloe to Godfrey's murder is
this: Bedloe had no hand in the murder, and never saw the corpse. The
crime was done in Somerset House, 'the Queen's confessor,' Father Le
Fevre, S.J., having singular facilities for entering, with his friends,
and carrying a dead body out 'through a private door'--a door not
mentioned by any witnesses, nor proved to exist by the evidence of a
chart. This Le Fevre, with Walsh, lived in the same house as Bedloe.
From them, Bedloe got his information. 'It is easy to conjecture how he
could have obtained it. Walsh and Le Fevre were absent from their rooms,
for a considerable part of the nights of Saturday and Wednesday, October
12 and 16. Bedloe's suspicions must have been aroused, and, either by
threats or cajolery, he wormed part of the secret out of his friends.
He obtained a general idea of the way in which the murder had been
committed and of the persons concerned in it. One of these was a
frequenter of the Queen's chapel whom he knew by sight. He thought him
to be a subordinate official there.'*


     *Pollock, pp. 157, 158.

On this amount of evidence Bedloe invented his many contradictions. Why
he did not cleave to the facts imparted to him by his Jesuit friends,
we do not learn. 'A general idea of the way in which the murder was
committed' any man could form from the state of Godfrey's body. There
was no reason why Walsh and Le Fevre 'should be absent from their rooms
on a considerable part of the night of Saturday 12,' and so excite
Bedloe's suspicions, for, on his versions, they slew Godfrey at 2 P.M.,
5 P.M., or any hour between. No proof is given that they were in their
lodgings, or in London, during the fortnight which followed Oates's
three successful Jesuit drives of September 28-30. In all probability
they had fled from London before Godfrey's murder. No evidence can I
find that Bedloe's Jesuits were at their lodgings on October 12-16. They
were not sought for there, but at Somerset House.* Two sisters, named
Salvin, were called before the Lords' Committee, and deposed that Bedloe
and Le Fevre had twice been at their house when Walsh said mass there.**


     *Lords' Journals, xiii. pp. 343 346.

     **Ibid. p. 353.

That is all! Bedloe had some acquaintance with the men he accused; so
had Prance with those he denounced. Prance's victims were innocent, and
against Bedloe's there is not, so far, evidence to convict a cat on
for stealing cream. He recognised Prance, therefore he really knew the
murderers--that is all the argument.

Mr. Pollock's theory reposes on the belief, rejected by L'Estrange, that
the Jesuits 'were the damnedest fools.' Suppose them guilty. The first
step of a Jesuit, or of any gentleman, about to commit a deliberate
deeply planned murder, is to secure an alibi. Le Fevre did not, or, when
questioned (on Mr. Pollock's theory) by Bedloe, he would have put him
off with his alibi. Again, 'a Jesuit,' 'the Queen's confessor,' does not
do his murders in the Queen's house: no gentleman does. But, if Le Fevre
did commit this solecism, he would have told Bedloe a different story;
if he confessed to him at all. These things are elementary.

Prance's confession, as to the share of Hill, Berry, and Green in the
murder, was admittedly false. On one point he stumbled always: 'Were
there no guards at the usual places at the time of the carrying on this
work?' he was asked by one of the Lords on December 24,1678. He mumbled,
'I did not take notice of any.'* He never, on later occasions, could
answer this question about the sentries. Prance saw no sentries, and
there is nowhere any evidence that the sentries were ever asked whether
they saw either Prance, Le Fevre, or Godfrey, in Somerset House or the
adjacent Somerset Yard, on October 12. They were likely to know both the
Queen's silversmith and 'the Queen's confessor,' and Godfrey they may
have known. Prance and the sentries had, for each other, the secret of
fern-seed, they walked invisible. This, of itself, is fatal to Prance's
legend.


     *Lords' Journals, xiii. p. 438.

No sooner had Prance confessed than he withdrew his confession. He
prayed to be taken before the King, knelt, and denied all. Next day
he did the same before the Council. He was restored to his pleasant
quarters in Newgate, and recanted his recantation. He again withdrew,
and maintained that his confession was false, before King and Council
(December 30), 'He knows nothing in the world of all he has said.' The
Lord Chancellor proposed 'to have him have the rack.'*


     *State Papers, Domestic, Charles II., Dec. 30, 1678, Bundle 408.

Probably he 'did not have the rack,' but he had the promise of it, and
nearly died of cold, ironed, in the condemned cell. 'He was almost dead
with the disorder in his mind, and with cold in his body,' said Dr.
Lloyd, who visited him, to Burnet. Lloyd got a bed and a fire for
the wretch, who revived, and repeated his original confession.* Lloyd
believed in his sincerity, says Burnet, writing many years later. In
1686, Lloyd denied that he believed.


     *Burnet, ii. p. 773.

Prance's victims, Hill, Berry, and Green, were tried on February 5,
1679. Prance told his story. On one essential point he professed to know
nothing. Where was Godfrey from five to nine o'clock, the hour when he
was lured into Somerset House? He was dogged in fields near Holborn to
somewhere unknown in St. Clement's. It is an odd fact that, though at
the dinner hour, one o'clock, close to his own house, and to that of
Mr. Welden (who had asked him to dine), Sir Edmund seems to have dined
nowhere. Had he done so, even in a tavern, he must have been recognised.
Probably Godfrey was dead long before 9 P.M. Mr. Justice Wild pressed
Prance on this point of where Godfrey was; he could say nothing.* Much
evidence (on one point absurd) was collected later by L'Estrange, and
is accepted by North in his 'Examen,' to prove that, by some of his
friends, Godfrey was reckoned 'missing' in the afternoon of the fatal
Saturday.** But no such evidence was wanted when Hill, Berry, and
Green were tried.*** The prosecution, with reckless impudence,
mingled Bedloe's and Prance's contradictory lies, and accused Bedloe's
'Jesuits,' Walsh and Le Fevre, in company with Prance's priests, Gerald
and Kelly.**** Bedloe, in his story before the jury, involved himself in
even more contradictory lies than usual. But, even now, he did not say
anything that really implicated the men accused by Prance, while
Prance said not a word, in Court or elsewhere, about the men accused by
Bedloe.*****


      *State Trials, vii. 177.

     **This is said in 1681 in A Letter to Miles Prance.

    ***North, Examen, p. 201.

   ****State Trials, vii, 178 (Speech of Serjeant Stringer).

  *****Ibid. vii. 179-183.

Lord Chief Justice Scroggs actually told the jury that 'for two
witnesses to agree as to many material circumstances with one another,
that had never conversed together, is impossible.... They agree so
in all things.'* The two witnesses did not agree at all, as we have
abundantly seen, but, in the fury of Protestant fear, any injustice
could be committed, and every kind of injustice was committed at this
trial. Prance later pleaded guilty on a charge of perjury, and well he
might. Bedloe died, and went to his own place with lies in his mouth.


     *State Trials, vii. 216.

5.

If I held a brief against the Jesuits, I should make much of a point
which Mr. Pollock does not labour. Just about the time when Prance began
confessing, in London, December 24, 1678, one Stephen Dugdale, styled
'gentleman,' was arrested in Staffordshire, examined, and sent up to
town. He was a Catholic, and had been in Lord Aston's service, but was
dismissed for dishonesty. In the country, at Tixall, he knew a Jesuit
named Evers, and through Evers he professed to know much about the
mythical plot to kill the King, and the rest of the farrago of lies. At
the trial of the five Jesuits, in June 1679, Dugdale told what he had
told privately, under examination, on March 21, 1679.* This revelation
was that Harcourt, a Jesuit, had written from town to Evers, a Jesuit
at Tixall, by the night post of Saturday, October 12, 1678, 'This very
night Sir Edmundbury (sic) Godfrey is dispatched.' The letter reached
Tixall by Monday, October 14.


     *Fitzherbert MSS; State Trials, vii. 338.

Mr. Pollock writes: 'Dugdale was proved to have spoken on Tuesday,
October 15, 1678, of the death of a justice of the peace in Westminster,
which does not go far.'* But if this is PROVED, it appears to go all the
way; unless we can explain Dugdale's information without involving
the guilty knowledge of Harcourt. The proof that Dugdale, on Tuesday,
October 15, spoke at Tixall of Godfrey's death, two days before
Godfrey's body was found near London, stands thus: at the trial of the
Jesuits a gentleman, Chetwyn, gave evidence that, on the morning of
Tuesday, October 15, a Mr. Sanbidge told him that Dugdale had talked
at an alehouse about the slaying of a justice of peace of Westminster.
Chetwyn was certain of the date, because on that day he went to
Litchfield races. At Litchfield he stayed till Saturday, October 19,
when he heard from London of the discovery of Godfrey's body.** Chetwyn
asked Dugdale about this, when Dugdale was sent to town, in December
1678. Dugdale said he remembered the facts, but, as he did not report
them to his examiners (a singular omission), he was not called as a
witness at the trial of Berry, Green, and Hill. Chetwyn later asked
Dugdale why he was not called, and said: 'Pray let me see the copy of
your deposition sworn before the Council. He showed it me, and there was
not a syllable of it, that I could see, BUT AFTERWARDS IT APPEARED TO BE
THERE.'


     *Pollock, p. 341, note 2.

     **State Trials, vii. 339, 341,

Lord Chief Justice. 'That is not very material, if the thing itself be
true.'

Chetwyn. 'But its not being there made me remember it.'

Its later appearance, 'there,' shows how depositions were handled!

Chetwyn, in June 1679, says that he heard of Dugdale's words as to the
murder, from Mr. Sanbidge, or Sambidge, or Sawbridge. At the trial of
Lord Stafford (1680) Sanbidge 'took it upon his salvation' that Dugdale
told him nothing of the matter, and vowed that Dugdale was a wicked
rogue.* Mr. Wilson, the parish clergyman of Tixall, was said to have
heard Dugdale speak of Godfrey's death on October 14. He also remembered
no such thing. Hanson, a running-man, heard Dugdale talk of the murder
of a justice of the peace at Westminster as early as the morning of
Monday, October 14, 1678: the London Saturday post arrived at Tixall on
Monday morning. Two gentlemen, Birch and Turton, averred that the
news of the murder 'was all over the country' near Tixall, on Tuesday,
October 15; but Turton was not sure that he did not hear first of the
fact on Friday, October 18, which, by ordinary post from London, was
impossible.


     *State Trials, vii. 1406.

Such was the evidence to show that Dugdale spoke of Godfrey's death, in
the country, two or three days before Godfrey's body was found. The fact
can scarcely be said to be PROVED, considering the excitement of men's
minds, the fallacies of memory, the silence of Dugdale at his first
examination before the Council, Sanbidge's refusal to corroborate
Chetwyn, and Wilson's inability to remember anything about a matter
so remarkable and so recent. To deny, like Sanbidge, to be unable to
remember, like Wilson, demanded some courage, in face of the frenzied
terror of the Protestants. Birch confessedly took no notice of the
rumour, when it first reached him, but at the trial of Green, Berry,
and Hill, 'I told several gentlemen that I did perfectly remember before
Thursday it was discoursed of in the country by several gentlemen where
I lived.'* The 'several gentlemen' whom Birch 'told' were not called
to corroborate him. In short, the evidence seems to fall short of
demonstrative proof.


     *State Trials. vii. 1455.

But, if it were all true, L'Estrange (and a writer who made the
assertion in 1681) collected a good deal of evidence* to show that
a rumour of Godfrey's disappearance, and probable murder by bloody
Papists, was current in London on the afternoon of the day when he
disappeared, Saturday, October 12.*** Mr. Pollock says that the evidence
is 'not to be relied on,' and part of it, attributing the rumour to
Godfrey's brothers, is absurd. THEY were afraid that Godfrey had killed
himself, not that he was murdered by Papists. That 'his household could
not have known that he would not return,' is not to the point. The
people who raised the rumour were not of Godfrey's household. Nor is it
to the point, exactly, that, being invited to dine on Saturday by Mr.
Welden, who saw him on Friday night, 'he said he could not tell whether
he should.'** For Wynell had expected to dine with him at Welden's to
talk over some private business about house property.*** Wynell (the
authority for Godfrey's being 'master of a dangerous secret') did expect
to meet Godfrey at dinner, and, knowing the fears to which Godfrey often
confessed, might himself have originated, by his fussy inquiries, the
rumour that Sir Edmund was missing. The wild excitement of the town
might add 'murdered by Papists,' and the rumour might really get into a
letter from London of Saturday night, reaching Tixall by Monday morning.
North says: 'It was in every one's mouth, WHERE IS GODFREY? HE HAS
NOT BEEN AT HIS HOUSE ALL THIS DAY, THEY SAY HE IS MURDERED BY THE
PAPISTS.'**** That such a pheemee might arise is very conceivable. In
all probability the report which Bishop Burnet and Dr. Lloyd heard of
the discovery of Godfrey's body, before it was discovered, was another
rumour, based on a lucky conjecture. It is said that the report of the
fall of Khartoum was current in Cairo on the day of the unhappy event.
Rumour is correct once in a myriad times, and, in October 1678, London
was humming with rumours. THIS report might get into a letter to Tixall,
and, if so, Dugdale's early knowledge is accounted for; if knowledge he
had, which I have shown to be disputable.


     *Letter to Miles Prance, March, 1681.  L'Estrange, Brief History,
iii. pp. 195-201.

     **Lords' MSS., p. 48; Pollock, p. 93, and note 2.

     ***L'Estrange, Brief History, iii. pp. 188, 190, 195.

    ****Examen, p. 201. Anglicised version of the author's
original Greek text.

Dugdale's talk was thought, at the time, to clinch the demonstration
that the Jesuits were concerned in Godfrey's murder, L'Estrange says,
and he brings in his witnesses to prove, that the London rumour existed,
and could reach the country by post. In fact, Chetwyn, on the evidence
of Sanbidge, suggested this improvement of his original romance to
Dugdale, and Sanbidge contradicted Chetwyn. He knew nothing of the
matter. Such is the value of the only testimony against the Jesuits
which deserves consideration.

We do not propose to unriddle this mystery, but to show that the most
recent and industrious endeavour to solve the problem is unsuccessful.
We cannot deny that Godfrey may have been murdered to conceal Catholic
secrets, of which, thanks to his inexplicable familiarity with Coleman,
he may have had many. But we have tried to prove that we do not KNOW him
to have had any such Catholic secrets, or much beyond Oates's fables;
and we have probably succeeded in showing that against the Jesuits, as
Sir Edmund's destroyers, there is no evidence at all.

Had modern men of science, unaffected by political and religious
bias, given evidence equivalent to that of the two surgeons, one might
conceive that Godfrey was probably slain, as Macaulay thought, by
hotheaded Catholics. But I confess to a leaning in favour of the picture
of Godfrey sketched by L'Estrange; of the man confessing to hereditary
melancholy; fretted and alarmed by the tracasseries and perils of his
own position, alarming his friends and endangering himself by his gloomy
hints; settling, on the last night of his life (Friday, October 11),
with morbid anxiety, some details of a parish charity founded by
himself; uncertain as to whether he can dine with Welden (at about one)
next day; seen at that very hour near his own house, yet dining nowhere;
said to have roamed, before that hour, to Paddington Woods and back
again; seen vaguely, perhaps, wandering near Primrose Hill in the
afternoon, and found dead five days later in the bush-covered ditch near
Primrose Hill, his own sword through his breast and back, his body in
the attitude of one who had died a Roman death.

Between us and that conclusion--suicide caused by fear--nothing
stands but the surgical evidence, and the grounds of that evidence are
disputed.

Surgical evidence, however, is a fact 'that winna ding,' and I do
not rely on the theory of suicide. But, if Godfrey was murdered by
Catholics, it seems odd that nobody has suggested, as the probable
scene, the Savoy, which lay next on the right to Somerset Yard. The
Savoy, so well described by Scott in Peveril of the Peak, and by
Macaulay, was by this time a rambling, ruinous, labyrinth of lanes and
dilapidated dwellings, tenanted by adventurers and skulking Catholics.
It was an Alsatia, says Macaulay, more dangerous than the Bog of Allen,
or the passes of the Grampians. A courageous magistrate might be lured
into the Savoy to stop a fight, or on any similar pretence; and, once
within a rambling old dwelling of the Hospital, would be in far greater
peril than in the Queen's guarded residence. Catholic adventurers might
here destroy Godfrey, either for his alleged zeal, or to seize his
papers, or because he, so great a friend of Catholics as he was, might
know too much. The body could much more easily be removed, perhaps by
water, from the Savoy, than from the guarded gates of Somerset House.
Oates knew the Savoy, and said falsely that he had met Coleman there.*
If murder was done, the Savoy was as good a place for the deed as the
Forest of Bondy.


     *State Trials, vii. 28.

                    *          *          *

NOTE I.

CHARLES II. AND GODFREY'S DEATH.

The Duke of York, speaking of Bedloe's evidence before the Lords
(November 8), says, 'Upon recollection the King remembered he was
at Sommerset House himself, at the very time he swore the murder was
committed:... his having been there at that time himself, made it
impossible that a man should be assaulted in the Court, murder'd, and
hurryd into the backstairs, when there was a Centry at every door, a
foot Company on the Guard, and yet nobody see or knew anything of it.*
Now evidence was brought that, at 5 P.M. on Saturday, October 12, the
Queen decided to be 'not at home.' But Bedloe placed the murder as early
as 2 P.M., sometimes, and between two o'clock and five o'clock the King
may, as the Duke of York says, have been at Somerset House. Reresby, in
his diary, for November 21, 1678, says that the King told him on that
day that he was 'satisfied' Bedloe had given false evidence as to
Godfrey's murder. The Duke of York probably repeats the King's grounds
for this opinion. Charles also knew that the room selected by Bedloe as
the scene of the deed was impossible.

Life of James II, i. pp. 527, 528.

NOTE II.

PRANCE AND THE WHITE HOUSE CLUB.

The body of Godfrey was found in a ditch near the White House Tavern,
and that tavern was used as a club by a set of Catholic tradesmen. Was
Prance a member? The landlord, Rawson, on October 24, mentioned as
a member 'Mr. PRINCE, a silversmith in Holborn.' Mr. PRANCE was a
silversmith in Covent Garden. On December 21, Prance said that he had
not seen Rawson for a year; he was asked about Rawson. The members of
the club met at the White House during the sitting of the coroner's
inquest there, on Friday, October 18. Prance, according to the author of
'A Letter to Miles Prance,' was present. He may have been a member, he
may have known the useful ditch where Godfrey's corpse was found, but
this does not rise beyond the value of conjecture.*


     *Lords' MSS. pp. 46, 47, 51.

NOTE III.

THE JESUIT MURDERERS.

There is difficulty in identifying as Jesuits the 'Jesuits' accused
by Bedloe. The chief is 'Father Le Herry,'* called 'Le Ferry' by Mr.
Pollock and Mr. Foley. He also appears as Le Faire, Lee Phaire, Le Fere,
but usually Le Fevre, in the documents. There really was a priest styled
Le Fevre. A man named Mark Preston was accused of being a priest and a
Jesuit. When arrested he declared that he was a married layman with a
family. He had been married in Mr. Langhorne's rooms, in the Temple,
by Le Fevre, a priest, in 1667, or, at least, about eleven years before
1678.** I cannot find that Le Fevre was known as a Jesuit to the English
members of the Society. He is not in Oates's list of conspirators. He
does not occur in Foley's 'Records,' vol. v., a very painstaking work.
Nor would he be omitted because accused of a crime, rather he would be
reckoned as more or less of a martyr, like the other Fathers implicated
by the informers. The author of 'Florus Anglo-Bavaricus'*** names
'Pharius' (Le Phaire), 'Valschius' (Walsh), and 'Atkinsus,' as denounced
by Bedloe, but clearly knows nothing about them. 'Atkinsus' is Mr.
Pepys's clerk, Samuel Atkins, who had an alibi. Valschius is Walsh,
certainly a priest, but not to be found in Foley's 'Records' as a
Jesuit.


      *Brit. Mus. Addit. MS. 11055, 245.

     **Lords' Journals, xiii. 331, 332. Lords' MSS., p. 99.

    ***Liege, 1685, p. 137.

That Le Fevre was the Queen's confessor I find no proof. But she had
a priest named Ferrera, who might be confused with Le Faire.* He was
accused of calling a waterman to help to take two persons down the river
on November 6, 1678. He was summoned before the Lords, but we do not
know that he came. Ferrera MAY have been the Queen's confessor, he was
'one of the Queen's priests.' In 1670 she had twenty-eight priests as
chaplains; twelve were Portuguese Capuchins, six were Benedictines, two,
Dominicans, and the rest seculars.** Mrs. Prance admitted that she knew
'Mr. Le Phaire, and that he went for a priest.'*** Of Le Fevre, 'Jesuit'
and 'Queens confessor,' I know no more.


      *Lords' MSS., p. 49.

     **Maziere Brady, Episcopal Succession in England, p. 124 (1876).

     ***Lords' MSS p. 52.

It appears that Mr. Pollock's authority for styling Le Fevre 'the
Queen's confessor' is a slip of information appended to the Coventry
notes, in the Longleat MSS., on Bedloe's deposition of November 7.* I
do not know the authority of the writer of the slip. It is admitted
that the authority of a slip pinned on to a letter of Randolph's is
not sufficient to prove John Knox to have been one of the Riccio
conspirators. The same slip appears to style Charles Walsh a Jesuit of
the household of Lord Bellasis. This Walsh is unknown to Foley.


     *Pollock, pp. 155, 157, note 2, in each case.

As to Father Pritchard, a Jesuit, Bedloe, in the British Museum MS.,
accuses 'Penthard, a layman.' He develops into Pridgeot, a Jesuit.*
Later he is Father Pritchard, S.J. There was such a Jesuit, and,
according to the Jesuit Annual Letter of 1680, he passed sixteen years
in the South Wales Mission, and never once went to London. In 1680 he
died in concealment.** It is clear that if Le Fevre was the Queen's
confessor, the sentries at Somerset House could prove whether he was
there on the day of Godfrey's murder. No such evidence was adduced.
But if Le Fevre was not the Queen's confessor, he would scarcely have
facilities for smuggling a dead body out of 'a private door.'


     *Longleat MS., Pollock, p. 386.

     **Foley, v. 875-877.




IV. THE FALSE JEANNE D'ARC.


Who that ever saw Jeanne d'Arc could mistake her for another woman? No
portrait of the Maid was painted from the life, but we know the light
perfect figure, the black hair cut short like a soldier's, and we can
imagine the face of her, who, says young Laval, writing to his mother
after his first meeting with the deliverer of France, 'seemed a thing
all divine.' Yet even two of her own brothers certainly recognised
another girl as the Maid, five years after her death by fire. It is
equally certain that, eight years after the martyrdom of Jeanne, an
impostor dwelt for several days in Orleans, and was there publicly
regarded as the heroine who raised the siege in 1429. Her family
accepted the impostor for sixteen years. These facts rest on undoubted
evidence.

To unravel the threads of the story is a task very difficult. My table
is strewn with pamphlets, papers, genealogies, essays; the authors
taking opposite sides as to the question, Was Jeanne d'Arc burned at
Rouen on May 30, 1431? Unluckily even the most exact historians (yea,
even M. Quicherat, the editor of the five volumes of documents and
notices about the Maid) (1841-1849) make slips in dates, where dates are
all important. It would add confusion if we dwelt on these errors, or on
the bias of the various disputants.

Not a word was said at the Trial of Rehabilitation in 1452-1456 about
the supposed survival of the Maid. But there are indications of the
inevitable popular belief that she was not burned. Long after the fall
of Khartoum, rumours of the escape of Charles Gordon were current; even
in our own day people are loth to believe that their hero has perished.
Like Arthur he will come again, and from Arthur to James IV. of
Scotland, from James IV. to the Duke of Monmouth, or the son of Louis
XVI., the populace believes and hopes that its darling has not perished.
We destroyed the Mahdi's body to nullify such a belief, or to prevent
worship at his tomb. In the same way, at Rouen, 'when the Maid was dead,
as the English feared that she might be said to have escaped, they bade
the executioner rake back the fire somewhat that the bystanders might
see her dead.'* An account of a similar precaution, the fire drawn back
after the Maid's robes were burned away, is given in brutal detail
by the contemporary diarist (who was not present), the Bourgeois de
Paris.**


     *Quicherat, iii. p. 191.  These lines are not in MS. 5970.  M.
Save, in Jehanne des Armoises, Pucelle d'Orleans, p. 6 (Nancy, 1893),
interpolates, in italics, words of his own into his translation of this
text, which improve the force of his argument!

   **Quicherat, iv. p. 471.

In spite of all this, the populace, as reflected in several chronicles,
was uncertain that Jeanne had died. A 'manuscript in the British Museum'
says: 'At last they burned her, or another woman like her, on which
point many persons are, and have been, of different opinions.'*


     *Save, p. 7, citing Bibliotheque de l'Ecole des Chartes, ii., Second
Series.

This hopeful rumour of the Maid's escape was certain to arise, populus
vult decipi.

Now we reach a point at which we may well doubt how to array the
evidence. But probably the best plan is first to give the testimony of
undoubted public documents from the Treasury Accounts of the town of
Orleans. In that loyal city the day of the Maid's death had been duly
celebrated by religious services; the Orleanese had indulged in no
illusions. None the less on August 9, 1436, the good town pays its
pursuivant, Fleur-de-lys, 'because he had brought letters to the town
FROM JEHANNE LA PUCELLE'! On August 21 money is paid to 'Jehan du Lys,
brother of Jehanne la Pucelle,' because he has visited the King, Charles
VII., is returning to his sister, the Maid, and is in want of cash,
as the King's order given to him was not fully honoured. On October 18
another pursuivant is paid for a mission occupying six weeks. He has
visited the Maid at Arlon in Luxembourg, and carried letters from her to
the King at Loches on the Loire. Earlier, in August, a messenger brought
letters from the Maid, and went on to Guillaume Belier, bailiff of
Troyes, in whose house the real Maid had lodged, at Chinon, in the dawn
of her mission, March 1429. Thus the impostor was dealing, by letters,
with some of the people who knew the Maid best, and was freely accepted
by her brother Jehan.*


     *Quicherat, v. pp. 326-327.

For three years the account-books of Orleans are silent about this
strange Pucelle. Orleans has not seen her, but has had Jeanne's
brother's word for her reappearance, and the word, probably, of the
pursuivants sent to her. Jeanne's annual funeral services are therefore
discontinued.

Mention of her in the accounts again appears on July 18, 1439. Money is
now paid to Jaquet Leprestre for ten pints and a chopine of wine given
to DAME JEHANNE DES ARMOISES. On the 29th, 30th, and on August 1, when
she left the town, entries of payments for quantities of wine and food
for Jehanne des Armoises occur, and she is given 210 livres 'after
deliberation with the town council,' 'for the good that she did to the
said town during the siege of 1429.'

The only Jehanne who served Orleans in the siege was Jehanne d'Arc.
Here, then, she is, as Jehanne des Armoises, in Orleans for several
days in 1439, feasted and presented with money by command of the town
council. Again she returns and receives 'propine' on September 4.* The
Leprestre who is paid for the wine was he who furnished wine to the real
Maid in 1429.


     *Quicherat, v. pp. 331-332.

It is undeniable that the people of Orleans must have seen the impostor
in 1439, and they ceased to celebrate service on the day of the true
Maid's death. Really it seems as if better evidence could not be that
Jeanne des Armoises, nee Jeanne d'Arc, was alive in 1439. All Orleans
knew the Maid, and yet the town council recognised the impostor.

She is again heard of on September 27, 1439, when the town of Tours pays
a messenger for carrying to Orleans letters which Jeanne wrote to
the King, and also letters from the bailli of Touraine to the King,
concerning Jeanne. The real Jeanne could not write, but the impostor,
too, may have employed a secretary.*


     *Quicherat, v. p. 332.

In June 1441 Charles VII. pardoned, for an escape from prison, one de
Siquemville, who, 'two years ago or thereabouts' (1439), was sent by the
late Gilles de Raiz, Marechal de France, to take over the leadership of
a commando at Mans, which had hitherto been under 'UNE APPELEE JEHANNE,
QUI SE DISOIT PUCELLE.'* The phrase 'one styled Jehanne who called
herself Pucelle' does not indicate fervent belief on the part of the
King. Apparently this Jeanne went to Orleans and Tours after quitting
her command at Mans in 1439. If ever she saw Gilles de Raiz (the
notorious monster of cruelty) in 1439, she saw a man who had fought in
the campaigns of the true Maid under her sacred banner, argent a dove on
an azure field.**


     *Quicherat, v. p. 333.

     **She never used the arms given to her and her family by Charles VII.

Here public documents about the impostor fall silent. It is not known
what she was doing between August 9, 1436, and September 1439. At the
earlier date she had written to the town of Orleans; at the later, she
was writing to the King, from Tours. Here an error must be avoided.
According to the author of the 'Chronicle of the Constable of Alvaro de
Luna,'* the impostor was, in 1436, sending a letter, and ambassadors,
to the King of Spain, asking him to succour La Rochelle. The ambassadors
found the King at Valladolid, and the Constable treated the letter, 'as
if it were a relic, with great reverence.'


     *Madrid, 1784, p. 131.

The impostor flies high! But the whole story is false.

M. Quicherat held at first that the date and place may be erroneously
stated, but did not doubt that the False Pucelle did send her
ambassadors and letter to the King of Spain. We never hear that the true
Maid did anything of the sort. But Quicherat changed his mind on the
subject. The author of the 'Chronicle of Alvaro de Luna' merely cites
a Coronica de la Poncella. That coronica, says Quicherat later, 'is a
tissue of fables, a romance in the Spanish taste,' and in this nonsense
occurs the story of the embassy to the Spanish King. That story does not
apply to the False Pucelle, and is not true, a point of which students
of Quicherat's great work need to be warned; his correction may escape
notice.*


     *Revue des Questions Historiques, April 1, 1881, pp. 553-566.
Article by the Comte de Puymaigre.

We thus discard a strong trump in the hand of believers that the
impostor was the real Maid; had a Pucelle actually sent ambassadors to
Spain in 1436, their case would be stronger than it is.

Next, why is the false Pucelle styled 'Jeanne des Armoises' in the town
accounts of Orleans in 1439?

This leads us to the proofs of the marriage of the false Pucelle, in
1436, with a Monsieur Robert des Armoises, a gentleman of the Metz
country. The evidence is in a confused state. In the reign of Louis XIV.
lived a Pere Vignier, a savant, who is said to have been a fraudulent
antiquary. Whether this be true or not, his brother, after the death of
Pere Vignier, wrote a letter to the Duc de Grammont, which was published
in the 'Mercure Galant' of November, 1683. The writer says that his
brother, Pere Vignier, found, at Metz, an ancient chronicle of the town,
in manuscript, and had a copy made by a notary royal. The extract is
perfectly genuine, whatever the reputation of the discoverer may be.
This portion of the chronicle of the doyen of Saint-Thibaud de Metz
exists in two forms, of which the latter, whoever wrote it, is intended
to correct the former.

In the earlier shape the author says that, on May 20, 1436, the Pucelle
Jeanne came to Metz, and was met by her brothers, Pierre, a knight, and
Jehan, an esquire. Pierre had, in fact, fought beside his sister when
both he and she were captured, at Compiegne, in May 1430. Jehan, as we
have already seen, was in attendance on the false Maid in August 1436.

According to the Metz chronicle, these two brothers of the Maid, on
May 20, 1436, recognised the impostor for their sister, and the
account-books of Orleans leave no doubt that Jehan, at least, actually
did accept her as such, in August 1436, four months after they met in
May. Now this lasting recognition by one, at least, of the brothers, is
a fact very hard to explain.

M. Anatole France offers a theory of the easiest. The brothers went to
Lorraine in May 1436, to see the pretender. 'Did they hurry to expose
the fraud, or did they not think it credible, on the other hand, that,
with God's permission, the Saint had risen again? Nothing could seem
impossible, after all that they had seen.... They acted in good faith.
A woman said to them, "I am Jeanne, your sister." They believed, because
they wished to believe.' And so forth, about the credulity of the age.

The age was not promiscuously credulous. In a RESURRECTION of Jeanne,
after death, the age did not believe. The brothers had never seen
anything of the kind, nor had the town council of Orleans. THEY had
nothing to gain by their belief, the brothers had everything to gain.
One might say that they feigned belief, in the hope that 'there was
money in it;' but one cannot say that about the people of Orleans who
had to spend money. The case is simply a puzzle.*


     *Anatole France, 'La Fausse Pucelle,' Revue de Famille, Feb. 15,
1891. I cite from the quotation by M. P. Lanery d'Arc in Deux Lettres
(Beauvais, 1894), a brochure which I owe to the kindness of the author.

After displaying feats of horsemanship, in male attire, and being
accepted by many gentlemen, and receiving gifts of horses and jewels,
the impostor went to Arlon, in Luxembourg, where she was welcomed by the
lady of the duchy, Elizabeth de Gorlitz, Madame de Luxembourg. And at
Arlon she was in October 1436, as the town accounts of Orleans have
proved. Thence, says the Metz chronicle, the 'Comte de Warnonbourg'(?)
took her to Cologne, and gave her a cuirass. Thence she returned to
Arlon in Luxembourg, and there married the knight Robert des Hermoises,
or Armoises, 'and they dwelt in their own house at Metz, as long as they
would.' Thus Jeanne became 'Madame des Hermoises,' or 'Ermaises,' or, in
the town accounts of Orleans, in 1439, 'des Armoises.'

So says the Metz chronicle, in one form, but, in another manuscript
version, it denounces this Pucelle as an impostor, who especially
deceived tous les plus grands. Her brothers, we read (the real Maid's
brothers), brought her to the neighbourhood of Metz. She dwelt with
Madame de Luxembourg, and married 'Robert des Armoize.'* The Pere
Vignier's brother, in 1683, published the first, but not the second, of
these two accounts in the 'Mercure Galant' for November.


     *Quicherat, v. pp. 321-324, cf. iv. 321.

In or about 1439, Nider, a witch-hunting priest, in his Formicarium,
speaks of a false Jeanne at Cologne, protected by Ulrich of Wirtemberg,
(the Metz chronicle has 'Comte de Warnonbourg'), who took the woman
to Cologne. The woman, says Nider, was a noisy lass, who came eating,
drinking, and doing conjuring feats; the Inquisition failed to catch
her, thanks to Ulrich's protection. She married a knight, and presently
became the concubine of a priest in Metz.* This reads like a piece of
confused gossip.


     *Quicherat, v. pp. 324-325.

Vignier's brother goes on to say (1683) in the 'Mercure Galant,' that
his learned brother found the wedding contract of Jeanne la Pucelle and
Robert des Armoises in the charter chest of the M. des Armoises of his
own day, the time of Louis XIV. The brother of Vignier had himself
met the son of this des Armoises, who corroborated the fact. But 'the
original copy of this ancient manuscript vanished, with all the papers
of Pere Vignier, at his death.'

Two months later, in the spring of 1684, Vienne de Plancy wrote to the
'Mercure Galant,' saying that 'the late illustrious brother' of the Duc
de Grammont was fully persuaded, and argued very well in favour of
his opinion, that the actual Pucelle did not die at Rouen, but married
Robert des Armoises. He quoted a genuine petition of Pierre du Lys, the
brother of the real Maid, to the Duc d'Orleans, of 1443. Pierre herein
says he has warred 'in the company of Jeanne la Pucelle, his sister,
jusqu'a son absentement, and so on till this hour, exposing his body and
goods in the King's service.' This, argued M. de Grammont, implied
that Jeanne was not dead; Pierre does not say, feue ma soeur, 'my late
sister,' and his words may even mean that he is still with her. ('Avec
laquelle, jusques a son absentement, ET DEPUIS JUSQUES A PRESENT, il a
expose son corps.')*


     *The petition is in Quicherat, v. pp. 212-214.  For Vienne-Plancy
see the papers from the Mercure Galant in Jeanne d'Arc n'a point ete
brulee a Rouen (Rouen, Lanctin, 1872). The tract was published in 100
copies only.

Though no copy of the marriage contract of Jeanne and des Armoises
exists, Quicherat prints a deed of November 7, 1436, in which Robert des
Armoises and his wife, 'La Pucelle de France,' acknowledge themselves to
be married, and sell a piece of land. The paper was first cited by Dom
Calmet, among the documents in his 'Histoire de Lorraine.' It is rather
under suspicion.

There seems no good reason, however, to doubt the authenticity of the
fact that a woman, calling herself Jeanne Pucelle de France, did, in
1436, marry Robert des Armoises, a man of ancient and noble family.
Hence, in the town accounts of Tours and Orleans, after October 1436, up
to September 1439, the impostor appears as 'Mme. Jehanne des Armoises.'
In August 1436, she was probably not yet married, as the Orleans
accounts then call her 'Jehanne la Pucelle,' when they send their
pursuivants to her; men who, doubtless, had known the true Maid in
1429-1430. These men did not undeceive the citizens, who, at least
till September 1439, accepted the impostor. There is hardly a more
extraordinary fact in history. For the rest we know that, in 1436-1439,
the impostor was dealing with the King by letters, and that she held a
command under one of his marshals, who had known the true Maid well in
1429-1430.

It appears possible that, emboldened by her amazing successes, the false
Pucelle sought an interview with Charles VII. The authority, to be sure,
is late. The King had a chamberlain, de Boisy, who survived till 1480,
when he met Pierre Sala, one of the gentlemen of the chamber of Charles
VIII. De Boisy, having served Charles VII., knew and told Sala the
nature of the secret that was between that king and the true Maid. That
such a secret existed is certain. Alain Chartier, the poet, may have
been present, in March 1429, when the Maid spoke words to Charles VII.
which filled him with a spiritual rapture. So Alain wrote to a foreign
prince in July 1429. M. Quicherat avers that Alain was present: I cannot
find this in his letter.* Any amount of evidence for the 'sign' given to
the King, by his own statement, is found throughout the two trials,
that of Rouen and that of Rehabilitation. Dunois, the famous Bastard of
Orleans, told the story to Basin, Bishop of Lisieux; and at Rouen
the French examiners of the Maid vainly tried to extort from her the
secret.** In 1480, Boisy, who had been used to sleep in the bed of
Charles VII., according to the odd custom of the time, told the secret
to Sala. The Maid, in 1429, revealed to Charles the purpose of a secret
prayer which he had made alone in his oratory, imploring light on the
question of his legitimacy.*** M. Quicherat, no bigot, thinks that 'the
authenticity of the revelation is beyond the reach of doubt.'****


     *Quicherat, Apercus Nouveaux, p. 62. Proces, v. p. 133.

     **For the complete evidence, see Quicherat, Apercus, pp. 61-66.

     ***Quicherat, v. p. 280, iv. pp. 258, 259, another and ampler account,
in a MS. of 1500. Another, iv. p. 271: MS. of the period of Louis XII.

     ****Apercus, p. 60, Paris, 1850.

Thus there was a secret between the true Maid and Charles VII. The King,
of course, could not afford to let it be known that he had secretly
doubted whether he were legitimate. Boisy alone, at some later date, was
admitted to his confidence.

Boisy went on to tell Sala that, ten years later (whether after 1429
or after 1431, the date of the Maid's death, is uncertain), a pretended
Pucelle, 'very like the first,' was brought to the King. He was in a
garden, and bade one of his gentlemen personate him. The impostor was
not deceived, for she knew that Charles, having hurt his foot, then wore
a soft boot. She passed the gentleman, and walked straight to the
King, 'whereat he was astonished, and knew not what to say, but, gently
saluting her, exclaimed, "Pucelle, my dear, you are right welcome back,
in the name of God, who knows the secret that is between you and me."'
The false Pucelle then knelt, confessed her sin, and cried for mercy.
'For her treachery some were sorely punished, as in such a case was
fitting.'*


     *Quicherat, v. p. 281.  There is doubt as to whether Boisy's tale
does not refer to Jeanne la Feronne, a visionary. Varlet de Vireville,
Charles VII., iii. p. 425, note 1.

If any deserved punishment, the Maid's brothers did, but they rather
flourished and prospered, as time went on, than otherwise.

It appears, then, that in 1439-1441 the King exposed the false Pucelle,
or another person, Jeanne la Feronne. A great foe of the true Maid, the
diarist known as the Bourgeois de Paris, in his journal for August 1440,
tells us that just then many believed that Jeanne had not been burned at
Rouen. The gens d'armes brought to Paris 'a woman who had been received
with great honour at Orleans'--clearly Jeanne des Armoises. The
University and Parlement had her seized and exhibited to the public at
the Palais. Her life was exposed; she confessed that she was no maid,
but a mother, and the wife of a knight (des Armoises?). After this
follows an unintelligible story of how she had gone on pilgrimage to
Rome, and fought in the Italian wars.* Apparently she now joined a
regiment at Paris, et puis s'en alla, but all is very vaguely recorded.


     *Quicherat, v. pp. 334, 335; c.f. Lefevre-Pontalis, Les Sources
Allemands, 113-115. Fontemoing, Paris, 1903.


The most extraordinary circumstance remains to be told. Apparently the
brothers and cousins of the true Maid continued to entertain and accept
the impostor! We have already seen that, in 1443, Pierre du Lys, in his
petition to the Duc d'Orleans, writes as if he did not believe in the
death of his sister, but that may be a mere ambiguity of language; we
cannot repose on the passage.

In 1476 a legal process and inquest was held as to the descendants of
the brother of the mother of Jeanne d'Arc, named Voulton or Vouthon.
Among other witnesses was Henry de Voulton, called Perinet, a carpenter,
aged fifty-two. He was grandson of the brother of the mother of Jeanne
d'Arc, his grand-maternal aunt. This witness declared that he had often
seen the two brothers du Lys, Jehan and Pierre, with their sister, La
Pucelle, come to the village of Sermaise and feast with his father. They
always accepted him, the witness, as their cousin, 'in all places where
he has been, conversed, eaten, and drunk in their company.' Now Perinet
is clearly speaking of his associations with Jeanne and her brothers
AFTER HE HIMSELF WAS A MAN GROWN. Born in 1424, he was only five years
old when the Maid left Domremy for ever. He cannot mean that, as a child
of five, he was always, in various places, drinking with the Maid and
her brothers. Indeed, he says, taking a distinction, that in his early
childhood--'son jeune aage'--he visited the family of d'Arc, with his
father, at Domremy, and saw the Maid, qui pour lors estoit jeune fille.*


     *De Bouteiller et de Braux, Nouvelles Recherches sur la Famille de
Jeanne d'Arc, Paris, 1879, pp. 8, 9.

Moreover, the next witness, the cure of Sermaise, aged fifty-three, says
that, twenty-four years ago (in 1452), a young woman dressed as a man,
calling herself Jeanne la Pucelle, used to come to Sermaise, and that,
as he heard, she was the near kinswoman of all the Voultons, 'and he saw
her make great and joyous cheer with them while she was at Sermaise.'*
Clearly it was about this time, in or before 1452, that Perinet himself
was conversant with Jehan and Pierre du Lys, and with their sister,
calling herself La Pucelle.


     *Op. cit. p. 11.

Again, Jehan le Montigueue, aged about seventy, deposed that, in 1449,
a woman calling herself Jeanne la Pucelle came to Sermaise and feasted
with the Voultons, as also did (but he does not say at the same time)
the Maid's brother, Jehan du Lys.* Jehan du Lys could, at least, if he
did not accept her, have warned his cousins, the Voultons, against their
pretended kinswoman, the false Pucelle. But for some three years at
least she came, a welcome guest, to Sermaise, matched herself against
the cure at tennis, and told him that he might now say that he had
played against la Pucelle de France. This news gave him the greatest
pleasure.


     *Op. cit. pp. 4,5, MM. de Bouteiller and de Graux do not observe the
remarkable nature of this evidence, as regards the BROTHERS of the Maid;
see their Preface, p. xxx.

Jehan Guillaume, aged seventy-six, had seen both the self-styled Pucelle
and the real Maid's brothers at the house of the Voultons. He did not
know whether she was the true Maid or not.

It is certain, practically, that this PUCELLE, so merry at Sermaise with
the brothers and cousins of the Maid, was the Jeanne des Armoises of
1436-1439. The du Lys family could not successively adopt TWO impostors
as their sister! Again, the woman of circ. 1449-1452 is not a younger
sister of Jeanne, who in 1429 had no sister living, though one,
Catherine, whom she dearly loved, was dead.

We have now had glimpses of the impostor from 1436 to 1440, when
she seems to have been publicly exposed (though the statement of the
Bourgeois de Paris is certainly that of a prejudiced writer), and again
we have found the impostor accepted by the paternal and maternal kin
of the Maid, about 1449-1452. In 1452 the preliminary steps towards
the Rehabilitation of the true Maid began, ending triumphantly in 1456.
Probably the families of Voulton and du Lys now, after the trial
began in 1452, found their jolly tennis-playing sister and cousin
inconvenient. She reappears, NOT at Sermaise, in 1457. In that year King
Rene (father of Margaret, wife of our Henry VI.) gives a remission to
'Jeanne de Sermaises.' M. Lecoy de la March, in his 'Roi Rene' (1875)
made this discovery, and took 'Jeanne de Sermaises' for our old friend,
'Jeanne des Ermaises,' or 'des Armoises.' She was accused of 'having
LONG called herself Jeanne la Pucelle, and deceived many persons who had
seen Jeanne at the siege of Orleans.' She has lain in prison, but is let
out, in February 1457, on a five years' ticket of leave, so to speak,
'provided she bear herself honestly in dress, and in other matters, as a
woman should do.'

Probably, though 'at present the wife of Jean Douillet,' this Jeanne
still wore male costume, hence the reference to bearing herself
'honestly in dress.' She acknowledges nothing, merely says that the
charge of imposture lui a ete impose, and that she has not been actainte
d'aucun autre vilain cas.* At this date Jeanne cruised about Anjou and
the town of Saumur. And here, at the age of forty-five, if she was
of the same age as the true Maid, we lose sight for ever of this
extraordinary woman. Of course, if she was the genuine Maid, the career
of La Pucelle de France ends most ignobly. The idea 'was nuts' (as the
Elizabethans said) to a good anti-clerical Frenchman, M. Lesigne, who,
in 1889, published 'La Fin d'une Legende.' There would be no chance of
canonising a Pucelle who was twice married and lived a life of frolic.


     *Lecoy de la Marche, Le Roi Rene, ii. 281-283, 1875.

A more serious and discreet scholar, M. Gaston Save, in 1893, made an
effort to prove that Jeanne was not burned at Rouen.* He supposed that
the Duchess of Bedford let Jeanne out of prison and bribed the two
priests, Massieu and Ladvenu, who accompanied the Maid to the scaffold,
to pretend that they had been with her, not with a substituted victim.
This victim went with hidden face to the scaffold, le visage embronche,
says Percival de Cagny, a retainer of Jeanne's 'beau duc,' d'Alencon.**
The townspeople were kept apart by 800 English soldiers.*** The Madame
de Luxembourg who entertained the impostor at Arlon (1436) was 'perhaps'
the same as she who entertained the real Jeanne at Beaurevoir in 1430.
Unluckily THAT lady died in November 1430!


      *Jehanne des Armoises, Pucelle d'Orleans, Nancy, 1893.

     **Quicherat, iv. 36.

    ***Quicherat, ii. 14, 19.

However, the Madame de Luxembourg who entertained the impostor was aunt,
by marriage, of the Duke of Burgundy, the true Maid's enemy, and she
had means of being absolutely well informed, so the case remains very
strange. Strange, too, it is that, in the records of payment of pension
to the true Maid's mother, from the town of Orleans, she is 'mere de la
Pucelle' till 1452, when she becomes 'mere de feue la Pucelle,' 'mother
of the LATE Pucelle.' That is to say, the family and the town of Orleans
recognised the impostor till, in 1452, the Trial of Rehabilitation
began. So I have inferred, as regards the family, from the record of the
inquest of 1476, which, though it suited the argument of M. Save, was
unknown to him.

His brochure distressed the faithful. The Abbe, Dr. Jangen, editor of
'Le Pretre,' wrote anxiously to M. P. Lanery d'Arc, who replied in a
tract already cited (1894). But M. Lanery d'Arc did not demolish the
sounder parts of the argument of M. Save, and he knew nothing of the
inquest of 1476, or said nothing. Then arose M. Lefevre Pontalis.*
Admitting the merits of M. Save's other works, he noted many errors in
this tract. For example, the fire at Rouen was raked (as we saw) more
or less (admodum) clear of the dead body of the martyr. But would it
be easy, in the circumstances, to recognise a charred corpse? The two
Mesdames de Luxembourg were distinguished apart, as by Quicherat. The
Vignier documents as to Robert des Armoises were said to be impostures.
Quicherat, however, throws no doubt on the deed of sale by Jehanne and
her husband, des Armoises, in November 1436. Many errors in dates were
exposed. The difficulty about the impostor's reception in Orleans,
was recognised, and it is, of course, THE difficulty. M. Lefevre de
Pontalis, however, urges that her brothers are not said to have been
with her, 'and there is not a trace of their persistence in their
error after the first months of the imposture.' But we have traces, nay
proofs, in the inquest of 1476. The inference of M. Save from the fact
that the Pucelle is never styled 'the late Pucelle,' in the Orleans
accounts, till 1452, is merely declared 'inadmissible.' The fact, on the
other hand, is highly significant. In 1452 the impostor was recognised
by the family; but in that year began the Trial of Rehabilitation, and
we hear no more of her among the du Lys and the Voultons. M. Lefevre
Pontalis merely mentions the inquest of 1476, saying that the impostor
of Sermaise (1449-1452) may perhaps have been another impostor, not
Jeanne des Armoises. The family of the Maid was not capable, surely, of
accepting TWO impostors, 'one down, the other come on'! This is utterly
incredible.


     *Le Moyen Age, June 1895.

In brief, the family of Jeanne, in 1436,1449-1452, were revelling with
Jeanne des Armoises, accepting her, some as sister, some as cousin. In
1439 the Town Council of Orleans not only gave many presents of wine and
meat to the same woman, recognising her as their saviour in the siege of
1429, but also gave her 210 livres. Now, on February 7, 1430, the town
of Orleans had refused to give 100 crowns, at Jeanne's request, to
Heliote, daughter of her Scottish painter, 'Heuves Polnoir.'* They said
that they could not afford the money. They were not the people to give
210 livres to a self-styled Pucelle without examining her personally.
Moreover, the impostor supped, in August 1439, with Jehan Luillier, who,
in June, 1429, had supplied the true Maid with cloth, a present from
Charles d'Orleans. He was in Orleans during the siege of 1429, and gave
evidence as to the actions of the Maid at the trial in 1456.** This man
clearly did not detect or expose the impostor, she was again welcomed
at Orleans six weeks after he supped with her. These facts must not be
overlooked, and they have never been explained. So there we leave the
most surprising and baffling of historical mysteries. It is, of course,
an obvious conjecture that, in 1436, Jehan and Pierre du Lys may have
pretended to recognise the impostor, in hopes of honour and rewards such
as they had already received through their connection with the Maid.
But, if the impostor was unmasked in 1440, there was no more to be got
in that way.*** While the nature of the arts of the False Pucelle is
inscrutable, the evidence as to the heroic death of the True Maid is
copious and deeply moving. There is absolutely no room for doubt that
she won the martyr's crown at Rouen.


      *Quicherat, v. 155.

     **Quicherat, v. pp. 112,113,331, iii. p. 23.

***By 1452 Pierre du Lys had un grand hotel opposite the Ile des
Boeufs, at Orleans, given to him for two lives, by Charles d'Orleans,
in 1443. He was also building a town house in Orleans, and the
chevalier Pierre was no snob, for he brought from Sermaise his
carpenter kinsman, Perinet de Voulton, to superintend the erection.
Nouvelles Recherches, pp. 19, 20.




V. JUNIUS AND LORD LYTTELTON'S GHOST


'Sir,' said Dr. Johnson, 'it is the most extraordinary thing that has
happened in my day.'

The most extraordinary thing that had happened in Dr. Johnson's day was
the 'warning' to the noble peer generally spoken of as 'the wicked Lord
Lyttelton.' The Doctor went on thus: 'I heard it with my own ears from
his uncle, Lord Westcote. I am so glad to have every evidence of the
spiritual world that I am willing to believe it.' Dr. Adams replied,
'You have evidence enough--good evidence, which needs no support.' Dr.
Johnson growled out, 'I like to have more!'

Thus the Doctor was willing to believe what it suited him to believe,
even though he had the tale at third or fourth hand; for Lord Westcote
was not with the wicked Lord Lyttelton at the time of his death, on
November 27, 1779. Dr. Johnson's observations were made on June 12,
1784.

To Lord Westcote's narrative we shall return.

As a study in Russian scandal, and the growth and development of
stories, this anecdote of Lord Lyttelton deserves attention. So first we
must glance at the previous history of the hero. Thomas Lord Lyttelton
was born, says Mr. Coulton (in the 'Quarterly Review,' No. 179, p. 111),
on January 30, 1744.* He was educated at Eton, where Dr. Barnard thought
his boyish promise even superior to that of Charles James Fox. His
sketches of scenery in Scotland reminded Mrs. Montagu of the vigour of
Salvator Rosa, combined with the grace of Claude Lorraine! At the age
of nineteen, already affianced to Miss Warburton, he went on the Grand
Tour, and excelled the ordinary model of young debauchery abroad. Mr.
James Boswell found a Circe at Siena, Lyttelton found Circes everywhere.
He returned to England in 1765; and that learned lady, Mrs. Carter, the
translator of Epictetus, 'admired his talents and elegant manners,
as much as she detested his vices.' In 1768 he entered the House of
Commons, and, in his maiden speech, implored the Assembly to believe
that America was more important than Mr. Wilkes (and Liberty). Unseated
for bribery in January 1769, he vanished from the public view, more
or less, for a season; at least he is rarely mentioned in memoirs, and
Coulton thinks that young Lyttelton was now engaged--in what does the
reader suppose? In writing 'The Letters of Junius'!**


     *The writer was not Croker, but Mr. Coulton, 'a Kentish gentleman,'
says Lockhart, February 7, 1851, to his daughter Charlotte.

   **If
Lyttelton went to Italy on being ejected from Parliament, as Mr. Rigg
says he did in the 'Dictionary of National Biography,' Coulton's theory
will be hard to justify.

He was clever enough; his rank was like that assumed as his own by
Junius; his eloquence (as he proved later in the House of Lords) was
vituperative enough; he shared some of Junius's hatreds, while he
proclaimed, like Junius, that the country was going to the dogs. Just as
Junius was ending his Letters, the prodigal, Thomas Lyttelton, returned
to his father's house; and Chatham wrote to congratulate the parent
(February 15, 1772). On May 12, 1772, Junius published his last letter
in 'The Public Advertiser;' and on June 26 Mr. Lyttelton married a
widow, a Mrs. Peach. He soon left his wife, and was abroad (with a
barmaid) when his father died in 1773. In January 1774 he took his seat
in the Lords. Though Fox thought him a bad man, his first speech was in
favour of securing to authors a perpetual copyright in their own works.
He repeated his arguments some months later; so authors, at least, have
reason for judging him charitably.

Mr. Carlyle would have admired Lyttelton. His politics (at one juncture)
were 'The Dictatorship for Lord Chatham'! How does this agree with the
sentiments of Junius? In 1767-69 Junius had exhausted on Chatham his
considerable treasury of insult. He is 'a lunatic brandishing a crutch,'
'so black a villain,' 'an abandoned profligate,' and he exhibits 'THE
UPSTART INSOLENCE OF A DICTATOR!' This goes not well with Lyttelton's
sentiments in 1774. True, but by that date (iii. 305) Junius himself had
discovered 'that if this country can be saved, it must be saved by Lord
Chatham's spirit, by Lord Chatham's abilities.' Lyttelton and Junius
are assuredly both of them ruffianly, scandal-loving, inconsistent, and
patrician in the manner of Catiline. So far, the likeness is close.

About America Lyttelton wavered. On the whole, he recognised the need
of fighting; and his main idea was that, as fight we must, we should
organise our forces well, and fight with our heads as well as with our
hands. He disdained the policy of the ostrich. The Americans were in
active rebellion; it could not be blinked. He praised Chatham while
he opposed him. He was 'fighting for his own hand.' Ministers felt the
advantage of his aid; they knew his unscrupulous versatility, and in
November 1775 bought Lyttelton with a lucrative sinecure--the post
of Chief Justice of Eyre beyond the Trent. Coulton calls the place
'honourable;' we take another view. Lyttelton was bought and sold, but
no one deemed Lyttelton a person of scrupulous conscience.

The public prospects darkened, folly was heaped on folly, blunder on
blunder, defeat on defeat. On April 24, 1779, Horace Walpole says that
Lord Lyttelton 'has again turned against the Court on obtaining the
Seals'* November 25, 1779, saw Lyttelton go boldly into Opposition.
He reviewed the whole state of the empire. He poured out a torrent of
invective. As to his sinecure, he said, 'Perhaps he might not keep it
long.' 'The noble Lords smile at what I say!'


     *Is this a slip, or misprint, for 'on NOT obtaining the Seals'?

They need not have smiled. He spoke on Thursday, November 25; on
Saturday, November 27, the place in Eyre was vacant, and Lord Lyttelton
was a dead man.

The reader will keep in mind these dates. On Thursday, November 25,
1779, the first day of the session, Lyttelton overflows in a volcanic
speech against the Court. He announces that his place may soon be
vacant. At midnight on November 27 he is dead.

On all this, and on the story of the ghostly 'warning' to Lord
Lyttelton, delivered in the night of Wednesday, November 24, Coulton
builds a political romance. In his view, Lyttelton, expelled from
Parliament, lavished his genius and exuded his spleen in the 'Letters
of Junius.' Taking his seat in the Lords, he fights for his own hand, is
bought and muzzled, wrenches off his muzzle, blazes into a fierce attack
on the wrongs which he is weary of witnessing, the hypocrisy which he
is tired of sharing, makes his will, sets his house in order, plays
one last practical joke by inventing the story of the ghostly warning,
surrounds himself with dissolute company, and at midnight on November 27
deliberately fulfils his own prediction, and dies by his own hand. It
is a tale creditable to Coulton's fancy. A patrician of genius, a wit,
a profligate, in fatigue and despair, closes his career with a fierce
harangue, a sacrilegious jest, a debauch, and a draught of poison,
leaving to Dr. Johnson a proof of 'the spiritual world,' and to mankind
the double mystery of Junius and of the Ghost.

As to the identity of Junius, remembering the warning of Lord
Beaconsfield, 'If you wish to be a bore, take up the "Letters of
Junius,"' we shall drop that enigma; but as to the alleged suicide of
Lord Lyttelton, we think we can make that seem extremely improbable.
Let us return to the course of events, as stated by Coulton and by
contemporaries.

The warning of death in three days, says Coulton, occurred (place not
given) on the night of November 24, 1779. He observes: 'It is certain
that, on the morning after that very day' (November 25), 'Lord Lyttelton
had related, not to one person alone, but to several, and all of them
people of credit, the particulars of a strange vision which he said had
appeared to him the preceding night.' On Thursday, the 25th, as we saw,
he spoke in the Lords. On Friday, the 26th, he went down to his house
at Epsom, Pitt Place, where his party, says Coulton, consisted of Mr.
(later Lord) Fortescue, Captain (later Admiral) Wolsley, Mrs. Flood, and
the Misses Amphlett. Now, the town had no kind of doubt concerning the
nature of Lord Lyttelton's relations with two, if not three, of the
Misses Amphlett. His character was nearly as bad, where women were
concerned, as that of Colonel Charteris. But Walpole, writing to Mann
on November 28 (the day after Lord Lyttelton's death), says: 'Lord
Lyttelton is dead suddenly. SUDDENLY, in this country, is always at
first construed to mean BY A PISTOL... The story given out is, that he
looked ill, AND HAD SAID HE SHOULD NOT LIVE THREE DAYS; that, however,
he had gone to his house at Epsom... with a caravan of nymphs; and on
Saturday night had retired before supper to take rhubarb, returned,
supped heartily, went into the next room again, and died in an instant.'

Nothing here of a dream or ghost. We only hear of a prophecy, by
Lyttelton, of his death.

Writing to Mason on Monday, November 29, Walpole avers that Lord
Lyttelton was 'attended only by four virgins, whom he had picked up in
the Strand.' Here Horace, though writing from Berkeley Square, within
two days of the fatal 27th, is wrong. Lord Lyttelton had the Misses
Amphlett, Captain Wolsley, Mr. Fortescue, and Mrs. Flood with him.
According to Walpole, he felt unwell on Saturday night (the 27th),
'went to bed, rung his bell in ten minutes, and in one minute after the
arrival of his servant expired!' 'He had said on Thursday that he should
die in three days, HAD DREAMT SO, and felt that it would be so. On
Saturday he said, "If I outlive to-day, I shall go on;" but enough of
him.'

Walpole speaks of a DREAM, but he soon has other, if not better,
information. Writing to Mason on December 11, he says that ghost stories
from the north will now be welcome. 'Lord Lyttelton's vision has revived
the taste; though it seems a little odd that an APPARITION should
despair of getting access to his Lordship's bed, in the shape of a young
woman, without being forced to use the disguise of a robin-redbreast.'
What was an apprehension or prophecy has become a dream, and the dream
has become an apparition of a robin-redbreast and a young woman.

If this excite suspicion, let us hasten to add that we have
undesigned evidence to Lord Lyttelton's belief that he had beheld an
APPARITION--evidence a day earlier than the day of his death. Mrs.
Piozzi (then Mrs. Thrale), in her diary of Sunday, November 28, writes:
'Yesterday a lady from Wales dropped in and said that she had been at
Drury Lane on Friday night. "How," I asked, "were you entertained?"
"Very strangely indeed! Not with the play, though, but the discourse of
a Captain Ascough, who averred that a friend of his, Lord Lyttelton, has
SEEN A SPIRIT, who has warned him that he will die in three days. I have
thought of nothing else since."'

Next day, November 29, Mrs. Piozzi heard of Lord Lyttelton's death.*


     *Notes and Queries.  Series V., vol. ii. p. 508.  December 26,1874.

Here is proof absolute that the story, with apparition, if not with
robin, was current THE DAY BEFORE LORD LYTTELTON'S DECEASE.

Of what did Lord Lyttelton die?

'According to one of the papers,' says Coulton, vaguely, 'the cause
of death was disease of the heart.' A brief 'convulsion' is distinctly
mentioned, whence Coulton concludes that the disease was NOT cardiac. On
December 7, Mason writes to Walpole from York: 'Suppose Lord Lyttelton
had recovered the breaking of his blood-vessel!'

Was a broken blood-vessel the cause of death? or have we here, as is
probable, a mere inference of Mason's?

Coulton's account is meant to lead up to his theory of suicide. Lord
Lyttelton mentioned his apprehension of death 'somewhat ostentatiously,
we think.' According to Coulton, at 10 P.M. on Saturday, Lord Lyttelton,
looking at his watch, said: 'Should I live two hours longer, I shall
jockey the ghost.' Coulton thinks that it would have been 'more natural'
for him to await the fatal hour of midnight 'in gay company' than to
go to bed before twelve. He finishes the tale thus: Lord Lyttelton was
taking rhubarb in his bedroom; he sent his valet for a spoon, and the
man, returning, found him 'on the point of dissolution.'

'His family maintained a guarded and perhaps judicious silence on the
subject,' yet Lord Westcote spoke of it to Dr. Johnson, and wrote an
account of it, and so did Lord Lyttelton's widow; while Wraxall, as we
shall see, says that the Dowager Lady Lyttelton painted a picture of the
'warning' in 1780.

Harping on suicide, Coulton quotes Scott's statement in 'Letters
on Demonology:' 'Of late it has been said, and PUBLISHED, that the
unfortunate nobleman had determined to take poison.' Sir Walter gives
no authority, and Coulton admits that he knows of none. Gloomy but
commonplace reflections in the so-called 'Letters' of Lyttelton do not
even raise a presumption in favour of suicide, which, in these very
Letters, Lyttelton says that he cannot defend by argument.* That
Lyttelton made his will 'a few weeks before his death,' providing
for his fair victims, may be accounted for, as we shall see, by the
threatening state of his health, without any notion of self-destruction.
Walpole, in his three letters, only speaks of 'a pistol' as the common
construction of 'sudden death;' and that remark occurs before he has
heard any details. He rises from a mere statement of Lord Lyttelton's,
that he is 'to die in three days,' to a 'dream' containing that
assurance, and thence to apparitions of a young woman and a
robin-redbreast. The appearance of that bird, by the way, is, in the
folk-lore of Surrey, an omen of death. Walpole was in a position to know
all current gossip, and so was Mrs. Piozzi.


     *Coulton's argument requires him to postulate the authenticity of
many, at least, of these Letters, which were given to the world by the
author of 'Doctor Syntax.'

We now turn to a narrative nearly contemporary, that written out by Lord
Westcote on February 13, 1780. Lord Westcote examined the eldest Miss
Amphlett, Captain (later Admiral) Charles Wolsley, Mrs. Flood, Lord
Lyttelton's valet, Faulkner, and Stuckey, the servant in whose arms, so
to speak, Lord Lyttelton died. Stuckey was questioned (note this) in
the presence of Captain Wolsley and of MR. FORTESCUE. The late Lord
Lyttelton permitted the Westcote narrative to be published in 'Notes
and Queries' (November 21, 1874). The story, which so much pleased Dr.
Johnson, runs thus:--On Thursday, November 25, Mrs. Flood and the three
Misses Amphlett were residing at Lord Lyttelton's house in Hill Street,
Berkeley Square. Who IS this Mrs. Flood? Frederick Flood (1741-1824)
married LADY Julia Annesley in 1782. The wife of the more famous Flood
suits the case no better: his wife was LADY F. M. Flood; she was a
Beresford. (The 'Dictionary of National Biography' is responsible for
these facts.) At all events, on November 25, at breakfast, in Hill
Street, Lord Lyttelton told the young ladies and their chaperon that he
had had an extraordinary DREAM.

He seemed to be in a room which a bird flew into; the bird changed into
a woman in white, who told him he should die in three days.

He 'did not much regard it, because he could in some measure account
for it; for that a few days before he had been with Mrs. Dawson, when a
robin-redbreast flew into her room.' On the morning of Saturday he told
the same ladies that he was very well, and believed he should 'BILK THE
GHOST.' The dream has become an apparition! On that day--Saturday--he,
with the ladies, Fortescue, and Wolsley, went to Pitt Place; he went
to bed after eleven, ordered rolls for breakfast, and, in bed, 'died
without a groan,' as his servant was disengaging him from his waistcoat.
During dinner he had 'a rising in his throat' (a slight sickness),
'a thing which had often happened to him before.' His physician, Dr.
Fothergill, vaguely attributed his death to the rupture of some vessel
in his side, where he had felt a pain in summer.

From this version we may glean that Lord Lyttelton was not himself very
certain whether his vision occurred when he was awake or asleep. He is
made to speak of a 'dream,' and even to account for it in a probable
way; but later he talks of 'bilking the GHOST.' The editor of 'Notes
and Queries' now tries to annihilate this contemporary document by
third-hand evidence, seventy years after date. In 1851 or 1852 the late
Dowager Lady Lyttelton, Sarah, daughter of the second Earl Spencer,
discussed the story with Mr. Fortescue, a son of the Mr. Fortescue who
was at Pitt Place, and succeeded to the family title six years later, in
1785. The elder Mr. Fortescue, in brief, is said to have averred that he
had heard nothing of the dream or prediction till 'some days after;'
he, therefore, was inclined to disbelieve in it. We have demonstrated,
however, that if Mr. Fortescue had heard nothing, yet the tale was
all over the town before Lord Lyttelton died. Nay, more, we have
contemporary proof that Mr. Fortescue HAD heard of the affair! Lyttelton
died at midnight on the Saturday, November 27. In her diary for the
following Tuesday (November 30), Lady Mary Coke says that she has just
heard the story of the 'dream' from Lady Bute, who had it from Mr. Ross,
WHO HAD IT FROM MR. FORTESCUE!* Mr. Fortescue, then, must have told the
tale as early as the Monday after the fatal Saturday night. Yet in old
age he seems to have persuaded himself that the tale came later to his
knowledge. Some irrelevant, late, and fourth-hand versions will be found
in 'Notes and Queries,' but they merely illustrate the badness of such
testimony.


     *See The Letters and Journals of Lady Mary Coke, iii. 85. Note--She
speaks of 'a dream.'

One trifle of contemporary evidence may be added: Mrs. Delany, on
December 9, 1779, wrote an account of the affair to her niece--here a
bird turns into a woman.

In pursuit of evidence, it is a long way from 1780 to 1816. In November
of that year, T. J. wrote from Pitt Place, Epsom, in 'The Gentleman's
Magazine;' but his letter is dated 'January 6.' T. J. has bought Pitt
Place, and gives 'a copy of a document in writing, left in the house'
(where Lyttelton died) 'as an heirloom which may be depended on.'
This document begins, 'Lord Lyttelton's Dream and Death (see Admiral
Wolsley's account).'

But where IS Admiral Wolsley's account? Is it in the archives of Sir
Charles Wolseley of Wolseley? Or is THIS (the Pitt Place document)
Admiral Wolsley's account? The anonymous author says that he was one
of the party at Pitt Place on November 27,1779, with 'Lord Fortescue,'
'Lady Flood,' and the two Misses Amphlett. Consequently this account
is written after 1785, when Mr. Fortescue succeeded to his title. Lord
Lyttelton, not long returned from Ireland, had been suffering from
'suffocating fits' in the last month. And THIS, not the purpose of
suicide, was probably his reason for executing his will. 'While in his
house in Hill Street, Berkeley Square, he DREAMT three days before his
death he saw a bird fluttering, and afterwards a woman appeared in white
apparel, and said, "Prepare to meet your death in three days." He was
alarmed and called his servant. On the third day, while at breakfast
with the above-named persons, he said, "I have jockeyed the ghost, as
this is the third day."' Coulton places this incident at 10 P.M. on
Saturday, and makes his lordship say, 'In two hours I shall jockey the
ghost.' 'The whole party set out for Pitt Place,' which contradicts
Coulton's statement that they set out on Friday, but agrees with Lord
Westcote's. 'They had not long arrived when he was seized with a usual
fit. Soon recovered. Dined at five. To bed at eleven.' Then we hear how
he rebuked his servant for stirring his rhubarb 'with a tooth-pick' (a
plausible touch), sent him for a spoon, and was 'in a fit' on the man's
return. 'The pillow being high, his chin bore hard on his neck. Instead
of relieving him, the man ran for help: on his return found him dead.'

This undated and unsigned document, by a person who professes to have
been present, is not, perhaps, very accurate in dates. The phrase
'dreamt' is to be taken as the common-sense way of stating that
Lord Lyttelton had a vision of some sort. His lordship, who spoke of
'jockeying the GHOST,' may have believed that he was awake at the time,
not dreaming; but no person of self-respect, in these unpsychical days,
could admit more than a dream. Perhaps this remark also applies to
Walpole's 'he dreamed.' The species of the bird is left in the vague.

Moving further from the event, to 1828, we find a book styled
'Past Feelings Renovated,' a reply to Dr. Hibbert's 'Philosophy of
Apparitions.' The anonymous author is 'struck with the total inadequacy
of Dr. Hibbert's theory.' Among his stories he quotes Wraxall's
'Memoirs.' In 1783, Wraxall dined at Pitt Place, and visited 'the
bedroom where the casement window at which Lord Lyttelton asserted the
DOVE appeared to flutter* was pointed out to me.' Now the Pitt Place
document puts the vision 'in Hill Street, Berkeley Square.' So does Lord
Westcote. Even a bird cannot be in two places at once, and the 'Pitt
Place Anonymous' does seem to know what he is talking about. Of course
Lord Lyttelton MAY have been at Pitt Place on November 24, and had his
dream there. He MAY have run up to Hill Street on the 25th and delivered
his speech, and MAY have returned to Pitt Place on the Friday or
Saturday.** But we have no evidence for this view; and the Pitt Place
document places the vision in Hill Street. Wraxall adds that he has
frequently seen a painting of bird, ghost, and Lord Lyttelton, which was
executed by that nobleman's stepmother in 1780. It was done 'after the
description given to her by the valet de chambre who attended him, to
whom his master related all the circumstances.'


     *It was a ROBIN in 1779.

     **Coulton says Friday; the Anonymous says Saturday, with Lord Westcote.

Our author of 1828 next produces the narrative by Lord Lyttelton's
widow, Mrs. Peach, who was so soon deserted. In 1828 she is 'now alive,
and resident in the south-west part of Warwickshire.' According to Lady
Lyttelton (who, of course, was not present), Lord Lyttelton had gone to
bed, whether in Hill Street or Pitt Place we are not told. His candle
was extinguished, when he heard 'a noise resembling the fluttering of
a bird at his chamber window. Looking in the direction of the sound, he
saw the figure of an unhappy female, whom he had seduced and deserted,
and who, when deserted, had put a violent end to her own existence,
standing in the aperture of the window from which the fluttering sound
had proceeded. The form approached the foot of the bed: the room was
preternaturally light; the objects in the chamber were distinctly
visible. The figure pointed to a clock, and announced that Lord
Lyttelton would expire AT THAT VERY HOUR (twelve o'clock) in the third
day after the visitation.'

We greatly prefer, as a good old-fashioned ghost story, this version of
Lady Lyttelton's. There is no real bird, only a fluttering sound, as in
the case of the Cock Lane Ghost, and many other examples. The room is
'preternaturally light,' as in Greek and Norse belief it should have
been, and as it is in the best modern ghost stories. Moreover, we have
the raison d'etre of the ghost: she had been a victim of the Chief
Justice in Eyre. The touch about the clock is in good taste. We did not
know all that before.

But, alas! our author of 1828, after quoting the Pitt Place Anonymous,
proceeds to tell, citing no named authority, that the ghost was that of
Mrs. Amphlett, mother of the two Misses Amphlett, and of a third sister,
in no way less distinguished than these by his lordship. Now a ghost
cannot be the ghost of two different people. Moreover, Mrs. Amphlett
lived (it is said) for years after. However, Mrs. Amphlett has the
preference if she 'died of grief at the precise time when the female
vision appeared to his lordship,' which makes it odd that her daughters
should then have been revelling at Pitt Place under the chaperonage of
Mrs. Flood. We are also informed (on no authority) that Lord Lyttelton
'acknowledged' the ghost to have been that of the injured mother of the
three Misses Amphlett.

Let not the weary reader imagine that the catena of evidence ends here!
His lordship's own ghost did a separate stroke of business, though
only in the commonplace character of a deathbed wraith, or 'veridical
hallucination.'

Lord Lyttelton had a friend, we learn from 'Past Feelings Renovated'
(1828), a friend named Miles Peter Andrews. 'One night after Mr. Andrews
had left Pitt Place and gone to Dartford,' where he owned powder-mills,
his bed-curtains were pulled open and Lord Lyttelton appeared before
him in his robe de chambre and nightcap. Mr. Andrews reproached him for
coming to Dartford Mills in such a guise, at such a time of night,
and, 'turning to the other side of the bed, rang the bell, when Lord
Lyttelton had disappeared.' The house and garden were searched in
vain; and about four in the afternoon a friend arrived at Dartford with
tidings of his lordship's death.

Here the reader with true common sense remarks that this second ghost,
Lord Lyttelton's own, does not appear in evidence till 1828, fifty years
after date, and then in an anonymous book, on no authority. We have
permitted to the reader this opportunity of exercising his acuteness,
while laying a little trap for him. It is not in 1828 that Mr. Andrews's
story first appears. We first find it in December 1779--that is, in the
month following the alleged event. Mr. Andrews's experience, and the
vision of Lord Lyttelton, are both printed in 'The Scots Magazine,'
December 1779, p. 650. The account is headed 'A Dream,' and yet the
author avers that Lord Lyttelton was wide awake! This illustrates
beautifully the fact on which we insist, that 'dream' is
eighteenth-century English for ghost, vision, hallucination, or what you
will.

'Lord Lyttelton,' says the contemporary 'Scots Magazine,' 'started
up from a midnight sleep on perceiving a bird fluttering near the
bed-curtains, which vanished suddenly when a female spirit in white
raiment presented herself' and prophesied Lord Lyttelton's death in
three days. His death is attributed to convulsions while undressing.

The 'dream' of Mr. Andrews (according to 'The Scots Magazine' of
December 1779)* occurred at Dartford in Kent, on the night of November
27. It represented Lord Lyttelton drawing his bed-curtains, and saying,
'It is all over,' or some such words.


     *The magazine appeared at the end of December.

This Mr. Andrews had been a drysalter. He made a large fortune, owned
the powder-mills at Dartford, sat in Parliament, wrote plays which had
some success, and was thought a good fellow in raffish society. Indeed,
the society was not always raffish. In 'Notes and Queries' (December 26,
1874) H. S. says that his mother, daughter of Sir George Prescott, often
met Mr. Andrews at their house, Theobalds Park, Herts. He was extremely
agreeable, and, if pressed, would tell his little anecdote of November
27, 1779.

This proof that the Andrews tale is contemporary has led us away from
the description of the final scene, given in 'Past Feelings Renovated,'
by the person who brought the news to Mr. Andrews. His version includes
a trick played with the watches and clocks. All were set on half
an hour; the valet secretly made the change in Lord Lyttelton's own
timepiece. His lordship thus went to bed, as he thought, at 11.30,
really at eleven o'clock, as in the Pitt Place document. At about
twelve o'clock, midnight, the valet rushed in among the guests, who were
discussing the odd circumstances, and said that his master was at the
point of death. Lord Lyttelton had kept looking at his watch, and at a
quarter past twelve (by his chronometer and his valet's) he remarked,
'This mysterious lady is not a true prophetess, I find.' The real hour
was then a quarter to twelve. At about half-past twelve, by HIS watch,
twelve by the real time, he asked for his physic. The valet went into
the dressing-room to prepare it (to fetch a spoon by other versions),
when he heard his master 'breathing very hard.' 'I ran to him, and found
him in the agonies of death.'

There is something rather plausible in this narrative, corresponding, as
it does, with the Pitt Place document, in which the valet, finding his
master in a fit, leaves him and seeks assistance, instead of lowering
his head that he might breathe more easily. Like the other, this tale
makes suicide a most improbable explanation of Lord Lyttelton's death.
The affair of the watches is dramatic, but not improbable in itself.
A correspondent of 'The Gentleman's Magazine' (in 1815) only cites 'a
London paper' as his authority. The writer of 'Past Feelings Renovated'
(1828) adds that Mr. Andrews could never again be induced to sleep at
Pitt Place, but, when visiting there, always lay at the Spread Eagle, in
Epsom.

Let us now tabulate our results.

At Pitt Place, Epsom, or Hill Street, Berkeley Square, On November 24,
Lord Lyttelton Dreamed of, or saw, A young woman and a robin. A bird
which became a woman. A dove and a woman. Mrs. Amphlett (without a dove
or robin). Some one else unknown.

In one variant, a clock and a preternatural light are thrown in, with
a sermon which it were superfluous to quote. In another we have the
derangement of clocks and watches. Lord Lyttelton's stepmother
believed in the dove. Lady Lyttelton did without a dove, but admitted a
fluttering sound.

For causes of death we have--heart disease (a newspaper), breaking of a
blood-vessel (Mason), suicide (Coulton), and 'a suffocating fit' (Pitt
Place document). The balance is in favour of a suffocating fit, and is
against suicide. On the whole, if we follow the Pitt Place Anonymous
(writing some time after the event, for he calls Mr. Fortescue 'Lord
Fortescue'), we may conclude that Lord Lyttelton had been ill for some
time. The making of his will suggests a natural apprehension on his
part, rather than a purpose of suicide. There was a lively impression
of coming death on his mind, but how it was made--whether by a dream, an
hallucination, or what not--there is no good evidence to show.

There is every reason to believe, on the Pitt Place evidence, combined
with the making of his will, that Lord Lyttelton had really, for some
time, suffered from alarming attacks of breathlessness, due to what
cause physicians may conjecture. Any one of these fits, probably, might
cause death, if the obvious precaution of freeing the head and throat
from encumbrances were neglected; and the Pitt Place document asserts
that the frightened valet DID neglect it. Again, that persons under the
strong conviction of approaching death will actually die is proved by
many examples. Even Dr. Hibbert says that 'no reasonable doubt can be
placed on the authenticity of the narrative' of Miss Lee's death, 'as it
was drawn up by the Bishop of Gloucester' (Dr. William Nicholson) 'from
the recital of the young lady's father,' Sir Charles Lee. Every one
knows the tale. In a preternatural light, in a midnight chamber, Miss
Lee saw a woman, who proclaimed herself Miss Lee's dead mother, 'and
that by twelve o'clock of the day she should be with her.' So Miss
Lee died in her chair next day, on the stroke of noon, and Dr. Hibbert
rather heartlessly calls this 'a fortunate circumstance.'

The Rev. Mr. Fison, in 'Kamilaroi and Kurnai,' gives, from his own
experience, similar tales of death following alleged ghostly warnings,
among Fijians and Australian blacks. Lord Lyttelton's uneasiness and
apprehension are conspicuous in all versions; his dreams had long been
troubled, his health had caused him anxiety, the 'warning' (whatever
it may have been) clinched the matter, and he died a perfectly natural
death.

Mr. Coulton, omitting Walpole's statement that he 'looked ill,' and
never alluding to the Pitt Place description of his very alarming
symptoms, but clinging fondly to his theory of Junius, perorates thus:
'Not Dante, or Milton, or Shakespeare himself, could have struck forth
a finer conception than Junius, in the pride of rank, wealth, and
dignities, raised to the Council table of the sovereign he had so
foully slandered--yet sick at heart and deeply stained with every
profligacy--terminating his career by deliberate self-murder, with every
accompaniment of audacious charlatanry that could conceal the crime.'

It is magnificent, it is worthy of Dante, or Shakespeare himself--but
the conception is Mr. Coulton's.

We do not think that we have provided what Dr. Johnson 'liked,'
'evidence for the spiritual world.' Nor have we any evidence explanatory
of the precise nature of Lord Lyttelton's hallucination. The problem
of the authorship of the 'Junius Letters' is a malstrom into which we
decline to be drawn.

But it is fair to observe that all the discrepancies in the story of the
'warning' are not more numerous, nor more at variance with each other,
than remote hearsay reports of any ordinary occurrence are apt to be.
And we think it is plain that, if Lord Lyttelton WAS Junius, Mr. Coulton
had no right to allege that Junius went and hanged himself, or, in any
other way, was guilty of self-murder.




VI. THE MYSTERY OF AMY ROBSART


1. HISTORICAL CONFUSIONS AS TO EVENTS BEFORE AMY'S DEATH

Let him who would weep over the tribulations of the historical inquirer
attend to the tale of the Mystery of Amy Robsart!

The student must dismiss from his memory all that he recollects of
Scott's 'Kenilworth.' Sir Walter's chivalrous motto was 'No scandal
about Queen Elizabeth,' 'tis blazoned on his title-page. To avoid
scandal, he calmly cast his narrative at a date some fifteen years after
Amy Robsart's death, brought Amy alive, and represented Queen Elizabeth
as ignorant of her very existence. He might, had he chosen, have proved
to his readers that, as regards Amy Robsart and her death, Elizabeth was
in a position almost as equivocal as was Mary Stuart in regard to the
murder of Darnley. Before the murder of Darnley we do not hear one word
to suggest that Mary was in love with Bothwell. For many months before
the death of Amy (Lady Robert Dudley), we hear constant reports that
Elizabeth has a love affair with Lord Robert, and that Amy is to be
divorced or murdered. When Darnley is killed, a mock investigation
acquits Bothwell, and Mary loads him with honours and rewards. When Amy
dies mysteriously, a coroner's inquest, deep in the country, is held,
and no records of its proceedings can be found. Its verdict is unknown.
After a brief tiff, Elizabeth restores Lord Robert to favour.

After Darnley's murder, Mary's ambassador in France implores her
to investigate the matter with all diligence. After Amy's death,
Elizabeth's ambassador in France implores her to investigate the matter
with all diligence. Neither lady listens to her loyal servant, indeed
Mary could not have pursued the inquiry, however innocent she might
have been. Elizabeth could! In three months after Darnley's murder,
Mary married Bothwell. In two months after Amy's death Cecil told
(apparently) the Spanish ambassador that Elizabeth had married Lord
Robert Dudley. But this point, we shall see, is dubious.

There the parallel ceases, for, in all probability, Lord Robert was not
art and part in Amy's death, and, whatever Elizabeth may have done in
private, she certainly did not publicly espouse Lord Robert. A Scot as
patriotic as, but less chivalrous than, Sir Walter might, however, have
given us a romance of Cumnor Place in which Mary would have been avenged
on 'her sister and her foe.' He abstained, but wove a tale so full of
conscious anachronisms that we must dismiss it from our minds.

Amy Robsart was the only daughter of Sir John Robsart and his wife
Elizabeth, nee Scot, and widow of Roger Appleyard, a man of good old
Norfolk family. This Roger Appleyard, dying on June 8, 1528, left a son
and heir, John, aged less than two years. His widow, Elizabeth, had the
life interest in his four manors, and, as we saw, she married Sir John
Robsart, and by him became the mother of Amy, who had also a brother on
the paternal side, Arthur Robsart, whether legitimately born or not.*
Both these brothers play a part in the sequel of the mystery. Lord
Robert Dudley, son of John, Duke of Northumberland, and grandson of the
Dudley who, with Empson, was so unpopular under Henry VII., was about
seventeen or eighteen when he married Amy Robsart--herself perhaps
a year older--on June 4, 1550. At that time his father was Earl of
Warwick; the wedding is chronicled in the diary of the child king,
Edward VI.**


     *Mr. Walter Rye in The Murder of Amy Robsart, Norwich and London,
1885, makes Arthur a bastard. Mr. Pettigrew, in An Inquiry into the
Particulars connected with the Death of Amy Robsart (London, 1859),
represents Arthur as legitimate.

    **Mr. Rye dates the marriage in 1550.
Rye, pp. 5, 36, cf. Edward VI.'s Diary, Clarendon Society. Mr. Froude
cites the date, June 4, 1549, from Burnet's Collectanea, Froude, vi.
p. 422, note 2 (1898), being misled by Old Style; Edward VI. notes the
close of 1549 on March 24.

Amy, as the daughter of a rich knight, was (at least if we regard her
brother Arthur as a bastard) a considerable heiress. Robert Dudley was a
younger son. Probably the match was a family arrangement, but Mr. Froude
says 'it was a love match.' His reason for this assertion seems to rest
on a misunderstanding. In 1566-67, six years after Amy's death, Cecil
drew up a list of the merits and demerits of Dudley (by that time Earl
of Leicester) and of the Archduke Charles, as possible husbands of
Elizabeth. Among other points is noted by Cecil, 'Likelihood to Love his
Wife.' As to the Archduke, Cecil takes a line through his father, who
'hath been blessed with multitude of children.' As to Leicester,
Cecil writes 'Nuptiae carnales a laetitia incipiunt, et in luctu
terminantur'--'Weddings of passion begin in joy and end in grief.' This
is not a reference, as Mr. Froude thought, to the marriage of Amy and
Dudley, it is merely a general maxim, applicable to a marriage between
Elizabeth and Leicester. The Queen, according to accounts from all
quarters, had a physical passion or caprice for Leicester. The marriage,
if it occurred, would be nuptiae carnales, and as such, in Cecil's view,
likely to end badly, while the Queen and the Archduke (the alternative
suitor) had never seen each other and could not be 'carnally'
affectionate.*


     *Froude, ut supra, note 3.

We do not know, in short, whether Dudley and Amy were in love with each
other or not. Their marriage, Cecil says, was childless.

Concerning the married life of Dudley and Amy very little is known.
When he was a prisoner in the Tower under Mary Tudor, Amy was allowed to
visit him. She lost her father, Sir John, in 1553. Two undated letters
of Amy's exist: one shows that she was trusted by her husband in the
management of his affairs (1556-57) and that both he and she were
anxious to act honourably by some poor persons to whom money was due.*
The other is to a woman's tailor, and, though merely concerned with
gowns and collars, is written in a style of courteous friendliness.**
Both letters, in orthography and sentiment, do credit to Amy's education
and character. There is certainly nothing vague or morbid or indicative
of an unbalanced mind in these poor epistles.


     *Pettigrew, 14, note 1.

     **Jackson, Nineteenth Century, March 1882, A Longleat MS.

When Elizabeth came to the throne (1558) she at once made Dudley Master
of the Horse, a Privy Councillor, and a Knight of the Garter. His office
necessarily caused him to be in constant attendance on the royal person,
and the Knighthood of the Garter proves that he stood in the highest
degree of favour.

For whatever reason, whether from distaste for Court life, or because
of the confessed jealousy with which the Queen regarded the wives of her
favourites--of all men, indeed--Amy did not come to Court. About 1558-59
she lived mainly at the country house of the Hydes of Detchworth, not
far from Abingdon. Dudley seems to have paid several visits to the
Hydes, his connections; this is proved by entries in his household books
of sums of money for card-playing there.* It is also certain that Amy
at that date, down to the end of 1559, travelled about freely, to London
and many other places; that she had twelve horses at her service; and
that, as late as March 1560 (when resident with Dudley's comptroller,
Forster, at Cumnor Place) she was buying a velvet hat and shoes. In
brief, though she can have seen but little of her husband, she was
obviously at liberty, lived till 1560 among honourable people, her
connections, and, in things material, wanted for nothing.** Yet Amy
cannot but have been miserable by 1560. The extraordinary favour in
which Elizabeth held her lord caused the lewdest stories to spread among
all classes, from the circle of the Court to the tattle of country folk
in Essex and Devonshire.***


     *Jackson, ut supra.

     **For details see Canon Jackson's 'Amy Robsart,' Nineteenth Century,
vol. xi. Canon Jackson used documents in the possession of the Marquis
of Bath, at Longleat.

     ***Cal. Dom. Eliz. p. 157, August 13, 1560; also
Hatfield Calendar.

News of this kind is certain to reach the persons concerned.

Our chief authority for the gossip about Elizabeth and Dudley is to
be found in the despatches of the Spanish ambassadors to their master,
Philip of Spain. The fortunes of Western Europe, perhaps of the Church
herself, hung on Elizabeth's marriage and on the succession to the
English throne. The ambassadors, whatever their other failings, were
undoubtedly loyal to Philip and to the Church, and they were not men to
be deceived by the gossip of every gobemouche. The command of money gave
them good intelligence, they were fair judges of evidence, and what they
told Philip was what they regarded as well worthy of his attention. They
certainly were not deceiving Philip.

The evidence of the Spanish ambassadors, as men concerned to find out
the truth and to tell it, is therefore of the highest importance. They
are not writing mere amusing chroniques scandaleuses of the court to
which they are accredited, as ambassadors have often done, and what they
hear is sometimes so bad that they decline to put it on paper. They are
serious and wary men of the world. Unhappily their valuable despatches,
now in 'the Castilian village of Simancas,' reach English inquirers in
the most mangled and garbled condition. Major Martin Hume, editor of
the Spanish Calendar (1892), tells us in the Introduction to the first
volume of this official publication how the land lies. Not to speak of
the partial English translation (1865) of Gonzales's partial summary of
the despatches (Madrid, 1832) we have the fruits of the labours of Mr.
Froude. He visited Simancas, consulted the original documents, and
'had a large number of copies and extracts made.' These extracts
and transcripts Mr. Froude deposited in the British Museum. These
transcripts, compared with the portions translated in Mr. Froude's great
book, enable us to understand the causes of certain confusions in Amy
Robsart's mystery. Mr. Froude practically aimed at giving the gist, as
he conceived it, of the original papers of the period, which he rendered
with freedom, and in his captivating style--foreign to the perplexed
prolixity of the actual writers. But, in this process, points of
importance might be omitted; and, in certain cases, words from letters
of other dates appear to have been inserted by Mr. Froude, to clear up
the situation. The result is not always satisfactory.

Next, from 1886 onwards, the Spanish Government published five volumes
of the correspondence of Philip with his ambassadors at the English
Court.* These papers Major Hume was to condense and edit for our
official publication, the Spanish State Papers, in the series of the
Master of the Rolls. But Major Hume found the papers in the Spanish
official publication in a deplorably unedited state. Copyists and
compositors 'seem to have had a free hand.' Major Hume therefore
compared the printed Spanish texts, where he could, with Mr. Froude's
transcripts of the same documents in the Museum, and the most important
letter in this dark affair, in our Spanish Calendar, follows incorrectly
Mr. Froude's transcript, NOT the original document, which is not printed
in 'Documentos Ineditos.'** Thus, Major Hume's translation differs from
Mr. Froude's translation, which, again, differs from Mr. Gairdner's
translation of the original text as published by the Baron Kervyn de
Lettenhove.***


     *Documentos Ineditos para la Historia de Espana.  Ginesta, Madrid,
1886.

    **Spanish Calendar, vol. i. p. iv. Mr. Gairdner says, 'Major Hume
in preparing his first volume, he informs me, took transcripts from
Simancas of all the direct English correspondence,' but for letters
between England and Flanders used Mr. Froude's transcripts. Gairdner,
English Historical Review, January 1898, note 1.

   ***Relations Politiquesdes Pays-Bas et de l'Anqleterre sous le Regne
de Philippe II. vol. ii. pp. 529-533. Brussels, 1883.

The amateur of truth, being now fully apprised of the 'hazards' which
add variety to the links of history, turns to the Spanish Calendar for
the reports of the ambassadors. He reaches April 18, 1559, when de Feria
says: 'Lord Robert has come so much into favour that he does whatever he
likes with affairs, and it is even said that her Majesty visits him in
his chamber day and night. People talk of this so freely that they go so
far as to say that his wife has a malady in one of her breasts and the
Queen is only waiting for her to die to marry Lord Robert.'

De Feria therefore suggests that Philip might come to terms with Lord
Robert. Again, on April 29, 1559, de Feria writes (according to the
Calendar): 'Sometimes she' (Elizabeth) 'appears to want to marry him'
(Archduke Ferdinand) 'and speaks like a woman who will only accept a
great prince, and then they say she is in love with Lord Robert, and
never lets him leave her.' De Feria has reason to believe that 'she will
never bear children'*

Sp. Cal. i. pp. 57, 58, 63; Doc. Ineditos, 87, 171, 180.

Mr. Froude combines these two passages in one quotation, putting
the second part (of April 29) first, thus: 'They tell me that she is
enamoured of my Lord Robert Dudley, and will never let him leave her
side. HE OFFERS ME HIS SERVICES IN BEHALF OF THE ARCH DUKE, BUT I DOUBT
WHETHER IT WILL BE WELL TO USE THEM. He is in such favour that people
say she visits him in his chamber day and night. Nay, it is even
reported that his wife has a cancer on her breast, and that the Queen
waits only till she die to marry him.'*


     *Froude, vi. p. 199.  De Feria to Philip, April 28 and April 29.
MS. Simancas, cf. Documentos Ineditos, pp. 87, 171, 180, ut supra.

The sentence printed in capitals cannot be found by me in either of de
Feria's letters quoted by Mr. Froude, but the sense of it occurs in a
letter written at another date. Mr. Froude has placed, in his quotation,
first a sentence of the letter of April 29, then a sentence not in
either letter (as far as the Calendar and printed Spanish documents
show), then sentences from the letter of April 18. He goes on to remark
that the marriage of Amy and Dudley 'was a love match of a doubtful
kind,' about which we have, as has been shown, no information whatever.
Such are the pitfalls which strew the path of inquiry.

One thing is plain, a year and a half before her death Amy was regarded
as a person who would be 'better dead,' and Elizabeth was said to love
Dudley, on whom she showered honours and gifts.

De Feria, in the summer of 1559, was succeeded as ambassador by de
Quadra, bishop of Aquila. Dudley and his sister, Lady Sidney (mother of
Sir Philip Sidney), now seemed to favour Spanish projects, but (November
13) de Quadra writes: 'I heard from a certain person who is accustomed
to give veracious news that Lord Robert has sent to poison his wife.
Certainly all the Queen has done with us and with the Swede, and will
do with the rest in the matter of her marriage, is only keeping Lord
Robert's enemies and the country engaged with words until this wicked
deed of killing his wife is consummated.' The enemies of Dudley included
the Duke of Norfolk, and most of the nation. There was talk of a plot to
destroy both Dudley and the Queen. 'The Duke and the rest of them cannot
put up with Lord Robert's being king.'* Further, and later, on January
16, 1560 (Amy being now probably at Cumnor), de Quadra writes to de
Feria that Baron Preyner, a German diplomatist, will tell him what
he knows of the poison for the wife of Milort Robert (Dudley), 'an
important story and necessary to be known.'** Thus between November 1559
and January 1560, the talk is that Amy shall be poisoned, and this tale
runs round the Courts of Europe.


      *Sp. Cal. i. pp. 112-114.

     **Relations Politiques, Lettenhove, ii. p. 187.

Mr. Froude gives, what the Calendar does not, a letter of de Quadra to
de Feria and the Bishop of Arras (January 15, 1560). 'In Lord Robert it
is easy to recognise the king that is to be... There is not a man who
does not cry out on him and her with indignation.'* 'She will marry none
but the favoured Robert.'** On March 7, 1560, de Quadra tells de Feria:
'Not a man in this country but cries out that this fellow' (Dudley) 'is
ruining the country with his vanity.'*** 'Is ruining the country AND THE
QUEEN,' is in the original Spanish.


      *Froude, vi. p. 311.

     **Relations Politiques, ii. 87, 183, 184.

    ***Sp. Cal. i. p. 133. Major Hume translates the text of Mr. Froude's
transcript in the British Museum. It is a mere fragment; in 1883 the
whole despatch was printed by Baron Kervyn de Lettenhove.

On March 28 (Calendar), on March 27 (Froude) de Quadra wrote to
Philip--(Calendar)--,'I have understood Lord Robert told somebody, who
has not kept silence, that if he live another year he will be in a very
different position from now. He is laying in a good stock of arms, and
is assuming every day a more masterful part in affairs. They say that
he thinks of divorcing his wife.'* So the Calendar. Mr. Froude condenses
his Spanish author THUS:** 'Lord Robert says that if he lives a year he
will be in another position from that which he at present holds. Every
day he presumes more and more, and it is now said that he means to
divorce his wife.' From the evidence of the Spanish ambassadors, it is
clear that an insurance office would only have accepted Amy Robsart's
life, however excellent her health, at a very high premium. Her
situation was much like that of Darnley in the winter of 1566-67, when
'every one in Scotland who had the smallest judgment' knew that 'he
could not long continue,' that his doom was dight.


     *Sp. Cal. i, p. 141.

     **Froude, vi. p. 340.

Meanwhile, through the winter, spring, and early summer of 1560,
diplomatists and politicians were more concerned about the war of
the Congregation against Mary of Guise in Scotland, with the English
alliance with the Scottish Protestant rebels, with the siege of Leith,
and with Cecil's negotiations resulting in the treaty of Edinburgh, than
even with Elizabeth's marriage, and her dalliance with Dudley.

All this time, Amy was living at Cumnor Place, about three miles from
Oxford. Precisely at what date she took up her abode there is not
certain, probably about the time when de Quadra heard that Lord Robert
had sent to poison his wife, the November of 1559. Others say in March
1560. The house was rented from a Dr. Owen by Anthony Forster. This
gentleman was of an old and good family, well known since the time of
Edward I.; his wife also, Ann Williams, daughter of Reginald Williams
of Burghfield, Berks, was a lady of excellent social position. Forster
himself had estates in several counties, and obtained many grants
of land after Amy's death. He died in 1572, leaving a very equitable
distribution of his properties; Cumnor he bought from Dr. Owen soon
after the death of Amy. In his bequests he did not forget the Master,
Fellows, and Scholars of Balliol.* There is nothing suspicious about
Forster, who was treasurer or comptroller of Leicester's household
expenses: in writing, Leicester signs himself 'your loving Master.' At
Cumnor Place also lived Mrs. Owen, wife of Dr. Owen, the owner of the
house, and physician to the Queen. There was, too, a Mrs. Oddingsell, of
respectable family, one of the Hydes of Denchworth. That any or all
of these persons should be concerned in abetting or shielding a murder
seems in the highest degree improbable. Cumnor Place was in no respect
like Kirk o' Field, as regards the character of its inhabitants. It
was, however, a lonely house, and, on the day of Amy's death, her own
servants (apparently by her own desire) were absent. And Amy, like
Darnley, was found dead on a Sunday night, no man to this day knowing
the actual cause of death in either case.


     *Pettigrew, pp. 19-22.

Here it may be well to consider the version of the tragedy as printed,
twenty-four years after the event, by the deadly enemies of Lord Robert,
now Earl of Leicester. This is the version which, many years later,
aided by local tradition, was used in Ashmole's account in his 'History
and Antiquities of Berkshire,' while Sir Walter employed Ashmole's
account as the basis of his romance. We find the PRINTED copy of
the book usually known as 'Leicester's Commonwealth' dated 1584, but
probably it had been earlier circulated in manuscript copies, of
which several exist.* It purports to be a letter written by a M.A. of
Cambridge to a friend in London, containing 'some talk passed of late'
about Leicester. Doubtless it DOES represent the talk against Leicester
that had been passing, at home and abroad, ever since 1560. Such talk,
after twenty years, could not be accurate. The point of the writer is
that Leicester is lucky in the deaths of inconvenient people. Thus,
when he was 'in full hope to marry' the Queen 'he did but send his wife
aside, to the house of his servant, Forster of Cumnor, by Oxford, where
shortly after she had the chance to fall from a pair of stairs, and so
to break her neck, but yet without hurting of her hood, that stood upon
her head.' Except for the hood, of which we know nothing, all this is
correct. In the next sentence we read: 'But Sir Richard Verney, who, by
commandment, remained with her that day alone, with one man only, and
had sent away perforce all her servants from her, to a market two
miles off, he, I say, with his man, can tell how she died.' The man was
privily killed in prison, where he lay for another offence, because he
'offered to publish' the fact; and Verney, about the same time, died
in London, after raving about devils 'to a gentleman of worship of mine
acquaintance.' 'The wife also of Bald Buttler, kinsman to my Lord, gave
out the whole fact a little before her death.'


     *Pettigrew, pp. 9, 10.

Verney, and the man, are never mentioned in contemporary papers: two
Mrs. Buttelars were mourners at Amy's funeral. Verney is obscure: Canon
Jackson argues that he was of the Warwickshire Verneys; Mr. Rye holds
that he was of the Bucks and Herts Verneys, connections of the Dudleys.
But, finding a Richard Verney made sheriff of Warwick and Leicester in
1562, Mr. Rye absurdly says: 'The former county being that in which the
murder was committed,' he 'was placed in the position to suppress
any unpleasant rumours.'* Amy died, of course, in Berkshire, not in
Warwickshire. A Richard Verney, not the Warwickshire Sir Richard,
according to Mr. Rye, on July 30, 1572, became Marshal of the
Marshalsea, 'when John Appleyard, Amy's half-brother, was turned out.'
This Verney died before November 15, 1575.


     *Rye, p. 55.

Of Appleyard we shall hear plenty: Leicester had favoured him (he was
Leicester's brother-in-law), and he turned against his patron on the
matter of Amy's death. Probably the Richard Verney who died in 1575
was the Verney aimed at in 'Leicester's Commonwealth.' He was a kind
of retainer of Dudley, otherwise he would not have been selected by the
author of the libel. But we know nothing to prove that he was at Cumnor
on September 8, 1560.

The most remarkable point in the libel avers that Leicester's first
idea was to poison Amy. This had been asserted by de Quadra as early as
November 1559. The libel avers that the conspirators, 'seeing the good
lady sad and heavy,' asked Dr. Bayly, of Oxford, for a potion, which
they 'would fetch from Oxford upon his prescription, meaning to have
added also somewhat of their own for her comfort.' Bayly was a Fellow
of New College; in 1558 was one of the proctors; in 1561 was Queen's
Professor of Physic, and was a highly reputable man.* He died in 1592.
Thus Bayly, if he chose, could have contradicted the printed libel of
1584, which avers that he refused to prescribe for Amy, 'misdoubting
(as he after reported) lest if they poisoned her under the name of his
potion, he might after have been hanged for a cover of their sin.'


     *Pettigrew, p. 17, citing Wood's Ath. Ox. i. P. 586 (Bliss).

Nothing was more natural and innocent than that Bayly should be asked to
prescribe, if Amy was ill. Nothing could be more audacious than to print
this tale about him, while he lived to contradict it. But it seems
far from improbable that Bayly did, for the reasons given, refuse to
prescribe for Amy, seeing (as the libel says) 'the small need which the
good lady had of physic.'

FOR THIS VERY REFUSAL BY BAYLY WOULD ACCOUNT FOR THE INFORMATION GIVEN
BY CECIL TO DE QUADRA ON THE DAY OF AMY'S DEATH. AND IT IS NOT EASY TO
EXPLAIN THE SOURCE OF CECIL'S INFORMATION IN ANY OTHER WAY.

We now reach the crucial point at which historical blunders and
confusions have been most maddeningly prevalent. Mr. Pettigrew, writing
in 1859, had no knowledge of Cecil's corroboration of the story of the
libel--Amy in no need of physic, and the intention to poison her. Mr.
Froude, however, published in his History a somewhat erroneous version
of de Quadra's letter about Cecil's revelations, and Mr. Rye (1885)
accused Dudley on the basis of Mr. Froude's version.*


     *Froude, vi. pp. 417-421.

Mr. Froude, then, presents a letter from de Quadra of September 11,
1560, to the Duchess of Parma, governing the Netherlands from Brussels,
'this being the nearest point from which he could receive instructions.
The despatches were then forwarded to Philip.' He dates de Quadra's
letter at the top, 'London, September 1l.' The real date is, at the foot
of the last page, 'Windsor, September 11.' Omitting the first portion
of the letter, except the first sentence (which says that fresh and
important events have occurred since the writer's last letter), Mr.
Froude makes de Quadra write: 'On the third of THIS month' (September
1560) 'the Queen spoke to me about her marriage with the Arch Duke. She
said she had made up her mind to marry and that the Arch Duke was to
be the man. She has just now told me drily that she does not intend to
marry, and that it cannot be.'

When, we ask, is 'just now'?

Mr. Froude goes on: 'After my conversation with the Queen, I met the
Secretary, Cecil, whom I knew to be in disgrace. Lord Robert, I was
aware, was endeavouring to deprive him of his place.' Briefly, Cecil
said to de Quadra that he thought of retiring, that ruin was coming on
the Queen 'through her intimacy with Lord Robert. The Lord Robert had
made himself master of the business of the State and of the person of
the Queen, to the extreme injury of the realm, with the intention of
marrying her, and she herself was shutting herself up in the palace to
the peril of her health and life.' Cecil begged de Quadra to remonstrate
with the Queen. After speaking of her finances, Cecil went on, in Mr.
Froude's version: 'Last of all he said they were thinking of destroying
Lord Robert's wife. THEY HAD GIVEN OUT THAT SHE WAS ILL; BUT SHE WAS
NOT ILL AT ALL; SHE WAS VERY WELL, AND WAS TAKING CARE NOT TO BE
POISONED....' [The capitals are mine.]

This is the very state of things reported in 'Leicester's Commonwealth.'
Cecil may easily have known the circumstances, if, as stated in that
libel, Bayly had been consulted, had found Amy 'in no need of physic,'
and had refused to prescribe. Bayly would blab, and Cecil had spies
everywhere to carry the report: the extent and precision of his secret
service are well known. Cecil added some pious remarks. God would not
permit the crime. Mr. Froude goes on: 'The day after this conversation,
the Queen on her return from hunting told me that Lord Robert's wife was
dead or nearly so, and begged me to say nothing about it.' After some
political speculations, the letter, in Froude, ends, 'Since this was
written the death of Lord Robert's wife has been given out publicly. The
Queen said in Italian "Que si ha rotto il collo" ["that she has broken
her neck"]. It appears that she fell down a staircase.'

Mr. Froude, after disposing of the ideas that de Quadra lied, or that
Cecil spoke 'in mere practice or diplomatic trickery,' remarks: 'Certain
it is that on September 8, at the time, or within a day of the time,
when Cecil told the Spanish ambassador that there was a plot to
kill her, Anne Dudley [Anne or Amy] was found dead at the foot of a
staircase.' This must be true, for the Queen told de Quadra, PRIVATELY,
'on the day after' Cecil unbosomed himself. The fatal news, we know,
reached Windsor on September 9, we do not know at what hour. The Queen
told de Quadra probably on September 9. If the news arrived late (and
Dudley's first letter on the subject is 'IN THE EVENING' of September
9), Elizabeth may have told de Quadra on the morning of September 10.

The inferences were drawn (by myself and others) that Elizabeth had told
de Quadra, on September 3, 'the third of THIS month' (as Mr. Froude,
by a slip of the pen, translates 'a tres del passado'), that she would
marry the Arch Duke; that Cecil spoke to de Quadra on the same day, and
that 'the day after this conversation' (September 4) the Queen told de
Quadra that Amy 'was dead or nearly so.' The presumption would be that
the Queen spoke of Amy's death FOUR DAYS BEFORE IT OCCURRED, and a
very awkward position, in that case, would be the Queen's. Guilty
foreknowledge would be attributed to her. This is like the real
situation if Dr. Ernst Bekker is right.* Dr. Bekker, knowing from the
portion of de Quadra's letter omitted by Mr. Froude, that he reached the
Court at Windsor on September 6, 1560, supposes that he had interviews
with Elizabeth and Cecil on that day, and that Elizabeth, prematurely,
announced to him Amy's death, next day, on September 7. But Mr. Gairdner
has proved that this scheme of dates is highly improbable.


     *Elizabeth and Leicester, Giesener Studien auf dem Gebiet der
Geschichte, v p.48. Giesen, 1890.

In the 'English Historical Review,'* Mr. Gairdner, examining the
question, used Mr. Froude's transcripts in the British Museum, and made
some slight corrections in his translation, but omitted to note the
crucial error of the 'third of THIS month' for 'the third of LAST
month.' This was in 1886. Mr. Gairdner's arguments as to dates were
unconvincing, in this his first article. But in 1892 the letter of de
Quadra was retranslated from Mr. Froude's transcript, in the Spanish
Calendar (i. pp. 174-176). The translation was again erroneous, 'THE
QUEEN HAD PROMISED ME AN ANSWER ABOUT THE SPANISH MARRIAGE BY THE THIRD
INSTANT' (September 3), 'but now she coolly tells me she cannot make up
her mind, and will not marry.' This is all unlike Mr. Froude's 'On the
third of this month the Queen spoke to me about her marriage WITH THE
ARCH DUKE. SHE SAID THAT SHE HAD MADE UP HER MIND TO MARRY AND THAT THE
ARCH DUKE WAS TO BE THE MAN.' There is, in fact, in Mr. Froude's copy
of the original Spanish, not a word about the Arch Duke, nor is there in
Baron Lettenhove's text. The remark has crept in from an earlier letter
of de Quadra, of August 4, 1560.** But neither is there anything about
'promising an answer by the third instant,' as in the Calendar; and
there is nothing at all about 'the third instant,' or (as in Mr. Froude)
'the third of this month.'


     *No. 2, April 1886, pp. 235-259.

     **Spanish Calendar, i. pp. 171-174.

The Queen's character has thus suffered, and the whole controversy
has been embroiled. In 1883, three years before the appearance of Mr.
Gairdner's article of 1886, nine years before the Calendar appeared, the
correct version of de Quadra's letter of September 11, 1560, had been
published by Baron Kervyn de Lettenhove in his 'Relations Politiques des
Pays-Bas et de l'Angleterre sous le Regne de Philippe II' (vol. ii. pp.
529, 533). In 1897, Mr. Gairdner's attention was called to the state of
affairs by the article, already cited, of Dr. Ernst Bekker. Mr. Gairdner
then translated the Belgian printed copy of de Quadra's letter, with
comments.*


     *English Historical Review, January 1898, pp. 83-90.

Matters now became clear. Mr. Froude's transcript and translation had
omitted all the first long paragraph of the letter, which proved that de
Quadra went to Windsor, to the Court, on September 6. Next, the
passage about 'the third of THIS month' really runs 'I showed her much
dissatisfaction about her marriage, in [on?] which on the third of LAST
month [August] she had told me she was already resolved and that she
assuredly meant to marry. Now she has coolly told me that she cannot
make up her mind, and that she does not intend to marry.' (Mr.
Gairdner's translation, 1898.) So the blot on the Queen's scutcheon
as to her foreknowledge and too previous announcement of Amy's death
disappears. But how did Mr. Gairdner, in 1886, using Mr. Froude's
transcript of the original Spanish, fail to see that it contained no
Arch Duke, and no 'third of the month'? Mr. Froude's transcript of the
original Spanish, but not his translation thereof, was correct.*


     *As to Verney, Appleyard, and Foster (see pages commencing:--'Here
it may be well to consider'), Cecil, in April 1566, names Foster
and Appleyard, but not Verney, among the 'particular friends' whom
Leicester, if he marries the Queen, 'will study to enhanss to welth, to
Offices, and Lands.' Bartlett, Cumnor Place, p. 73, London 1850.


2. AMY'S DEATH AND WHAT FOLLOWED


So far the case against Dudley, or servants of Dudley, has looked very
black. There are the scandals, too dark for ambassadors to write, but
mouthed aloud among the common people, about Dudley and the Queen. There
is de Quadra's talk of a purpose to poison Amy, in November-January,
1559-1560. There is the explicit statement of Cecil, as to the intended
poisoning (probably derived from Dr. Bayly), and as to Dudley's
'possession of the Queen's person,' the result of his own observation.
There is the coincidence of Amy's violent death with Cecil's words to de
Quadra (September 8 or 9, 1560).

But here the case takes a new turn. Documents appear, letters from and
to Dudley at the time of the event, which are totally inconsistent with
guilt on his part. These documents (in the Pepys MSS. at Cambridge) are
COPIES of letters between Dudley and Thomas Blount, a gentleman of good
family, whom he addresses as 'Cousin.' Blount, long after, in May 1567,
was examined on the affair before the Privy Council, and Mr. Froude very
plausibly suggests that Blount produced the copies in the course of the
inquiry. But why COPIES? We can only say that the originals may also
have been shown, and the copies made for the convenience of the members
of the Council. It is really incredible that the letters were forged,
after date, to prove Dudley's innocence.

In the usual blundering way, Mr. Pettigrew dates one letter of Dudley's
'September 27.' If that date were right, it would suggest that TWO
coroner's inquests were held, one after Amy's burial (on September 22),
but Mr. Gairdner says that the real date of the letter is September 12.*
So the date is given by Bartlett, in his 'History of Cumnor Place,' and
by Adlard (1870), following Bartlett, and Craik (1848).


     *English Historical Review, No. 2, p. 243, note.

The first letter, from Dudley, at Windsor 'this 9th day of September in
the evening,' proves that Blount, early on September 9, the day after
Amy's death, went from Leicester, at Windsor, towards Berkshire. He had
not long gone when Bowes (a retainer of Leicester, of Forster, or of
Amy) brought to Dudley the fatal news. 'By him I do understand that my
wife is dead and, as he saith, by a fall from a pair of stairs. Little
other understanding can I have from him.' Throughout the correspondence
Leicester does not utter one word of sorrow for Amy, as, had the letters
been written for exhibition, he would almost certainly have done. The
fear of his own danger and disgrace alone inspires him, and he takes
every measure to secure a full, free, and minute examination. 'Have no
respect to any living person.' A coroner's jury is to be called, the
body is to be examined; Appleyard and others of Amy's kin have already
been sent for to go to Cumnor.

From Cumnor, Blount replied on September 11. He only knew that 'my lady
is dead, and, as it seemeth, with a fall, but yet how, or which way, I
cannot learn.' Not even at Cumnor could Blount discover the manner of
the accident. On the night of the ninth he had lain at Abingdon, the
landlord of the inn could tell him no more than Dudley already knew.
Amy's servants had been at 'the fair' at Abingdon: she herself was said
to have insisted on their going thither very early in the day; among
them Bowes went, as he told Blount, who met him on the road, as he rode
to see Dudley. He said that Amy 'was very angry' with any who stayed,
and with Mrs. Oddingsell, who refused to go. Pinto (probably Amy's
maid), 'who doth love her dearly,' confirmed Bowes. She believed the
death to be 'a very accident.' She had heard Amy 'divers times pray
to God to deliver her from desperation,' but entirely disbelieved
in suicide, which no one would attempt, perhaps, by falling down two
flights of stairs.

Before Blount arrived at Cumnor on September 10, the coroner's jury
had been chosen, sensible men, but some of them hostile to Forster. By
September 12 (NOT 27) Dudley had retired from Court and was at Kew, but
had received Blount's letter. He bade Blount tell the jury to inquire
faithfully and find an honest verdict. On the thirteenth Blount again
wrote from Cumnor, meaning to join Dudley next day: 'I I have ALMOST
NOTHING that can make me so much [as?] to think that any man can be the
doer of it... the circumstances and the many things which I can learn
doth persuade me that only misfortune hath done it and nothing else.'
There is another letter by Dudley from Windsor, without date. He has had
a reassuring letter from Smythe, foreman of the jury. He wishes them to
examine 'as long as they lawfully may,' and that a fresh jury should
try the case again. He wishes Sir Richard Blount to help. Appleyard and
Arthur Robsart have been present. He means to have no more dealings with
the jury; his only 'dealings' seem to have been his repeated requests
that they would be diligent and honest. 'I am right glad they be all
strangers to me.'*


     *Pettigrew, pp. 28-32.

These letters are wholly inconsistent with guilt, in the faintest
degree, on the side of Dudley. But people were not satisfied. There is
a letter to Cecil, of September 17, from Lever, a minister at Coventry,
saying that the country was full of mutterings and dangerous suspicions,
and that there must be earnest searching and trying of the truth.*


     *Burghley Papers, Haynes, 362.

Suspicion was inevitable, but what could a jury do, more than, according
to Blount, the jury had done? Yet there is dense obscurity as to the
finding of the jury. We have seen that Appleyard, Amy's half-brother,
was at Cumnor during the inquest. Yet, in 1567, he did not know,
or pretended not to know, what the verdict had been. 'Leicester's
Commonwealth' says 'she was found murdered (as all men said) by the
crowner's inquest,' as if the verdict was not published, but was a mere
matter of rumour--'as all men said.' Appleyard's behaviour need not
detain us long, as he was such a shuffling knave that his statements, on
either side, were just what he found expedient in varying circumstances.
Dudley, after Amy's death, obtained for him various profitable billets;
in 1564 he was made keeper of the Marshalsea, had a commission under the
Great Seal to seize concealed prizes at sea without legal proceedings,
had the Portership of Berwick, and the Sheriffship of Norfolk and
Suffolk, while Leicester stood guarantor of a debt of his for 400
pounds. These facts he admitted before the Privy Council in 1567.* But
Leicester might naturally do what he could for his dead wife's brother:
we cannot argue that the jobs done for Appleyard were hush-money,
enormous as these jobs were. Yet in this light Appleyard chose to
consider them. He seems to have thought that Leicester did not treat him
well enough, and wanted to get rid of him in Ireland or France, and he
began, about 1566-67, to blab of what he could say an' he would. He 'let
fall words of anger, and said that for Dudley's sake he had covered the
murder of his sister.'


     *Rye, pp. 60-62. Hatfield MSS., Calendar, i. 345-352, May 1567.

Mr. Froude has here misconceived the situation, as Mr. Gairdner shows.
Mr. Froude's words are 'being examined by Cecil, he admitted the
investigation at Cumnor had after all been inadequately conducted.'*
In fact, Appleyard admitted that he had SAID this, and much more, in
private talk among his associates. Before the Council he subsequently
withdrew what he admitted having said in private talk. It does not
signify what he said, or what he withdrew, but Mr. Froude unluckily
did not observe a document which proved that Appleyard finally ate his
words, and he concludes that 'although Dudley was innocent of a direct
association with the crime, the unhappy lady was sacrificed to his
ambition. Dudley himself... used private means, notwithstanding his
affectation of sincerity, to prevent the search from being pressed
inconveniently far'--that is, 'if Appleyard spoke the truth.' But
Appleyard denied that he had spoken the truth, a fact overlooked by Mr.
Froude.**


     *Froude, vi. p. 430.

     **Ibid. vi. pp 430, 431.

The truth stood thus: in 1566-67 there was, or had been, some idea
that Leicester might, after all, marry the Queen. Appleyard told Thomas
Blount that he was being offered large sums by great persons to reopen
the Cumnor affair. Blount was examined by the Council, and gave
to Leicester a written account of what he told them. One Huggon,
Appleyard's 'brother,' had informed Leicester that courtiers were
practising on Appleyard, 'to search the manner of his sister's death.'
Leicester sent Blount to examine Appleyard as to who the courtiers were.
Appleyard was evasive, but at last told Blount a long tale of mysterious
attempts to seduce him into stirring up the old story. He promised to
meet Leicester, but did not: his brother, Huggon, named Norfolk, Sussex,
and others as the 'practisers.' Later, by Leicester's command, Blount
brought Appleyard to him at Greenwich. What speeches passed Blount did
not know, but Leicester was very angry, and bade Appleyard begone, 'with
great words of defiance.' It is clear that, with or without grounds,
Appleyard was trying to blackmail Leicester.

Before the Council (May 1567) Appleyard confessed that he had said to
people that he had often moved the Earl to let him pursue the murderers
of Amy, 'showing certain circumstances which led him to think surely
that she was murdered.' He had said that Leicester, on the other hand,
cited the verdict of the jury, but he himself declared that the jury, in
fact, 'had not as yet given up their verdict.' After these confessions
Appleyard lay in the Fleet prison, destitute, and scarce able to buy a
meal. On May 30, 1567, he wrote an abject letter to the Council. He had
been offered every opportunity of accusing those whom he suspected, and
he asked for 'a copy of the verdict presented by the jury, whereby I
may see what the jury have found,' after which he would take counsel's
advice. He got a copy of the verdict (?) (would that we had the copy!)
and, naturally, as he was starving, professed himself amply satisfied by
'proofs testified under the oaths of fifteen persons,' that Amy's death
was accidental. 'I have not money left to find me two meals.' In such a
posture, Appleyard would, of course, say anything to get himself out of
prison. Two days later he confessed that for three years he had been, in
fact, trying to blackmail Leicester on several counts, Amy's murder and
two political charges.*


     *See the full reports, Gairdner, English Historical Review, April
1886, 249-259, and Hatfield Calendar for the date May 1567.

The man was a rogue, however we take him, and the sole tangible fact is
that a report of the evidence given at the inquest did exist, and that
the verdict may have been 'Accidental Death.' We do not know but that
an open verdict was given. Appleyard professes to have been convinced by
the evidence, not by the verdict.

When 'Leicester's Apology' appeared (1584-85) Sir Philip Sidney,
Leicester's nephew, wrote a reply. It was easy for him to answer the
libeller's 'she was found murdered (as all men suppose) by the crowner's
inquest'--by producing the actual verdict of the jury. He did not; he
merely vapoured, and challenged the libeller to the duel.* Appleyard's
statement among his intimates, that no verdict had yet been given, seems
to point to an open verdict.


     *Sidney's reply is given in Adlard's Amye Robsart and the Earl of
Leicester. London, 1870.

The subject is alluded to by Elizabeth herself, who puts the final touch
of darkness on the mystery. Just as Archbishop Beaton, Mary's ambassador
in Paris, vainly adjured her to pursue the inquiry into Darnley's
murder, being urged by the talk in France, so Throgmorton, Elizabeth's
ambassador to the French Court, was heartbroken by what he heard.
Clearly no satisfactory verdict ever reached him. He finally sent Jones,
his secretary, with a verbal message to Elizabeth. Jones boldly put the
question of the Cumnor affair. She said that 'the matter had been tried
in the country, AND FOUND TO THE CONTRARY OF THAT WAS REPORTED.'

What 'was reported'? Clearly that Leicester and retainers of his had
been the murderers of Amy. For the Queen went on, 'Lord Robert was
in the Court, AND NONE OF HIS AT THE ATTEMPT AT HIS WIFE'S HOUSE.' So
Verney was not there. So Jones wrote to Throgmorton on November 30,
1560.* We shall return to Throgmorton.


     *Hardwicke Papers, i. 165.

If Jones correctly reported Elizabeth's words, there had been an
'attempt at' Cumnor Place, of which we hear nothing from any other
source. How black is the obscurity through which Blount, at Cumnor, two
days after Amy's death, could discern--nothing! 'A fall, yet how, or
which way, I cannot learn.' By September 17, nine days after the death,
Lever, at Coventry, an easy day's ride from Cumnor, knew nothing (as we
saw) of a verdict, or, at least, of a satisfactory verdict. It is true
that the Earl of Huntingdon, at Leicester, only heard of Amy's death
on September 17, nine days after date.* Given 'an attempt,' Amy might
perhaps break her neck down a spiral staircase, when running away in
terror. A cord stretched across the top step would have done all that
was needed.


     *Nineteenth Century, vol. ii. p. 431.  Huntingdon to Leicester,
Longleat MSS. I repose on Canon Jackson's date of the manuscript letter.

We next find confusion worse confounded, by our previous deliverer from
error, Baron Kervyn Lettenhove! What happened at Court immediately after
Amy's death? The Baron says: 'A fragment of a despatch of de la Quadra,
of the same period, reports Dudley to have said that his marriage had
been celebrated in presence of his brother, and of two of the Queen's
ladies.' For this, according to the Baron, Mr. Froude cites a letter
of the Bishop of Aquila (de Quadra) of September 11.* Mr. Froude does
nothing of the sort! He does cite 'an abstract of de Quadra's letters,
MS. Simancas,' without any date at all. 'The design of Cecil and of
those heretics to convey the kingdom to the Earl of Huntingdon is most
certain, for at last Cecil has yielded to Lord Robert, who, he says,
has married the Queen in presence of his brother and two ladies of her
bedchamber.' So Mr. Gairdner translates from Mr. Froude's transcript,
and he gives the date (November 20) which Mr. Froude does not give.
Major Hume translates, 'who, THEY say, was married.'** O History!
According to Baron Kervyn de Lettenhove, DUDLEY says he has married
the Queen; according to Mr. Gairdner, CECIL says so; according to Major
Hume, 'they' say so!***


      *Relations Politiques des Pays-Bas, etc., xlii., note 4.

     **Span. Cal. i. p. 178.

   ***The Spanish of this perplexing sentence is given by Froude, vi. p.
433, note 1. 'Cecil se ha rendido a Milord Roberto el qual dice que se
hay casado con la Reyna....'

The point is of crucial importance to Mrs. Gallup and the believers in
the cipher wherein Bacon maintains that he is the legal son of a
wedding between Dudley and the Queen. Was there such a marriage or even
betrothal? Froude cautiously says that this was averted 'SEEMINGLY on
Lord Robert's authority;' the Baron says that Lord Robert makes the
assertion; Mr. Gairdner says that Cecil is the authority, and Major
Hume declares that it is a mere on-dit--'who, they say.' It is
heart-breaking.*


     *For Mr. Gairdner, English Historical Review, No. 2, p. 246.

To deepen the darkness and distress, the official, printed, Spanish
Documentos Ineditos do not give this abstract of November 20 at all.
Major Hume translates it in full, from Mr. Froude's transcript.

Again, Mr. Froude inserts his undated quotation, really of November 20,
before he comes to tell of Amy Robsart's funeral (September 22, 1560),
and the Baron, as we saw, implies that Mr. Froude dates it September 11,
the day on which the Queen publicly announced Amy's death.

We now have an undated letter, endorsed by Cecil 'Sept. 1560,' wherein
Dudley, not at Court, and in tribulation, implores Cecil's advice and
aid. 'I am sorry so sudden a chance should breed me so great a change.'
He may have written from Kew, where Elizabeth had given him a house,
and where he was on September 12 (not 27). On October 13 (Froude), or
14 ('Documentos Ineditos,' 88, p. 310), or 15 (Spanish Calendar, i. p.
176)--for dates are strange things--de Quadra wrote a letter of which
there is only an abstract at Simancas. This abstract we quote: 'The
contents of the letter of Bishop Quadra to his Majesty written on the
15th' (though headed the 14th) 'of October, and received on the 16th of
November, 1560. It relates the way in which the wife of Lord Robert
came to her death, the respect (reverencia) paid him immediately by the
members of the Council and others, and the dissimulation of the
Queen. That he had heard that they were engaged in an affair of great
importance for the confirmation of their heresies, and wished to make
the Earl of Huntingdon king, should the Queen die without children, and
that Cecil had told him that the heritage was his as a descendant of the
House of York.... That Cecil had told him that the Queen was resolved
not to marry Lord Robert, as he had learned from herself; it seemed that
the Arch Duke might be proposed.' In mid-October, then, Elizabeth was
apparently disinclined to wed the so recently widowed Lord Robert,
though, shortly after Amy's death, the Privy Council began to court
Dudley as future king.

Mr. Froude writes--still before he comes to September 22--'the Bishop
of Aquila reported that there were anxious meetings of the Council,
the courtiers paid a partial homage to Dudley.'* This appears to be
a refraction from the abstract of the letter of October 13 or 14: 'he
relates the manner in which the wife of Lord Robert came to her death,
the respect (reverencia) paid to him immediately by members of the
Council and others.'


     *Froude, vi. p. 432.

Next we come, in Mr. Froude, to Amy's funeral (September 22), and to
Elizabeth's resolve not to marry Leicester (October 13, 14, 15?), and to
Throgmorton's interference in October-November. Throgmorton's wails over
the Queen's danger and dishonour were addressed to Cecil and the Marquis
of Northampton, from Poissy, on October 10, when he also condoled with
Dudley on the death of his wife! 'Thanks him for his present of a nag!'*
On the same date, October 10, Harry Killigrew, from London, wrote to
answer Throgmorton's inquiries about Amy's death. Certainly Throgmorton
had heard of Amy's death before October 10: he might have heard by
September 16. What he heard comforted him not. By October 10 he should
have had news of a satisfactory verdict. But Killigrew merely said
'she brake her neck... only by the hand of God, to my knowledge.'** On
October 17, Killigrew writes to Throgmorton 'rumours... have been very
rife, BUT THE QUEEN SAYS SHE WILL MAKE THEM FALSE.... Leaves to his
judgment what he will not write. Has therefore sent by Jones and
Summers' (verbally) 'what account he wished him to make of my Lord R.'
(Dudley).


     *For. Cal. Eliz., 1560, pp. 347-349.

     **Ibid., 1560, p. 350.

Then (October 28) Throgmorton tells Cecil plainly that, till he knows
what Cecil thinks, he sees no reason to advise the Queen in the matter
'of marrying Dudley.' Begs him 'TO SIGNIFY PLAINLY WHAT HAS BEEN
DONE,' and implores him, 'in the bowels of Christ '... 'to hinder that
matter.'* He writes 'with tears and sighs,' and--he declines to return
Cecil's letters on the subject. 'They be as safe in my hands as in your
own, and more safe in mine than in any messenger's.'


     *For. Cal. Eliz., 1560, p. 376.

On October 29, Throgmorton sets forth his troubles to Chamberlain.
'Chamberlain as a wise man can conceive how much it imports the Queen's
honour and her realm to have the same' (reports as to Amy's death)
'ceased.' 'He is withal brought to be weary of his life.'*


     *For. Cal. Eliz., 1560, p. 376.

On November 7, Throgmorton writes to the Marquis of Northampton and to
Lord Pembroke about 'the bruits lately risen from England... set so full
with great horror,' and never disproved, despite Throgmorton's prayers
for satisfaction.

Finally Throgmorton, as we saw, had the boldness to send his secretary,
Jones, direct to Elizabeth. All the comfort he got from her was her
statement that neither Dudley nor his retainers were at the attempt at
Cumnor Place. Francis I. died in France, people had something fresh to
talk about, and the Cumnor scandal dropped out of notice. Throgmorton,
however, persevered till, in January 1561, Cecil plainly told him to
cease to meddle. Throgmorton endorsed the letter 'A warning not to be
too busy about the matters between the Queen and Lord Robert.'*


     *For. Cal. Eliz., 1560, p. 498.

It is not necessary, perhaps, to pursue further the attempts of
Dudley to marry the Queen. On January 22 he sent to de Quadra his
brother-in-law, Sir Henry, father of Sir Philip Sidney, offering to
help to restore the Church if Philip II. would back the marriage. Sidney
professed to believe, after full inquiry, that Amy died by accident. But
he admitted 'that no one believed it;' that 'the preachers harped on it
in a manner prejudicial to the honour and service of the Queen, which
had caused her to move for the remedy of the disorders of this kingdom
in religion,' and so on.* De Quadra and the preachers had no belief in
Amy's death by accident. Nobody had, except Dudley's relations. A year
after Amy's death, on September 13, 1561, de Quadra wrote: 'The Earl of
Arundel and others are drawing up copies of the testimony given in the
inquiry respecting the death of Lord Robert's wife. Robert is now doing
his best to repair matters' (as to a quarrel with Arundel, it seems),
'as it appears that more is being discovered in that matter than he
wished.'** People were not so easily satisfied with the evidence as was
the imprisoned and starving Appleyard.


     *Documentos Ineditos, 88, p. 314; Span. Cal., i. p. 179; Froude, vi.
p. 453. The translations vary: I give my own. The Spanish has misprints.

     **Span. Cal., i. p. 213; Documentos Ineditos, 88, p. 367.

So the mystery stands. The letters of Blount and Dudley (September 9-12,
1560) entirely clear Dudley's character, and can only be got rid of on
the wild theory that they were composed, later, to that very end.
But the precise nature of the Cumnor jury's verdict is unknown, and
Elizabeth's words about 'the attempt at her house' prove that something
concealed from us did occur. It might be a mere half-sportive attempt by
rustics to enter a house known to be, at the moment, untenanted by
the servants, and may have caused to Amy an alarm, so that, rushing
downstairs in terror, she fell and broke her neck. The coincidence of
her death with the words of Cecil would thus be purely fortuitous, and
coincidences as extraordinary have occurred. Or a partisan of Dudley's,
finding poison difficult or impossible, may have, in his zeal, murdered
Amy, under the disguise of an accident. The theory of suicide would be
plausible, if it were conceivable that a person would commit suicide by
throwing herself downstairs.

We can have no certainty, but, at least, we show how Elizabeth came to
be erroneously accused of reporting Amy's death before it occurred.*


     *For a wild Italian legend of Amy's murder, written in 1577, see the
Hatfield Calendar, ii. 165-170.




VII. THE VOICES OF JEANNE D'ARC


Some of our old English historians write of Jeanne d'Arc, the Pucelle,
as 'the Puzel.' The author of the 'First Part of Henry VI.,' whether he
was Shakespeare or not, has a pun on the word:

          'Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish,'

the word 'Puzzel' carrying an unsavoury sense. (Act I. Scene 4.) A
puzzle, in the usual meaning of the word, the Maid was to the dramatist.
I shall not enter into the dispute as to whether Shakespeare was the
author, or part author, of this perplexed drama. But certainly the role
of the Pucelle is either by two different hands, or the one author was
'in two minds' about the heroine. Now she appears as la ribaulde
of Glasdale's taunt, which made her weep, as the 'bold strumpet' of
Talbot's insult in the play. The author adopts or even exaggerates the
falsehoods of Anglo-Burgundian legend. The personal purity of Jeanne
was not denied by her judges. On the other hand the dramatist makes his
'bold strumpet' a paladin of courage and a perfect patriot, reconciling
Burgundy to the national cause by a moving speech on 'the great pity
that was in France.' How could a ribaulde, a leaguer-lass, a witch,
a sacrificer of blood to devils, display the valour, the absolute
self-sacrifice, the eloquent and tender love of native land attributed
to the Pucelle of the play? Are there two authors, and is Shakespeare
one of them, with his understanding of the human heart? Or is there one
puzzled author producing an impossible and contradictory character?

The dramatist has a curious knowledge of minute points in Jeanne's
career: he knows and mocks at the sword with five crosses which she
found, apparently by clairvoyance, at Fierbois, but his history is
distorted and dislocated almost beyond recognition. Jeanne proclaims
herself to the Dauphin as the daughter of a shepherd, and as a pure
maid. Later she disclaims both her father and her maidenhood. She avers
that she was first inspired by a vision of the Virgin (which she never
did in fact), and she is haunted by 'fiends,' who represent her St.
Michael, St. Catherine, and St. Margaret. After the relief of Orleans
the Dauphin exclaims:

         'No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
          But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint,'

a prophecy which may yet be accomplished. Already accomplished is
d'Alencon's promise:

         'We'll set thy statue in some holy place.'

To the Duke of Burgundy, the Pucelle of the play speaks as the Maid
might have spoken:

         'Look on thy country, look on fertile France,
          And see the cities and the towns defaced
          By wasting ruin of the cruel foe!
          As looks the mother on her lowly babe,
          When death doth close his tender dying eyes,
          See, see, the pining malady of France;
          Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
          Which thou thyself hast given her woful breast!
          O turn thy edged sword another way;
          Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help!
          One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom
          Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore;
          Return thee, therefore, with a flood of tears,
          And wash away thy country's stained spots.'

Patriotism could find no better words, and how can the dramatist
represent the speaker as a 'strumpet' inspired by 'fiends'? To her
fiends when they desert her, the Pucelle of the play cries:

         'Cannot my body, nor blood sacrifice,
          Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
          Then take my soul; my body, soul, and all,
          Before that England give the French the foil.'

She is willing to give body and soul for France, and this, in the eyes
of the dramatist, appears to be her crime. For a French girl to bear
a French heart is to stamp her as the tool of devils. It is an odd
theology, and not in the spirit of Shakespeare. Indeed the Pucelle,
while disowning her father and her maidenhood, again speaks to the
English as Jeanne might have spoken:

         'I never had to do with wicked spirits:
          But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
          Stained with the guiltless blood of innocents,
          Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
          Because you want the grace that others have,
          You judge it straight a thing impossible
          To compass wonders but by help of devils.
          No, misconceiv'd!  Joan of Arc hath been
          A virgin from her tender infancy,
          Chaste and immaculate in very thought;
          Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effus'd,
          Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.'

The vengeance was not long delayed. 'The French and my countrymen,'
writes Patrick Abercromby, 'drove the English from province to province,
and from town to town' of France, while on England fell the Wars of the
Roses. But how can the dramatist make the dealer with fiends speak as
the Maid, in effect, did speak at her trial? He adds the most ribald of
insults; the Pucelle exclaiming:

         'It was Alencon that enjoyed my love!'

The author of the play thus speaks with two voices: in one Jeanne acts
and talks as she might have done (had she been given to oratory); in the
other she is the termagant of Anglo-Burgundian legend or myth.

Much of this perplexity still haunts the histories of the Maid. Her
courage, purity, patriotism, and clear-sighted military and political
common-sense; the marvellous wisdom of her replies to her judges--as of
her own St. Catherine before the fifty philosophers of her legend--are
universally acknowledged. This girl of seventeen, in fact, alone of the
French folk, understood the political and military situation. To restore
the confidence of France it was necessary that the Dauphin should
penetrate the English lines to Rheims, and there be crowned. She broke
the lines, she led him to Rheims, and crowned him. England was besieging
his last hold in the north and centre, Orleans, on a military policy
of pure 'bluff.' The city was at no time really invested. The besieging
force, as English official documents prove, was utterly inadequate to
its task, except so far as prestige and confidence gave power. Jeanne
simply destroyed and reversed the prestige, and, after a brilliant
campaign on the Loire, opened the way to Rheims. The next step was
to take Paris, and Paris she certainly would have taken, but the long
delays of politicians enabled Beaufort to secure peace with Scotland,
under James I., and to throw into Paris the English troops collected for
a crusade against the Hussites.* The Maid, unsupported, if not actually
betrayed, failed and was wounded before Paris, and prestige returned
for a while to the English party. She won minor victories, was taken at
Compiegne (May 1430), and a year later crowned her career by martyrdom.
But she had turned the tide, and within the six years of her prophecy
Paris returned to the national cause. The English lost, in losing Paris,
'a greater gage than Orleans.'


     *The Scottish immobility was secured in May-June 1429, the months of
the Maid's Loire campaign. Exchequer Rolls, iv. ciii. 466. Bain,
Calendar, iv. 212, Foedera, x. 428,1704-1717.

So much is universally acknowledged, but how did the Maid accomplish
her marvels? Brave as she certainly was, wise as she certainly was,
beautiful as she is said to have been, she would neither have risked her
unparalleled adventure, nor been followed, but for her strange visions
and 'voices.' She left her village and began her mission, as she said,
in contradiction to the strong common-sense of her normal character. She
resisted for long the advice that came to her in the apparent shape of
audible external voices and external visions of saint and angel. By a
statement of actual facts which she could not possibly have learned in
any normal way, she overcame, it is said, the resistance of the Governor
of Vaucouleurs, and obtained an escort to convey her to the King at
Chinon.* She conquered the doubts of the Dauphin by a similar display of
supernormal knowledge. She satisfied, at Poictiers, the divines of the
national party after a prolonged examination, of which the record, 'The
Book of Poictiers,' has disappeared. In these ways she inspired the
confidence which, in the real feebleness of the invading army, was
all that was needed to ensure the relief of Orleans, while, as Dunois
attested, she shook the confidence which was the strength of England.
About these facts the historical evidence is as good as for any other
events of the war.


     *Refer to paragraph commencing "The 'Journal du Siege d'Orleans'"
infra.

The essence, then, of the marvels wrought by Jeanne d'Arc lay in what
she called her 'Voices,' the mysterious monitions, to her audible, and
associated with visions of the heavenly speakers. Brave, pure, wise, and
probably beautiful as she was, the King of France would not have trusted
a peasant lass, and men disheartened by frequent disaster would not have
followed her, but for her voices.

The science or theology of the age had three possible ways of explaining
these experiences:

1. The Maid actually was inspired by Michael, Margaret, and Catherine.
From them she learned secrets of the future, of words unspoken save
in the King's private prayer, and of events distant in space, like the
defeat of the French and Scots at Rouvray, which she announced, on the
day of the occurrence, to Baudricourt, hundreds of leagues away, at
Vaucouleurs.

2. The monitions came from 'fiends.' This was the view of the
prosecutors in general at her trial, and of the author of 'Henry VI.,
Part I.'

3. One of her judges, Beaupere, was a man of some courage and
consistency. He maintained, at the trial of Rouen, and at the trial of
Rehabilitation (1452-1456), that the voices were mere illusions of a
girl who fasted much. In her fasts she would construe natural sounds, as
of church bells, or perhaps of the wind among woods, into audible words,
as Red Indian seers do to this day.

This third solution must and does neglect, or explain by chance
occurrence, or deny, the coincidences between facts not normally
knowable, and the monitions of the Voices, accepted as genuine, though
inexplicable, by M. Quicherat, the great palaeographer and historian
of Jeanne.* He by no means held a brief for the Church; Father Ayroles
continually quarrels with Quicherat, as a Freethinker. He certainly was
a free thinker in the sense that he was the first historian who did
not accept the theory of direct inspiration by saints (still less by
fiends), and yet took liberty to admit that the Maid possessed knowledge
not normally acquired. Other 'freethinking' sympathisers with the
heroine have shuffled, have skated adroitly past and round the facts, as
Father Ayroles amusingly demonstrates in his many passages of arms with
Michelet, Simeon Luce, Henri Martin, Fabre, and his other opponents.
M. Quicherat merely says that, if we are not to accept the marvels as
genuine, we must abandon the whole of the rest of the evidence as to
Jeanne d'Arc, and there he leaves the matter.


     *Quicherat's five volumes of documents, the Proces, is now
accessible, as far as records of the two trials go, in the English
version edited by Mr. Douglas Murray.

Can we not carry the question further? Has the psychological research
of the last half-century added nothing to our means of dealing with the
problem? Negatively, at least, something is gained. Science no longer
avers, with M. Lelut in his book on the Daemon of Socrates, that every
one who has experience of hallucinations, of impressions of the senses
not produced by objective causes, is mad. It is admitted that sane and
healthy persons may have hallucinations of lights, of voices, of visual
appearances. The researches of Mr. Galton, of M. Richet, of Brierre
du Boismont, of Mr. Gurney, and an army of other psychologists, have
secured this position.

Maniacs have hallucinations, especially of voices, but all who have
hallucinations are not maniacs. Jeanne d'Arc, so subject to 'airy
tongues,' was beyond all doubt a girl of extraordinary physical strength
and endurance, of the highest natural lucidity and common-sense, and
of health which neither wounds, nor fatigue, nor cruel treatment, could
seriously impair. Wounded again and again, she continued to animate the
troops by her voice, and was in arms undaunted next day. Her leap of
sixty feet from the battlements of Beaurevoir stunned but did not long
incapacitate her. Hunger, bonds, and the protracted weariness of months
of cross-examination produced an illness but left her intellect as keen,
her courage as unabated, her humour as vivacious, her memory as minutely
accurate as ever. There never was a more sane and healthy human being.
We never hear that, in the moments of her strange experiences, she was
'entranced,' or even dissociated from the actual occurrences of the
hour. She heard her voices, though not distinctly, in the uproar of
the brawling court which tried her at Rouen; she saw her visions in the
imminent deadly breach, when she rallied her men to victory. In this
alertness she is a contrast to a modern seeress, subject, like her,
to monitions of an hallucinatory kind, but subject during intervals of
somnambulisme. To her case, which has been carefully, humorously, and
sceptically studied, we shall return.

Meantime let us take voices and visions on the lowest, most prevalent,
and least startling level. A large proportion of people, including the
writer, are familiar with the momentary visions beheld with shut eyes
between waking and sleeping (illusions hypnagogiques). The waking self
is alert enough to contemplate these processions of figures and
faces, these landscapes too, which (in my own case) it is incapable of
purposefully calling up.

Thus, in a form of experience which is almost as common as ordinary
dreaming, we see that the semi-somnolent self possesses a faculty not
always given to the waking self. Compared with my own waking self, for
instance, my half-asleep self is almost a personality of genius. He can
create visions that the waking self can remember, but cannot originate,
and cannot trace to any memory of waking impressions. These apparently
trivial things thus point to the existence of almost wholly submerged
potentialities in a mind so everyday, commonplace, and, so to speak,
superficial as mine. This fact suggests that people who own such minds,
the vast majority of mankind, ought not to make themselves the measure
of the potentialities of minds of a rarer class, say that of Jeanne
d'Arc. The secret of natures like hers cannot be discovered, so long as
scientific men incapable even of ordinary 'visualising' (as Mr. Galton
found) make themselves the canon or measure of human nature.

Let us, for the sake of argument, suppose that some sane persons are
capable of hallucinatory impressions akin to but less transient than
illusions hypnagogiques, when, as far as they or others can perceive,
they are wide awake. Of such sane persons Goethe and Herschel were
examples. In this way we can most easily envisage, or make thinkable
by ourselves, the nature of the experiences of Jeanne d'Arc and other
seers.

In the other state of semi-somnolence, while still alert enough to watch
and reason on the phenomena, we occasionally, though less commonly, hear
what may be called 'inner voices.' That is to say, we do not suppose
that any one from without is speaking to us, but we hear, as it were, a
voice within us making some remark, usually disjointed enough, and not
suggested by any traceable train of thought of which we are conscious at
the time. This experience partly enables us to understand the cases of
sane persons who, when to all appearance wide awake, occasionally hear
voices which appear to be objective and caused by actual vibrations of
the atmosphere. I am acquainted with at least four persons, all of them
healthy, and normal enough, who have had such experiences. In all four
cases, the apparent voice (though the listeners have no superstitious
belief on the subject) has communicated intelligence which proved to
be correct. But in only one instance, I think, was the information
thus communicated beyond the reach of conjecture, based perhaps on some
observation unconsciously made or so little attended to when made that
it could not be recalled by the ordinary memory.

We are to suppose, then, that in such cases the person concerned being
to all appearance fully awake, his or her mind has presented a thought,
not as a thought, but in the shape of words that seemed to be externally
audible. One hearer, in fact, at the moment wondered that the apparent
speaker indicated by the voice and words should be shouting so loud in
an hotel. The apparent speaker was actually not in the hotel, but at
a considerable distance, well out of earshot, and, though in a nervous
crisis, was not shouting at all. We know that, between sleeping and
waking, our minds can present to us a thought in the apparent form of
articulate words, internally audible. The hearers, when fully awake,
of words that seem to be externally audible, probably do but carry the
semi-vigilant experience to a higher degree, as do the beholders of
visual hallucinations, when wide awake. In this way, at least, we can
most nearly attain to understanding their experiences. To a relatively
small proportion of people, in wakeful existence, experiences occur
with distinctness, which to a large proportion of persons occur but
indistinctly,

          'On the margin grey
           'Twixt the soul's night and day.'

Let us put it, then, that Jeanne d'Arc's was an advanced case of the
mental and bodily constitution exemplified by the relatively small
proportion of people, the sane seers of visual hallucinations and
hearers of unreal voices. Her thoughts--let us say the thoughts of
the deepest region of her being--presented themselves in visual forms,
taking the shapes of favourite saints--familiar to her in works of
sacred art--attended by an hallucinatory brightness of light ('a
photism'), and apparently uttering words of advice which was in conflict
with Jeanne's great natural shrewdness and strong sense of duty to
her parents. 'She MUST go into France,' and for two or three years she
pleaded her ignorance and incompetence. She declined to go. She COULD
resist her voices. In prison at Beaurevoir, they forbade her to leap
from the tower. But her natural impatience and hopefulness prevailed,
and she leaped. 'I would rather trust my soul to God than my body to the
English.' This she confessed to as sinful, though not, she hoped, of
the nature of deadly sin. Her inmost and her superficial nature were in
conflict.

It is now desirable to give, as briefly as possible, Jeanne's own
account of the nature of her experiences, as recorded in the book of her
trial at Rouen, with other secondhand accounts, offered on oath, at
her trial of Rehabilitation, by witnesses to whom she had spoken on the
subject. She was always reticent on the theme.

The period when Jeanne supposed herself to see her first visions was
physiologically critical. She was either between thirteen and fourteen,
or between twelve and thirteen. M. Simeon Luce, in his 'Jeanne d'Arc
a Domremy,' held that she was of the more advanced age, and his date
(1425) fitted in with some public events, which, in his opinion, were
probably the occasions of the experiences. Pere Ayroles prefers the
earlier period (1424) when the aforesaid public events had not yet
occurred. After examining the evidence on both sides, I am disposed to
think, or rather I am certain, that Pere Ayroles is in the right. In
either case Jeanne was at a critical age, when, as I understand, female
children are occasionally subject to illusions. Speaking then as a
non-scientific student, I submit that on the side of ordinary causes for
the visions and voices we have:

1. The period in Jeanne's life when they began.

2. Her habits of fasting and prayer.

3. Her intense patriotic enthusiasm, which may, for all that we know,
have been her mood before the voices announced to her the mission.

Let us then examine the evidence as to the origin and nature of the
alleged phenomena.

I shall begin with the letter of the Senechal de Berry, Perceval de
Boulainvilliers, to the Duke of Milan.* The date is June 21st, 1429, six
weeks after the relief of Orleans. After a few such tales as that the
cocks crowed when Jeanne was born, and that her flock was lucky, he
dates her first vision peractis aetatis suae duodecim annis, 'after she
was twelve.' Briefly, the tale is that, in a rustic race for flowers,
one of the other children cried, 'Joanna, video te volantem juxta
terrain,' 'Joan, I see you flying near the ground.' This is the one
solitary hint of 'levitation' (so common in hagiology and witchcraft)
which occurs in the career of the Maid. This kind of story is so
persistent that I knew it must have been told in connection with the
Irvingite movement in Scotland. And it was! There is, perhaps, just one
trace that flying was believed to be an accomplishment of Jeanne's. When
Frere Richard came to her at Troyes, he made, she says, the sign of the
cross.** She answered, 'Approchez hardiment, je ne m'envouleray pas.'
Now the contemporary St. Colette was not infrequently 'levitated'!


     *Proces, v. 115.

     **Proces, i. 100.

To return to the Voices. After her race, Jeanne was quasi rapta et a
sensibus alienata ('dissociated'), then juxta eam affuit juvenis quidam,
a youth stood by her who bade her 'go home, for her mother needed her.'

'Thinking that it was her brother or a neighbour' (apparently she only
heard the voice, and did not see the speaker), she hurried home, and
found that she had not been sent for. Next, as she was on the point of
returning to her friends, 'a very bright cloud appeared to her, and out
of the cloud came a voice,' bidding her take up her mission. She was
merely puzzled, but the experiences were often renewed. This letter,
being contemporary, represents current belief, based either on Jeanne's
own statements before the clergy at Poictiers (April 1429) or on the
gossip of Domremy. It should be observed that till Jeanne told her own
tale at Rouen (1431) we hear not one word about saints or angels. She
merely spoke of 'my voices,' 'my counsel,' 'my Master.' If she was
more explicit at Poictiers, her confessions did not find their way into
surviving letters and journals, not even into the journal of the hostile
Bourgeois de Paris. We may glance at examples.

The 'Journal du Siege d'Orleans' is in parts a late document, in
parts 'evidently copied from a journal kept in presence of the actual
events.'* The 'Journal,' in February 1429, vaguely says that, 'about
this time' our Lord used to appear to a maid, as she was guarding her
flock, or 'cousant et filant.' A St. Victor MS. has courant et saillant
(running and jumping), which curiously agrees with Boulainvilliers. The
'Journal,' after telling of the Battle of the Herrings (February 12th,
1429), in which the Scots and French were cut up in an attack on an
English convoy, declares that Jeanne 'knew of it by grace divine,'
and that her vue a distance induced Baudricourt to send her to the
Dauphin.** This was attested by Baudricourt's letters.***


      *Quicherat. In Proces, iv. 95.

     **Proces, iv. 125.

    ***Proces, iv. 125.

All this may have been written as late as 1468, but a vague reference to
an apparition of our Lord rather suggests contemporary hearsay, before
Jeanne came to Orleans. Jeanne never claimed any such visions of our
Lord. The story of the clairvoyance as to the Battle of the Herrings is
also given in the 'Chronique de la Pucelle.'* M. Quicherat thinks that
the passage is amplified from the 'Journal du Siege.' On the other hand,
M. Vallet (de Viriville) attributes with assurance the 'Chronique de la
Pucelle' to Cousinot de Montreuil, who was the Dauphin's secretary at
Poictiers, when the Maid was examined there in April 1429.** If Cousinot
was the author, he certainly did not write his chronicle till long after
date. However, he avers that the story of clairvoyance was current in
the spring of 1429. The dates exactly harmonise; that is to say, between
the day of the battle, February 12th, and the setting forth of the Maid
from Vaucouleurs, there is just time for the bad news from Rouvray to
arrive, confirming her statement, and for a day or two of preparation.
But perhaps, after the arrival of the bad news, Baudricourt may have
sent Jeanne to the King in a kind of despair. Things could not be worse.
If she could do no good, she could do no harm.


     *Proces, iv. 206.

     **Histoire de Charles VII., ii. 62.

The documents, whether contemporary or written later by contemporaries,
contain none of the references to visions of St. Margaret, St.
Catherine, and St. Michael, which we find in Jeanne's own replies at
Rouen. For this omission it is not easy to account, even if we suppose
that, except when giving evidence on oath, the Maid was extremely
reticent. That she was reticent, we shall prove from evidence of d'Aulon
and Dunois. Turning to the Maid's own evidence in court (1431) we must
remember that she was most averse to speaking at all, that she often
asked leave to wait for advice and permission from her voices before
replying, that on one point she constantly declared that, if compelled
to speak, she would not speak the truth. This point was the King's
secret. There is absolutely contemporary evidence, from Alain Chartier,
that, before she was accepted, she told Charles SOMETHING which filled
him with surprise, joy, and belief.* The secret was connected with
Charles's doubts of his own legitimacy, and Jeanne at her trial was
driven to obscure the truth in a mist of allegory, as, indeed, she
confessed. Jeanne's extreme reluctance to adopt even this loyal and
laudable evasion is the measure of her truthfulness in general. Still,
she did say some words which, as they stand, it is difficult to believe,
to explain, or to account for. From any other prisoner, so unjustly
menaced with a doom so dreadful, from Mary Stuart, for example, at
Fotheringay, we do not expect the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
The Maid is a witness of another kind, and where we cannot understand
her, we must say, like herself, passez outre!


     *Proces, v. 131. Letter of July 1429.  See supra, 'The False
Pucelle.'

When she was 'about thirteen,' this is her own account, she had a voice
from God, to aid her in governing herself. 'And the first time she was
in great fear. And it came, that voice, about noonday, in summer, in her
father's garden' (where other girls of old France hear the birds sing,
'Marry, maidens, marry!') 'and Jeanne had NOT fasted on the day before.*
She heard the voice from the right side, towards the church, and seldom
heard it without seeing a bright light. The light was not in front,
but at the side whence the voice came. If she were in a wood' (as
distinguished from the noise of the crowded and tumultuous court) 'she
could well hear the voices coming to her.' Asked what sign for her
soul's health the voice gave, she said it bade her behave well, and go
to church, and used to tell her to go into France on her mission. (I do
not know why the advice about going to church is generally said to have
been given FIRST.) Jeanne kept objecting that she was a poor girl who
could not ride, or lead in war. She resisted the voice with all her
energy. She asserted that she knew the Dauphin, on their first meeting,
by aid of her voices.** She declared that the Dauphin himself 'multas
habuit revelationes et apparitiones pulchras.' In its literal sense,
there is no evidence for this, but rather the reverse. She may mean
'revelations' through herself, or may refer to some circumstance
unknown. 'Those of my party saw and knew that voice,' she said, but
later would only accept them as witnesses if they were allowed to come
and see her.***


     *The reading is NEC not ET, as in Quicherat, Proces, i. 52, compare
i. 216.

    **Proces, i. 56.

   ***Proces, i. 57.

This is the most puzzling point in Jeanne's confession. She had no
motive for telling an untruth, unless she hoped that these remarks would
establish the objectivity of her visions. Of course, one of her strange
experiences may have occurred in the presence of Charles and his court,
and she may have believed that they shared in it. The point is one which
French writers appear to avoid as a rule.

She said that she heard the voice daily in prison, 'and stood in sore
need of it.' The voice bade her remain at St. Denis (after the repulse
from Paris in September 1429), but she was not allowed to remain.

On the next day (the third of the trial) she told Beaupere that she was
fasting since yesterday afternoon. Beaupere, as we saw, conceived that
her experiences were mere subjective hallucinations, caused by fasting,
by the sound of church-bells, and so on. As to the noise of bells,
Coleridge writes that their music fell on his ears, 'MOST LIKE
ARTICULATE SOUNDS OF THINGS TO COME.' Beaupere's sober common-sense did
not avail to help the Maid, but at the Rehabilitation (1456) he still
maintained his old opinion. 'Yesterday she had heard the voices in the
morning, at vespers, and at the late ringing for Ave Maria, and she
heard them much more frequently than she mentioned.' 'Yesterday she
had been asleep when the voice aroused her. She sat up and clasped her
hands, and the voice bade her answer boldly. Other words she half heard
before she was quite awake, but failed to understand.'*


     *Proces, i. 62.

She denied that the voices ever contradicted themselves. On this
occasion, as not having received leave from her voices, she refused to
say anything as to her visions.

At the next meeting she admitted having heard the voices in court, but
in court she could not distinguish the words, owing to the tumult. She
had now, however, leave to speak more fully. The voices were those of
St. Catherine and St. Margaret. Later she was asked if St. Margaret
'spoke English.' Apparently the querist thought that the English
Margaret, wife of Malcolm of Scotland, was intended. They were crowned
with fair crowns, as she had said at Poictiers two years before. She
now appealed to the record of her examination there, but it was not in
court, nor was it used in the trial of Rehabilitation. It has never been
recovered. A witness who had examined her at Poictiers threw no light
(twenty years later) on the saints and voices. Seven years ago (that
is, when she was twelve) she first saw the saints. On the attire of the
saints she had not leave to speak. They were preceded by St. Michael
'with the angels of heaven.' 'I saw them as clearly as I see you, and
I used to weep when they departed, and would fain that they should have
taken me with them.'

As to the famous sword at Fierbois, she averred that she had been in the
church there, on her way to Chinon, that the voices later bade her use
a sword which was hidden under earth--she thinks behind, but possibly
in front of the altar--at Fierbois. A man unknown to her was sent from
Tours to fetch the sword, which after search was found, and she wore it.

Asked whether she had prophesied her wound by an arrow at Orleans, and
her recovery, she said 'Yes.'

This prediction is singular in that it was recorded before the event.
The record was copied into the registre of Brabant, from a letter
written on April 22nd, 1429, by a Flemish diplomatist, De Rotselaer,
then at Lyons.* De Rotselaer had the prophecy from an officer of the
court of the Dauphin. The prediction was thus noted on April 22nd; the
event, the arrow-wound in the shoulder, occurred on May 7th. On the
fifth day of the trial Jeanne announced that, before seven years were
gone, the English 'shall lose a dearer gage than Orleans; this I know by
revelation, and am wroth that it is to be so long deferred.' Mr. Myers
observes that 'the prediction of a great victory over the English within
seven years was not fulfilled in any exact way.' The words of the Maid
are 'Angli demittent majus vadium quam fecerunt coram Aurelianis,' and,
as prophecies go, their loss of Paris (1436) corresponds very well to
the Maid's announcement. She went on, indeed, to say that the English
'will have greater loss than ever they had, through a great French
victory,' but this reads like a gloss on her original prediction. 'She
knew it as well as that we were there.'** 'You shall not have the exact
year, but well I wish it might be before the St. John;' however, she had
already expressed her sorrow that this was NOT to be. Asked, on March
1st, whether her liberation was promised, she said, 'Ask me in three
months, and I will tell you.' In three months exactly, her stainless
soul was free.


     *Proces, iv. 425.

     **Proces, i. 84.

On the appearance, garb, and so on of her saints, she declined to answer
questions.

She had once disobeyed her voices, when they forbade her to leap from
the tower of Beaurevoir. She leaped, but they forgave her, and told
her that Compiegne (where she was captured on May 23rd, 1430) would be
relieved 'before Martinmas.' It was relieved on October 26th, after a
siege of five months. On March 10th an effort was made to prove that
her voices had lied to her, and that she had lied about her voices.
The enemy maintained that on May 23rd, 1430, she announced a promised
victory to the people of Compiegne, vowing that St. Margaret and St.
Catherine had revealed it to her. Two hostile priests of Compiegne
were at Rouen, and may have carried this tale, which is reported by
two Burgundian chroniclers, but NOT by Monstrelet, who was with the
besieging army.* In court she said n'eust autre commandement de yssir:
she had no command from her voices to make her fatal sally. She was not
asked whether she had pretended to have received such an order. She
told the touching story of how, at Melun, in April 1430, the voices had
warned her that she would be taken prisoner before midsummer; how she
had prayed for death, or for tidings as to the day and hour. But no
tidings were given to her, and her old belief, often expressed, that
she 'should last but one year or little more,' was confirmed. The Duc
d'Alencon had heard her say this several times; for the prophecy at
Melun we have only her own word.


     *I have examined the evidence in Macmillan's Magazine for May 1894,
and, to myself, it seems inadequate.

She was now led into the allegory intended to veil the King's secret,
the allegory about the Angel (herself) and the Crown (the coronation at
Rheims). This allegory was fatal, but does not bear on her real belief
about her experiences. She averred, returning to genuine confessions,
that her voices often came spontaneously; if they did not, she summoned
them by a simple prayer to God. She had seen the angelic figures moving,
invisible save to her, among men. The voices HAD promised her the
release of Charles d'Orleans, but time had failed her. This was as near
a confession of failure as she ever made, till the day of her burning,
if she really made one then.* But here, as always, she had predicted
that she would do this or that if she were sans empeschement. She had no
revelation bidding her attack Paris when she did, and after the day
at Melun she submitted to the advice of the other captains. As to her
release, she was only bidden 'to bear all cheerfully; be not vexed
with thy martyrdom, thence shalt thou come at last into the kingdom of
Paradise.'


     *As to her 'abjuration' and alleged doubts, see L'Abjuration du
Cimetiere Saint-Ouen, by Abbe Ph. H. Dunard; Poussielgue, Paris, 1901.

To us, this is explicit enough, but the poor child explained to her
judges that by martire she understood the pains of prison, and she
referred it to her Lord, whether there were more to bear. In this
passage the original French exists, as well as the Latin translation.
The French is better.

'Ne te chaille de ton martire, tu t'en vendras enfin en royaulme de
Paradis.'

'Non cures de martyrio tuo: tu venies finaliter in regnum paradisi.'

The word hinc is omitted in the bad Latin. Unluckily we have only a
fragment of the original French, as taken down in court. The Latin
version, by Courcelles, one of the prosecutors, is in places inaccurate,
in others is actually garbled to the disadvantage of the Maid.

This passage, with some others, may perhaps be regarded as indicating
that the contents of the communications received by Jeanne were not
always intelligible to her.

That her saints could be, and were, touched physically by her, she
admitted.* Here I am inclined to think that she had touched with her
ring (as the custom was) a RELIC of St. Catherine at Fierbois. Such
relics, brought from the monastery of Sinai, lay at Fierbois, and we
know that women loved to rub their rings on the ring of Jeanne, in
spite of her laughing remonstrances. But apart from this conjecture,
she regarded her saints as tangible by her. She had embraced both St.
Margaret and St. Catherine.**


     *Proces, i. 185.

     **Proces, i. 186.

For the rest, Jeanne recanted her so-called recantation, averring that
she was unaware of the contents or full significance of the document,
which certainly is not the very brief writing to which she set her mark.
Her voices recalled her to her duty, for them she went to the stake, and
if there was a moment of wavering on the day of her doom, her belief in
the objective reality of the phenomena remained firm, and she recovered
her faith in the agony of her death.

Of EXTERNAL evidence as to her accounts of these experiences, the best
is probably that of d'Aulon, the maitre d'Hotel of the Maid, and her
companion through her career. He and she were reposing in the same room
at Orleans, her hostess being in the chamber (May 1429), and d'Aulon had
just fallen asleep, when the Maid awoke him with a cry. Her voices bade
her go against the English, but in what direction she knew not. In fact,
the French leaders had begun, without her knowledge, an attack on
St. Loup, whither she galloped and took the fort.* It is, of course,
conceivable that the din of onset, which presently became audible,
had vaguely reached the senses of the sleeping Maid. Her page confirms
d'Aulon's testimony.


     *Proces, iii. 212.

D'Aulon states that when the Maid had any martial adventure in prospect,
she told him that her 'counsel' had given her this or that advice. He
questioned her as to the nature of this 'counsel.' She said 'she had
three councillors, of whom one was always with her, a second went and
came to her, and the third was he with whom the others deliberated.'
D'Aulon 'was not worthy to see this counsel.' From the moment when
he heard this, d'Aulon asked no more questions. Dunois also gave some
evidence as to the 'counsel.' At Loches, when Jeanne was urging the
journey to Rheims, Harcourt asked her, before the King, what the nature
(modus) of the council was; HOW it communicated with her. She replied
that when she was met with incredulity, she went apart and prayed to
God. Then she heard a voice say, Fille De, va, va, va, je serai a ton
aide, va! 'And when she heard that voice she was right glad, and
would fain be ever in that state.' 'As she spoke thus, ipsa miro modo
exsultabat, levando suos oculos ad coelum.'* (She seemed wondrous glad,
raising her eyes to heaven.) Finally, that Jeanne maintained her belief
to the moment of her death, we learn from the priest, Martin Ladvenu,
who was with her to the last.** There is no sign anywhere that at
the moment of an 'experience' the Maid's aspect seemed that of one
'dissociated,' or uncanny, or abnormal, in the eyes of those who were in
her company.


     *Proces, iii. 12.

     **Proces, iii. 170.

These depositions were given twenty years later (1452-56), and, of
course, allowance must be made for weakness of memory and desire to
glorify the Maid. But there is really nothing of a suspicious character
about them. In fact, the 'growth of legend' was very slight, and is
mainly confined to the events of the martyrdom, the White Dove, the name
of Christ blazoned in flame, and so forth.* It should also have been
mentioned that at the taking of St. Pierre de Moustier (November 1429)
Jeanne, when deserted by her forces, declared to d'Aulon that she
was 'not alone, but surrounded by fifty thousand of her own.' The men
therefore rallied and stormed the place.

This is the sum of the external evidence as to the phenomena.


     *For German fables see Lefevre-Pontalis, Les Sources Allemandes,
Paris, 1903. They are scanty, and, in some cases, are distortions of
real events.

As to the contents of the communications to Jeanne, they were certainly
sane, judicious, and heroic. M. Quicherat (Apercus Nouveaux, p. 61)
distinguishes three classes of abnormally conveyed knowledge, all on
unimpeachable evidence.

(1.) THOUGHT-READING, as in the case of the King's secret; she repeated
to him the words of a prayer which he had made mentally in his oratory.

(2.) CLAIRVOYANCE, as exhibited in the affair of the sword of Fierbois.

(3.) PRESCIENCE, as in the prophecy of her arrow-wound at Orleans.
According to her confessor, Pasquerel, she repeated the prophecy and
indicated the spot in which she would be wounded (under the right
shoulder) on the night of May 6. But this is later evidence given in the
trial of Rehabilitation. Neither Pasquerel nor any other of the Maid's
party was heard at the trial of 1431.

To these we might add the view, from Vaucouleurs, a hundred leagues
away, of the defeat at Rouvray; the prophecy that she 'would last but
a year or little more;' the prophecy, at Melun, of her capture; the
prophecy of the relief of Compiegne; and the strange affair of the bon
conduit at the battle of Pathay.* For several of these predictions we
have only the Maid's word, but to be plain, we can scarcely have more
unimpeachable testimony.


     *Proces, iv. 371, 372.  Here the authority is Monstrelet, a
Burgundian.

Here the compiler leaves his task: the inferences may be drawn by
experts. The old theory of imposture, the Voltairean theory of a 'poor
idiot,' the vague charge of 'hysteria,' are untenable. The honesty and
the genius of Jeanne are no longer denied. If hysteria be named, it
is plain that we must argue that, because hysteria is accompanied by
visionary symptoms, all visions are proofs of hysteria. Michelet holds
by hallucinations which were unconsciously externalised by the mind
of Jeanne. That mind must have been a very peculiar intellect, and the
modus is precisely the difficulty. Henri Martin believes in some kind of
manifestation revealed to the individual mind by the Absolute: perhaps
this word is here equivalent to 'the subliminal self' of Mr. Myers. Many
Catholics, as yet unauthorised, I conceive, by the Church, accept the
theory of Jeanne herself; her saints were true saints from Paradise.
On the other hand it is manifest that visions of a bright light and
'auditions' of voices are common enough phenomena in madness, and in the
experiences of very uninspired sane men and women. From the sensations
of these people Jeanne's phenomena are only differentiated by their
number, by their persistence through seven years of an almost abnormally
healthy life, by their importance, orderliness, and veracity, as well as
by their heroic character.

Mr. Myers has justly compared the case of Jeanne with that of Socrates.
A much humbler parallel, curiously close in one respect, may be cited
from M. Janet's article, 'Les Actes Inconscients dans le Somnambulisme'
('Revue Philosophique,' March 1888).

The case is that of Madame B., a peasant woman near Cherbourg. She has
her common work-a-day personality, called, for convenience, 'Leonie.'
There is also her hypnotic personality, 'Leontine.' Now Leontine (that
is, Madame B. in a somnambulistic state) was one day hysterical and
troublesome. Suddenly she exclaimed in terror that she heard A VOICE ON
THE LEFT, crying, 'Enough, be quiet, you are a nuisance.' She hunted in
vain for the speaker, who, of course, was inaudible to M. Janet, though
he was present. This sagacious speaker (a faculty of Madame B.'s own
nature) is 'brought out' by repeated passes, and when this moral and
sensible phase of her character is thus evoked, Madame B. is 'Leonore.'
Madame B. now sometimes assumes an expression of beatitude, smiling and
looking upwards. As Dunois said of Jeanne when she was recalling her
visions, 'miro modo exsultabat, levando suos oculos ad coelum.' This
ecstasy Madame B. (as Leonie) dimly remembers, averring that 'she has
been dazzled BY A LIGHT ON THE LEFT SIDE.' Here apparently we have the
best aspect of poor Madame B. revealing itself in a mixture of hysterics
and hypnotism, and associating itself with an audible sagacious voice
and a dazzling light on the left, both hallucinatory.

The coincidence (not observed by M. Janet) with Jeanne's earliest
experience is most curious. Audivit vocem a dextero latere.... claritas
est ab eodem latere in quo vox auditur, sed ibi communiter est magna
claritas. (She heard a voice from the right. There is usually a bright
light on the same side as the voice.) Like Madame B., Jeanne was at
first alarmed by these sensations.

The parallel, so far, is perfectly complete (except that 'Leonore'
merely talks common sense, while Jeanne's voices gave information
not normally acquired). But in Jeanne's case I have found no hint of
temporary unconsciousness or 'dissociation.' When strung up to the most
intense mental eagerness in court, she still heard her voices, though,
because of the tumult of the assembly, she heard them indistinctly.
Thus her experiences are not associated with insanity, partial
unconsciousness, or any physical disturbance (as in some tales of second
sight), while the sagacity of the communications and their veracity
distinguish them from the hallucinations of mad people. As far as the
affair of Rouvray, the prophecy of the instant death of an insolent
soldier at Chinon (evidence of Pasquerel, her confessor), and such
things go, we have, of course, many alleged parallels in the predictions
of Mr. Peden and other seers of the Covenant. But Mr. Peden's political
predictions are still unfulfilled, whereas concerning the 'dear gage'
which the English should lose in France within seven years, Jeanne may
be called successful.

On the whole, if we explain Jeanne's experiences as the expressions
of her higher self (as Leonore is Madame B.'s higher self), we are
compelled to ask what is the nature of that self?

Another parallel, on a low level, to what may be called the mechanism
of Jeanne's voices and visions is found in Professor Flournoy's patient,
'Helene Smith.'* Miss 'Smith,' a hardworking shopwoman in Geneva, had,
as a child, been dull but dreamy. At about twelve years of age she began
to see, and hear, a visionary being named Leopold, who, in life,
had been Cagliostro. His appearance was probably suggested by an
illustration in the Joseph Balsamo of Alexandre Dumas. The saints of
Jeanne, in the same way, may have been suggested by works of sacred art
in statues and church windows. To Miss Smith, Leopold played the part of
Jeanne's saints. He appeared and warned her not to take such or such a
street when walking, not to try to lift a parcel which seemed light, but
was very heavy, and in other ways displayed knowledge not present to her
ordinary workaday self.


     *See Flournoy, Des Indes a la Planete Mars.  Alcan, Paris, 1900.

There was no real Leopold, and Jeanne's St. Catherine cannot be shown to
have ever been a real historical personage.* These figures, in fact,
are more or less akin to the 'invisible playmates' familiar to many
children.** They are not objective personalities, but part of the
mechanism of a certain class of mind. The mind may be that of a person
devoid of genius, like Miss Smith, or of a genius like Goethe, Shelley,
or Jeanne d'Arc, or Socrates with his 'Daemon,' and its warnings. In the
case of Jeanne d'Arc, as of Socrates, the mind communicated knowledge
not in the conscious everyday intelligence of the Athenian or of la
Pucelle. This information, in Jeanne's case, was presented in the shape
of hallucinations of eye and ear. It was sane, wise, noble, veracious,
and concerned not with trifles, but with great affairs. We are not
encouraged to suppose that saints or angels made themselves audible and
visible. But, by the mechanism of such appearances to the senses, that
which was divine in the Maid--in all of us, if we follow St. Paul--that
'in which we live and move and have our being,' made itself intelligible
to her ordinary consciousness, her workaday self, and led her to the
fulfilment of a task which seemed impossible to men.


     *See the Life and Martyrdom of St. Katherine of Alexandria.
(Roxburghe Club, 1884, Introduction by Mr. Charles Hardwick). Also the
writer's translation of the chapel record of the 'Miracles of Madame St.
Catherine of Fierbois,' in the Introduction. (London, Nutt.)

    **See the writer's preface to Miss Corbet's Animal Land for a singular
example in our own time.




VIII. THE MYSTERY OF JAMES DE LA CLOCHE



'P'raps he was my father--though on this subjict I can't speak suttinly,
for my ma wrapped up my buth in a mistry. I may be illygitmit, I may
have been changed at nuss.'

In these strange words does Mr. Thackeray's Jeames de la Pluche
anticipate the historical mystery of James de la Cloche. HIS 'buth' is
'wrapped up in a mistry,' HIS 'ma' is a theme of doubtful speculation;
his father (to all appearance) was Charles II. We know not whether James
de la Cloche--rejecting the gaudy lure of three crowns--lived and died
a saintly Jesuit; or whether, on the other hand, he married beneath him,
was thrown into gaol, was sentenced to a public whipping, was pardoned
and released, and died at the age of twenty-three, full of swaggering
and impenitent impudence. Was there but one James de la Cloche, a scion
of the noblest of European royal lines? Did he, after professions of a
holy vocation, suddenly assume the most secular of characters, jilting
Poverty and Obedience for an earthly bride? Or was the person who
appears to have acted in this unworthy manner a mere impostor, who had
stolen James's money and jewels and royal name? If so, what became of
the genuine and saintly James de la Cloche? He is never heard of any
more, whether because he assumed an ecclesiastical alias, or because
he was effectually silenced by the person who took his character, name,
money, and parentage.

There are two factions in the dispute about de la Cloche. The former
(including the late Lord Acton and Father Boero) believe that James
adhered to his sacred vocation, while the second James was a rank
impostor. The other party holds that the frivolous and secular James
was merely the original James, who suddenly abandoned his vocation, and
burst on the world as a gay cavalier, and claimant of the rank of
Prince of Wales, or, at least, of the revenues and perquisites of that
position.

The first act in the drama was discovered by Father Boero, who printed
the documents as to James de la Cloche in his 'History of the Conversion
to the Catholic Church of Charles II., King of England,' in the sixth
and seventh volumes, fifth series, of La Civilta Cattolica (Rome, 1863).
(The essays can be procured in a separate brochure.) Father Boero says
not a word about the second and secular James, calling himself 'Giacopo
Stuardo.' But the learned father had communicated the papers about de la
Cloche to Lord Acton, who wrote an article on the subject, 'The Secret
History of Charles II.,' in 'The Home and Foreign Review,' July 1862.
Lord Acton now added the story of the second James, or of the second
avatar of the first James, from State Papers in our Record Office. The
documents as to de la Cloche are among the MSS. of the Society of Jesus
at Rome.

The purpose of Father Boero was not to elucidate a romance in royal
life, but to prove that Charles II. had, for many years, been sincerely
inclined to the Catholic creed, though thwarted by his often expressed
disinclination to 'go on his travels again.' In point of fact, the
religion of Charles II. might probably be stated in a celebrated figure
of Pascal's. Let it be granted that reason can discover nothing as to
the existence of any ground for religion. Let it be granted that we
cannot know whether there is a God or not. Yet either there is, or there
is not. It is even betting, heads or tails, croix ou pile. This being
so, it is wiser to bet that there is a God. It is safer. If you lose,
you are just where you were, except for the pleasures which you desert.
If you win, you win everything! What you stake is finite, a little
pleasure; if you win, you win infinite bliss.

So far Charles was prepared theoretically to go but he would not abandon
his diversions. A God there is, but 'He's a good fellow, and 'twill all
be well.' God would never punish a man, he told Burnet, for taking 'a
little irregular pleasure.' Further, Charles saw that, if bet he
must, the safest religion to back was that of Catholicism. Thereby he
could--it was even betting--actually ensure his salvation. But if he put
on his money publicly, if he professed Catholicism, he certainly lost
his kingdoms. Consequently he tried to be a crypto-Catholic, but he was
not permitted to practise one creed and profess another. THAT the Pope
would not stand. So it was on his death-bed that he made his desperate
plunge, and went, it must be said, bravely, on the darkling voyage.

Not to dwell on Charles's earlier dalliances with Rome, in November
1665, his kinsman, Ludovick Stewart, Sieur d'Aubigny, of the
Scoto-French Lennox Stewarts, was made a cardinal, and then died.
Charles had now no man whom he could implicitly trust in his efforts to
become formally, but secretly, a Catholic. And now James de la Cloche
comes on the scene. Father Boero publishes, from the Jesuit archives, a
strange paper, purporting to be written and signed by the King's
hand, and sealed with his private seal, that diamond seal, whereof the
impression brought such joy to the soul of the disgraced Archbishop
Sharp. Father Boero attests the authenticity of seal and handwriting. In
this paper, Charles acknowledges his paternity of James Stuart, 'who,
by our command, has hitherto lived in France and other countries under a
feigned name.' He has come to London, and is to bear the name of 'de
la Cloche du Bourg de Jarsey.' De la Cloche is not to produce this
document, 'written in his own language' (French), till after the King's
death. (It is important to note that James de la Cloche seems to have
spoken no language except French.) The paper is dated 'Whitehall,
September 27, 1665,' when, as Lord Acton observes, the Court, during the
Plague, was NOT at Whitehall.*


     *Civ. Catt. Series V., vol. vi. 710.  Home and Foreign Review, vol.
i. 156.

Lord Acton conjectured that the name 'de la Cloche' was taken from
that of a Protestant minister in Jersey (circ. 1646). This is the more
probable, as Charles later invented a false history of his son, who was
to be described as the son of 'a rich preacher, deceased.' The surname,
de la Cloche, had really been that of a preacher in Jersey, and survives
in Jersey.

After 1665, James de la Cloche was pursuing his studies in Holland,
being at this time a Protestant. Conceivably he had been brought up in a
French Huguenot family, like that of the de Rohan. On February 7, 1667,
Charles wrote a new document. In this he grants to de la Cloche 500
pounds a year, while he lives in London and adheres to 'the religion of
his father and the Anglican service book.' But, in that very year (July
29, 1667), de la Cloche went to Hamburg, and was there received into the
Catholic Church, forfeiting his pension.

Christina of Sweden was then residing in Hamburg. De la Cloche apprised
her of his real position--a son of the King of England--and must have
shown her in proof Charles's two letters of 1665 and 1667. If so--and
how else could he prove his birth?--he broke faith with Charles, but,
apparently, he did not mean to use Charles's letters as proof of his
origin when applying, as he did, for admission to the novitiate of the
Jesuits at Rome. He obtained from Christina a statement, in Latin, that
Charles had acknowledged him, privately, to her, as his son. This note
of Christina's, de la Cloche was to show to his director at Rome.

It does not appear that Charles had ever told Christina a word about
the matter. These pious monarchs were far from being veracious. However,
Christina's document would save the young man much trouble, on the point
of his illegitimacy, when, on April 11, 1668, he entered St. Andrea al
Quirinale as a Jesuit novice. He came in poverty. His wardrobe was of
the scantiest. He had two shirts, a chamois leather chest protector,
three collars, and three pairs of sleeves. He described himself as
'Jacques de la Cloche, of Jersey, British subject,' and falsely, or
ignorantly, stated his age as twenty-four. Really he was twenty-two.*
Why he told Christina his secret, why he let her say that Charles had
told her, we do not know. It may be that the General of the Jesuits,
Oliva, did not yet know who de la Cloche really was. Meanwhile,
his religious vocation led him to forfeit 500 pounds yearly, and
expectations, and to disobey his father and king.


     *Civ. Catt., ut supra, 712, 713, and notes.

The good King took all very easily. On August 3, 1668, he wrote a longa
et verbosa epistola, from Whitehall, to the General of the Jesuits. His
face was now set towards the secret treaty of Dover and conversion. The
conversion of his son, therefore, seemed truly providential. Charles
had discussed it with his own mother and his wife. To Oliva he wrote
in French, explaining that his Latin was 'poor,' and that, if he wrote
English, an interpreter would be needed, but that no Englishman was to
'put his nose' into this affair. He had long prayed God to give him
a safe and secret chance of conversion, but he could not use, without
exciting suspicion, the priests then in England. On the other hand, his
son would do: the young cavalier then at Rome, named de la Cloche de
Jersey. This lad was the pledge of an early love for 'a young lady of a
family among the most distinguished in our kingdoms.' He was a child of
the King's 'earliest youth,' that is, during his residence in Jersey,
March-June 1646, when Charles was sixteen. In a few years, the King
hoped to recognise him publicly. With him alone could Charles practise
secretly the mysteries of the Church. To such edifying ends had God
turned an offence against His laws, an amourette. De la Cloche, of
course, was as yet not a priest, and could not administer sacraments, an
idea which occurred to Charles himself.

The Queen of Sweden, Charles added, was prudent, but, being a woman, she
probably could not keep a secret. Charles wants his son to come home,
and asks the Jesuit to put off Christina with any lie he pleases, if
she asks questions. In short, he regards the General of the Jesuits as
a person ready to tell any convenient falsehood, and lets this opinion
appear with perfect naivete! He will ask the Pope to hurry de la Cloche
into priest's orders, or, if that is not easy, he will have the thing
done in Paris, by means of Louis XIV., or his own sister, Henrietta
(Madame). Or the Queen and Queen Mother can have it done in London, as
they 'have bishops at their will.' The King has no desire to interrupt
his son's vocation as a Jesuit. In London the young man must avoid
Jesuit society, and other occasions of suspicion. He ends with a promise
of subscriptions to Jesuit objects.*


     *Civ. Catt. Series V., vii. 269-274.

By the same courier, the King wrote to 'Our most honoured son, the
Prince Stuart, dwelling with the R.P. Jesuits under the name of Signor
de la Cloche.' James may be easy about money. He must be careful of his
health, which is delicate, and not voyage at an unhealthy season. The
Queens are anxious to see him. He should avoid asceticism. He may yet
be recognised, and take precedence of his younger and less nobly born
brother, the Duke of Monmouth. The King expresses his affection for a
son of excellent character, and distinguished by the solidity of his
studies and acquirements. If toleration is gained, de la Cloche has some
chance of the English throne, supposing Charles and the Duke of York
to die without issue male. Parliament will be unable to oppose this
arrangement, unless Catholics are excluded from the succession.

This has a crazy sound. The Crown would have been in no lack of
legitimate heirs, failing offspring male of the King and the Duke of
York.

If de la Cloche, however, persists in his vocation, so be it. The
King may get for him a cardinal's hat. The King assures his son of
his affection, not only as the child of his extreme youth, but for
the virtues of his character. De la Cloche must travel as a simple
gentleman.*


     *Ut supra, 275, 278.

On August 29, Charles again wrote to Oliva. He had heard that the Queen
of Sweden was going to Rome. De la Cloche must not meet her, she might
let out the secret: he must come home at once. If Charles is known to
be a Catholic, there will be tumults, and he will lose his life. Another
letter, undated, asks that the novice, contrary to rule, may travel
alone, with no Jesuit chaperon, and by sea, direct from Genoa.
Consulting physicians, the King has learned that sea sickness is never
fatal, rather salutary. His travelling name should be Henri de Rohan,
as if he were of that Calvinistic house, friends of the King. The story
must be circulated that de la Cloche is the son of a rich preacher,
deceased, and that he has gone to visit his mother, who is likely to
be converted. He must leave his religious costume with the Jesuits at
Genoa, and pick it up there on his return. He must not land at the port
of London, but at some other harbour, and thence drive to town.*

Ut supra, 283-287.

On October 14, d'Oliva, from Leghorn, wrote to Charles that 'the French
gentleman' was on the seas. On November 18, Charles wrote to d'Oliva
that his son was returning to Rome as his secret ambassador, and, by the
King's orders, was to come back to London, bearing answers to questions
which he will put verbally. In France he leaves a Jesuit whom he is to
pick up as he again makes for England.*


     *Father Florent Dumas, in a rather florid essay on 'The Saintly Son
of Charles II,' supposes that, after all, he had a Jesuit chaperon
during his expedition to England (Jesuit Etudes de Rel., Hist. et Lit.,
Paris, 1864-1865).

The questions to which de la Cloche is to bring answers doubtless
concerned the wish of Charles to be a Catholic secretly, and other
arrangements which he is known to have suggested on another occasion.

After this letter of November 18, 1668, WE NEVER HEAR A WORD ABOUT JAMES
DE LA CLOCHE.* No later letters from the King to d'Oliva are found, the
name of James de la Cloche does not occur again in the Records of the
Society of Jesus.


     *Ut supra, 418-420.

Father Boero argues that James would return to London, under a third
name, unknown. But it would be risky for one who had appeared in England
under one name in 1665, and under another (Rohan) in 1668, to turn
up under a third in 1669. To take aliases, often three or four, was,
however, the custom of the English Jesuits, and de la Cloche may have
chosen his fourth. Thus we could not trace him, in records, unless
Charles wrote again to d'Oliva about his son. No such letter exists. In
his letter of November 18, Charles promises, in a year, a subscription
to the Jesuit building fund--this at his son's request. I know not if
the money was ever paid. He also asks Oliva to give James 800 doppie for
expenses, to be repaid in six months.

James did not leave the Society of Jesus, argues Father Boero, for,
had he left, he would have carried away the papers in which Charles
acknowledges him and promises a pension of 500 pounds yearly. But that
document would be useless to James, whether he remained a Jesuit or
not, for the condition of the pension (1667) was that he should be a
Protestant of the Anglican sect, and live in London. However, Charles's
letter of 1668 was in another tune, and James certainly left THAT with
the Jesuits in Rome; at least, they possess it now. But suppose that
James fled secretly from the Jesuits, then he probably had no chance
of recovering his papers. He was not likely to run away, however, for,
Charles says, he 'did not like London,' or the secular life, and
he appears to have returned to Rome at the end of 1668, with every
intention of fulfilling his mission and pursuing his vocation. His
return mission to England over, he probably would finish his Jesuit
training at a college in France or Flanders, say St. Omer's, where
Titus Oates for a while abode. No James de la Cloche is known there or
elsewhere, but he might easily adopt a new alias, and Charles would have
no need to write to Oliva about him. It may be that James was the priest
at St. Omer's, whom, in 1670, Charles had arranged to send, but did not
send, to Clement IX.* He may also be the priest secretly brought from
abroad to Charles during the Popish Plot (1678-1681).**


     *Mignet, Neg. rel. Succ. d'Espagne, iii. 232.

     **Welwood, Memoirs, 146.

These are suggestions of Lord Acton, who thinks that de la Cloche may
also have been the author of two papers, in French, on religion, left
by Charles, in his own hand, at his death.* These are conjectures. If
we accept them, de la Cloche was a truly self-denying young semi-Prince,
preferring an austere life to the delights and honours which attended
his younger brother, the Duke of Monmouth. But, just when de la Cloche
should have been returning from Rome to London, at the end of 1668 or
beginning of 1669, a person calling himself James Stuart, son of Charles
II., by an amour, at Jersey, in 1646, with a 'Lady Mary Henrietta
Stuart,' appeared in some magnificence at Naples. This James Stuart
either was, or affected to be, James de la Cloche. Whoever he was, the
King's carefully guarded secret was out, was public property.


     *Home and Foreign Review, i. 165.

Our information as to this James Stuart, or Giacopo Stuardo, son of
the King of England--the cavalier who appears exactly when the Jesuit
novice, James de la Cloche, son of the King of England, vanishes--is
derived from two sources. First there are Roman newsletters, forwarded
to England by Kent, the English agent at Rome, with his own despatches
in English. It does not appear to me that Kent had, as a rule, any
intimate purveyor of intelligence at Naples. He seems, in his own
letters to Williamson,* merely to follow and comment on the Italian
newsletters which he forwards and the gossip of 'the Nation,' that is,
the English in Rome. The newsletters, of course, might be under the
censorship of Rome and Naples. Such is one of our sources.**


     *See 'The Valet's Master,' for other references to Williamson.

     **State Papers, Italian, 1669, Bundle 10, Record Office.

Lord Acton, in 1862, and other writers, have relied solely on this
first set of testimonies. But the late Mr. Maziere Brady has apparently
ignored or been unacquainted with these materials, and he cites a
printed book not quoted by Lord Acton.* This work is the third volume
of the 'Lettere' of Vincenzo Armanni of Gubbio, who wrote much about the
conversion of England, and had himself been in that country. The work
quoted was printed (privately?) by Giuseppe Piccini, at Macerata, in
1674, and, so far, I have been unable to see an example. The British
Museum Library has no copy, and the 'Lettere' are unknown to Brunet.
We have thus to take a secondhand version of Armanni's account. He says
that his informant was one of two confessors, employed successively by
Prince James Stuart, at Naples, in January-August 1669. Now, Kent sent
to England an English translation of the Italian will of James Stuart. A
will is also given, of course in Italian, by Vincenzo Armanni; a copy of
this is in the Record Office.


     *Maziere Brady, Anglo-Roman Papers, pp. 93-121 (Gardner Paisley,
1890).

It appears from this will that James Stuart, for reasons of his own,
actually did enjoy the services of two successive confessors, at Naples,
in 1669. The earlier of these two was Armanni's informant. His account
of James Stuart differs from that of Kent and the Italian newsletters,
which we repeat, alone are cited by Lord Acton (1862); while Mr. Brady
(1890), citing Armanni, knows nothing of the newsletters and Kent, and
conceives himself to be the first writer in English on the subject.

Turning to our first source, the newsletters of Rome, and the letters of
Kent, the dates in each case prove that Kent, with variations, follows
the newsletters. The gazzetta of March 23, 1669, is the source of Kent's
despatch of March 30. On the gazzette of April 6, 13, and 20, he makes
no comment, but his letter of June 16 varies more or less from the
newsletter of June 11. His despatch of September 7 corresponds to the
newsletter of the same date, but is much more copious.

Taking these authorities in order of date, we find the newsletter of
Rome (March 23, 1669) averring that an unknown English gentleman has
been 'for some months' at Naples, that is, since January at least,
and has fallen in love with the daughter of a poor innkeeper, or host
(locandiere). He is a Catholic and has married the girl. The newly made
father-in-law has been spending freely the money given to him by the
bridegroom. Armanni, as summarised by Mr. Brady, states the matter
of the money thus: 'The Prince was anxious to make it appear that his
intended father-in-law was not altogether a pauper, and accordingly he
gave a sum of money to Signor Francesco Corona to serve as a dowry for
Teresa. Signor Corona could not deny himself the pleasure of exhibiting
this money before his friends, and he indiscreetly boasted before his
neighbours concerning his rich son-in-law.'

From Armanni's version, derived from the confessor of James Stuart, it
appears that nothing was said as to James's royal birth till after his
arrest, when he informed the Viceroy of Naples in self-defence.

To return to the newsletter of March 23, it represents that the Viceroy
heard of the unwonted expenditure of money by Corona, and seized the
English son-in-law on suspicion. In his possession the Viceroy found
about 200 doppie, many jewels, and some papers in which he was addressed
as Altezza (Highness). The word doppie is used by Charles (in Boero's
Italian translation) for the 800 coins which he asks Oliva to give to
de la Cloche for travelling expenses. Were James Stuart's 200 doppie the
remains of the 800? Lord Acton exaggerates when he writes vaguely that
Stuart possessed 'heaps of pistoles.' Two hundred doppie (about 150 or
160 pounds) are not 'heaps.' To return to the newsletter, the idea being
current that the young man was a natural son of the King of England, he
was provisionally confined in the castle of St. Elmo. On April 6, he is
reported to be shut up in the castle of Gaeta. On the 20th, we hear that
fifty scudi monthly have been assigned to the prisoner for his support.
The Viceroy has written (to England) to ask what is to be done with him.

On June 11, it is reported that, after being removed to the Vicaria, a
prison for vulgar malefactors, the captive has been released. He is NOT
the son of the King of England.

Kent's letter of March 30 follows the newsletter of March 23. He adds
that the unknown Englishman 'seems' to have 'vaunted to bee the King of
England's sonne BORNE AT GERSEY,' a fact never expressly stated about
de la Cloche. It is not clear that James Stuart vaunted his birth before
his arrest made it necessary for him to give an account of himself. Kent
also says that the unknown sent for the English consul, Mr. Browne, 'to
assist his delivery out of the castle. But it seems he could not speake
a word of English nor give any account of the birth he pretended to.' On
Kent's showing, he had no documentary proofs of his royal birth. French
was de la Cloche's language, if this unknown was he, and if Kent is
right, he had not with him the two documents and the letter of Charles
II. and the certificate of the Queen of Sweden. 'This is all the light I
can picke out of the Nation, or others, of his extravagant story, which
whether will end in Prince or cheate I shall endeavour to inform you
hereafter.'

Kent's next letter (June 16) follows, with variations, the newsletter of
June 11:--Kent to J. Williamson

June 16, 1669.

The Gentleman who WOULD HAVE BEENE HIS MAT'YS BASTARD at Naples, vpon
the receipt of his Ma'ties Letters to that Vice King was immediately
taken out of the Castle of Gaetta brought to Naples and Cast into the
Grand Prison called the Vicaria, where being thrust amongst the most
Vile and infamous Rascalls, the Vice King intended to have Caused him
to bee whipt about the Citty, but meanes was made by his wife's kindred
(Who was Likewise taken with this pretended Prince) to the Vice-Queene,
who, in compassion to her and her kindred, prevailed with Don Pedro to
deliver him from that Shame [and from gaol, it seems], and soe ends the
Story of this fourb WHO SPEAKS NOE LANGUADGE BUT FFRENCH.

The newsletter says nothing of the intended whipping, or of the
intercession of the family of the wife of the unknown. These points may
be the additions of gossips.

In any case the unknown, with his wife, after a stay of no long time in
the Vicaria, is set at liberty. His release might be explained on the
ground that Charles disavowed and cast him off, which he might safely
do, if the man was really de la Cloche, but had none of the papers
proving his birth, the papers which are still in the Jesuit archives.
Or he may have had the papers, and they may have been taken from him and
restored to the Jesuit General.

So far, the betting as to whether de la Cloche and the Naples pretender
were the same man or not is at evens. Each hypothesis is beset
by difficulties. It is highly improbable that the unworldly and
enthusiastic Jesuit novice threw up, at its very crisis, a mission which
might lead his king, his father, and the British Empire back into the
one Fold. De la Cloche, forfeiting his chances of an earthly crown,
was on the point of gaining a heavenly one. It seems to the last degree
unlikely that he would lose this and leave the Jesuits to whom he had
devoted himself, and the quiet life of study and religion, for the
worldly life which he disliked, and for that life on a humble capital
of a few hundred pounds, and some jewels, presents, perhaps from the two
Queens, his grandmother and stepmother. De la Cloche knew that Charles,
if the novice clung to religion, had promised to procure for him, if he
desired it, a cardinal's hat; while if, with Charles's approval, he
left religion, he might be a prince, perhaps a king. He had thus every
imaginable motive for behaving with decorum--in religion or out of it.
Yet, if he is the Naples pretender, he suddenly left the Jesuits without
Charles's knowledge and approval, but by a freakish escapade, like 'The
Start' of Charles himself as a lad, when he ran away from Argyll and
the Covenanters. And he did this before he ever saw Teresa Corona. He
reminds one of the Huguenot pastor in London, whom an acquaintance met
on the Turf. 'I not preacher now, I gay dog,' explained the holy man.

All this is, undeniably, of a high improbability. But on the other side,
de la Cloche was freakish and unsettled. He had but lately (1667) asked
for and accepted a pension to be paid while he remained an Anglican,
then he was suddenly received into the Roman Church, and started
off, probably on foot, with his tiny 'swag' of three shirts and three
collars, to walk to Rome and become a Jesuit. He may have deserted the
Jesuits as suddenly and recklessly as he had joined them. It is not
impossible. He may have received the 800 pounds for travelling expenses
from Oliva; not much of it was left by March 1669--only about 150
pounds. On the theory that the man at Naples was an impostor, it is
odd that he should only have spoken French, that he was charged with no
swindles, that he made a very poor marriage in place of aiming at a rich
union; that he had, somehow, learned de la Cloche's secret; and that,
possessing a fatal secret, invaluable to a swindler and blackmailer, he
was merely disgraced and set free. Louis XIV. would, at least, have held
him a masked captive for the rest of his life. But he was liberated,
and, after a brief excursion, returned to Naples, where he died,
maintaining that he was a prince.

Thus, on either view, 'prince or cheat,' we are met by things almost
impossible.

We now take up the Naples man's adventure as narrated by Kent. He
writes:

Kent to Jo: Williamson

Rome: August 31, 1669.

That certaine fellow or what hee was, who pretended to bee his Ma'ties
naturall sonn at Naples is dead and haueing made his will they write mee
from thence wee shall with the next Poast know the truth of his quality.


September 7, 1669.

That certaine Person at Naples who in his Lyfe tyme would needes bee
his Ma'ties naturall Sonne is dead in the same confidence and Princely
humour, for haueing Left his Lady Teresa Corona, an ordinary person, 7
months gone with Child, hee made his Testament, and hath Left his most
Xtian Ma'tie (whom he called Cousin) executor of it.

Hee had been absent from Naples some tyme pretending to haue made a
journey into France to visit his Mother, Dona Maria Stuarta of His
Ma'tie Royall Family, which neernes and greatnes of Blood was the cause,
Saies hee, that his Ma'tie would never acknowledge him for his Sonn,
his mother Dona Maria Stuarta was, it seemes, dead before hee came into
France. In his will hee desires the present King of England Carlo 2nd to
allow His Prince Hans in Kelder eighty thousand Ducketts, which is his
Mother's Estate, he Leaues Likewise to his Child and Mother Teresa 291
thousand Ducketts which hee calls Legacies. Hee was buried in the Church
of St. Fran'co Di Paolo out of the Porta Capuana (for hee dyed of this
Religion). He left 400 pounds for a Lapide to have his name and quality
engrauen vpon it for hee called himself Don Jacopo Stuarto, and this is
the end of that Princely Cheate or whatever hee was.

The newsletter of September 7 merely mentions the death and the will.
On this occasion Kent had private intelligence from a correspondent in
Naples. Copies of the will, in English and in Italian, were forwarded to
England, where both copies remain.

'This will,' Lord Acton remarked, 'is fatal to the case for the Prince.'
If not fatal, it is a great obstacle to the cause of the Naples man. He
claims as his mother, Donna Maria Stewart, 'of the family of the Barons
of San Marzo.' If Marzo means 'March,' the Earl of March was a title
in the Lennox family. The only Mary Stewart in that family known to
Douglas's 'Peerage' was younger than James de la Cloche, and died, the
wife of the Earl of Arran, in 1667, at the age of eighteen. She may have
had some outlying cousin Mary, but nothing is known of such a possible
mother of de la Cloche. Again, the testator begs Charles II. to give his
unborn child 'the ordinary principality either of Wales or Monmouth, or
other province customary to be given to the natural sons of the Crown;'
to the value of 100,000 scudi!

Could de la Cloche be so ignorant as to suppose that a royal bastard
might be created Prince of Wales? He certainly knew, from Charles's
letter, that his younger brother was already Duke of Monmouth. His
legacies are of princely munificence, but--he is to be buried at the
expense of his father-in-law.

By way of security for his legacies, the testator 'assigns and gives his
lands, called the Marquisate of Juvignis, worth 300,000 scudi.'

Mr. Brady writes: 'Juvignis is probably a mistake for Aubigny, the
dukedom which belonged to the Dukes of Richmond and Lennox by the older
creation.' But a dukedom is not a marquisate, nor could de la Cloche
hold Aubigny, of which the last holder was Ludovick Stewart, who died, a
cardinal, in November 1665. The lands then reverted to the French
Crown. Moreover, there are two places called Juvigny, or Juvignis, in
north-eastern France (Orne and Manche). Conceivably one or other of
these belonged to the house of Rohan, and James Stuart's posthumous son,
one of whose names is 'Roano,' claimed a title from Juvigny or Juvignis,
among other absurd pretensions. 'Henri de Rohan' was only the travelling
name of de la Cloche in 1668, though it is conceivable that he was
brought up by the de Rohan family, friendly to Charles II.

The whole will is incompatible with all that de la Cloche must have
known. Being in Italian it cannot have been intelligible to him, and may
conceivably be the work of an ignorant Neapolitan attorney, while de la
Cloche, as a dying man, may have signed without understanding much of
what he signed. The folly of the Corona family may thus (it is a mere
suggestion) be responsible for this absurd testament. Armanni, however,
represents the man as sane, and very devout, till his death.

A posthumous child, a son, was born and lived a scrambling life, now
'recognised' abroad, now in prison and poverty, till we lose him about
1750.*


     *A. F. Steuart, Engl. Hist. Review, July 1903, 'The Neapolitan
Stuarts.' Maziere Brady, ut supra.

Among his sham titles are Dux Roani and 'de Roano,' clearly referring,
as Mr. Steuart notices, to de la Cloche's travelling name of Henri de
Rohan. The Neapolitan pretender, therefore, knew the secret of that
incognito, and so of de la Cloche's mission to England in 1668. That,
possessing this secret, he was set free, is a most unaccountable
circumstance. Charles had written to Oliva that his life hung on
absolute secrecy, yet the owner of the secret is left at liberty.

Our first sources leave us in these perplexities. They are not
disentangled by the 'Lettere' of Vincenzo Armanni (1674). I have been
unable, as has been said, to see this book. In the summary by Mr. Brady
we read that (1668-1669) Prince James Stuart, with a French Knight of
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, came to Naples for his health.
This must have been in December 1668 or January 1669; by March 1669 the
pretender had been 'for some months' in Naples. The Frenchman went by
way of Malta to England, recommending Prince James to a confessor at
Naples, who was a parish priest. This priest was Armanni's informant.
He advised the Prince to lodge with Corona, and here James proposed
to Teresa. She at first held aloof, and the priest discountenanced
the affair. The Prince ceased to be devout, but later chose another
confessor. Both priests knew, in confession, the secret of his birth:
the Prince says so in his will, and leaves them great legacies. So far
Armanni's version is corroborated.

Mr. Brady goes on, citing Armanni: 'At last he chose another spiritual
director, to whom he revealed not only his passion for Teresa Corona,
but also the secret of his birth, showing to him the letters written
by the Queen of Sweden and the Father General of the Jesuits.' Was the
latter document Oliva's note from Leghorn of October 14, 1668? That did
not contain a word about de la Cloche's birth: he is merely styled 'the
French gentleman.' Again, the letter of the Queen of Sweden is now in
the Jesuit archives; how could it be in the possession of the pretender
at Naples? Was it taken from him in prison, and returned to Oliva?

The new confessor approved of the wedding which was certainly celebrated
on February 19, 1669. Old Corona now began to show his money: his new
son-in-law was suspected of being a false coiner, and was arrested by
the Viceroy. 'The certificates and papers attesting the parentage of
James Stuart were then produced....' How could this be--they were in the
hands of the Jesuits at Rome. Had de la Cloche brought them to Naples,
the Corona family would have clung to them, but they are in the Gesu
at Rome to this day. The rest is much as we know it, save, what is
important, that the Prince, from prison, 'wrote to the General of the
Jesuits, beseeching him to interpose his good offices with the Viceroy,
and to obtain permission for him to go to England via Leghorn' (as in
1688) 'and Marseilles.'

Armanni knew nothing, or says nothing, of de la Cloche's having been in
the Jesuit novitiate. His informant, the priest, must have known that,
but under seal of confession, so he would not tell Armanni. He did tell
him that James Stuart wrote to the Jesuit general, asking his help in
procuring leave to go to England. The General knew de la Cloche's hand,
and would not be taken in by the impostor's. This point is in favour
of the identity of James Stuart with de la Cloche. The Viceroy had,
however, already written to London, and waited for a reply. 'Immediately
on arrival of the answer from London, the Prince was set at liberty and
left Naples. It may be supposed he went to England. After a few months
he returned to Naples with an assignment of 50,000 scudi,' and died of
fever.

Nothing is said by Armanni of the imprisonment among the low scum of the
Vicaria: nothing of the intended whipping, nothing of the visit by James
Stuart to France. The 50,000 scudi have a mythical ring. Why should
James, if he had 50,000 scudi, be buried at the expense of his
father-in-law, who also has to pay 50 ducats to the notary for drawing
the will of this 'prince or cheate'? Probably the parish priest and
ex-confessor of the prince was misinformed on some points. The Corona
family would make out the best case they could for their royal kinsman.

Was the man of Naples 'prince or cheate'? Was he de la Cloche, or, as
Lord Acton suggests, a servant who had robbed de la Cloche of money and
papers?

Every hypothesis (we shall recapitulate them) which we can try as a key
fails to fit the lock. Say that de la Cloche had confided his secret to
a friend among the Jesuit novices; say that this young man either robbed
de la Cloche, or, having money and jewels of his own, fled from the
S. Andrea training college, and, when arrested, assumed the name and
pretended to the rank of de la Cloche. This is not inconceivable, but it
is odd that he had no language but French, and that, possessing secrets
of capital importance, he was released from prison, and allowed to
depart where he would, and return to Naples when he chose.

Say that a French servant of de la Cloche robbed and perhaps even
murdered him. In that case he certainly would not have been released
from prison. The man at Naples was regarded as a gentleman, but that is
not so important in an age when the low scoundrel, Bedloe, could pass in
Spain and elsewhere for an English peer.

But again, if the Naples man is a swindler, as already remarked, he
behaves unlike one. A swindler would have tried to entrap a woman of
property into a marriage--he might have seduced, but would not have
married, the penniless Teresa Corona, giving what money he had to her
father. When arrested, the man had not in money more than 160 pounds.
His maintenance, while in prison, was paid for by the Viceroy. No
detaining charges, from other victims, appear to have been lodged
against him. His will ordains that the document shall be destroyed by
his confessor, if the secret of his birth therein contained is divulged
before his death. The secret perhaps was only known--before his
arrest--to his confessors; it came out when he was arrested by the
Viceroy as a coiner of false money. Like de la Cloche, he was pious,
though not much turns on that. If Armanni's information is correct, if,
when taken, the man wrote to the General of the Jesuits--who knew de la
Cloche's handwriting--we can scarcely escape the inference that he was
de la Cloche.

On the other hand is the monstrous will. Unworldly as de la Cloche may
have been, he can hardly have fancied that Wales was the appanage of
a bastard of the Crown; and he certainly knew that 'the province of
Monmouth' already gave a title to his younger brother, the duke, born
in 1649. Yet the testator claims Wales or Monmouth for his unborn child.
Again, de la Cloche may not have known who his mother was. But not only
can no Mary, or Mary Henrietta, of the Lennox family be found, except
the impossible Lady Mary who was younger than de la Cloche; but we
observe no trace of the presence of any d'Aubigny, or even of any
Stewart, male or female, at the court of the Prince of Wales in Jersey,
in 1646.*


     *See Hoskins, Charles II. in the Channel islands (Bentley, London,
1854).

The names of the suite are given by Dr. Hoskins from the journal (MS.)
of Chevalier, a Jersey man, and from the Osborne papers. No Stewart or
Stuart occurs, but, in a crowd of some 3,000 refugees, there MAY have
been a young lady of the name. Lady Fanshaw, who was in Jersey, is
silent. The will is absurd throughout, but whether it is all of the
dying pretender's composition, whether it may not be a thing concocted
by an agent of the Corona family, is another question.

It is a mere conjecture, suggested by more than one inquirer, as by Mr.
Steuart, that the words 'Signora D. Maria Stuardo della famiglia delli
Baroni di S. Marzo,' refer to the Lennox family, which would naturally
be spoken of as Lennox, or as d'Aubigny. About the marquisate of Juvigny
(which cannot mean the dukedom of d'Aubigny) we have said enough. In
short, the whole will is absurd, and it is all but inconceivable that
the real de la Cloche could have been so ignorant as to compose it.

So the matter stands; one of two hypotheses must be correct--the Naples
man was de la Cloche or he was not--yet either hypothesis is almost
impossible.*


     *I was at first inclined to suppose that the de la Cloche papers in
the Gesu--the letters of Charles II. and the note of the Queen of
Sweden--were forgeries, part of an impostor's apparatus, seized at
Naples and sent to Oliva for inspection. But the letters--handwriting
and royal seal apart--show too much knowledge of Charles's secret policy
to have been feigned. We are not told that the certificates of de la
Cloche's birth were taken from James Stuart in prison, and, even if he
possessed them, as Armanni says he did, he may have stolen them, and
they may have been restored by the Viceroy of Naples, as we said, to the
Jesuits. As to whether Charles II. paid his promised subscription to
the Jesuit building fund, Father Boero says: 'We possess a royal letter,
proving that it was abundant' (Boero, Istoria etc., p. 56, note 1),
but he does not print the letter; and Mr. Brady speaks now of extant
documents proving the donation, and now of 'a traditional belief that
Charles was a benefactor of the Jesuit College.'

It may be added that, on December 27, 1668, Charles wrote to his sister,
Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans: 'I assure you that nobody does, nor
shall, know anything of it here' (of his intended conversion and secret
dealings with France) 'but my selfe, and that one person more, till
it be fitte to be publique...' 'That one person more' is not elsewhere
referred to in Charles's known letters to his sister, unless he be 'he
that came last, and delivered me your letter of the 9th December; he has
given me a full account of what he was charged with, and I am very well
pleased with what he tells me' (Whitehall, December 14, 1668).

This mysterious person, the one sharer of the King's secret, may be de
la Cloche, if he could have left England by November 18, visited Rome,
and returned to Paris by December 9. If so, de la Cloche may have
fulfilled his mission. Did he return to Italy, and appear in Naples in
January or February 1669? (See Madame, by Julia Cartwright, pp. 274,
275, London, 1894.)




IX. THE TRUTH ABOUT 'FISHER'S GHOST'



Everybody has heard about 'Fisher's Ghost.' It is one of the stock
'yarns' of the world, and reappears now and again in magazines, books
like 'The Night Side of Nature,' newspapers, and general conversation.
As usually told, the story runs thus: One Fisher, an Australian
settler of unknown date, dwelling not far from Sydney, disappeared. His
overseer, like himself an ex-convict, gave out that Fisher had returned
to England, leaving him as plenipotentiary. One evening a neighbour (one
Farley), returning from market, saw Fisher sitting on the fence of his
paddock, walked up to speak to him, and marked him leave the fence
and retreat into the field, where he was lost to sight. The neighbour
reported Fisher's return, and, as Fisher could nowhere be found, made a
deposition before magistrates. A native tracker was taken to the fence
where the pseudo Fisher sat, discovered 'white man's blood' on it,
detected 'white man's fat' on the scum of a pool hard by, and, finally,
found 'white man's body' buried in a brake. The overseer was tried,
condemned, and hanged after confession.

Such is the yarn: occasionally the ghost of Fisher is said to have been
viewed several times on the fence.

Now, if the yarn were true, it would be no proof of a ghost. The person
sitting on the fence might be mistaken for Fisher by a confusion
of identity, or might be a mere subjective hallucination of a sort
recognised even by official science as not uncommon. On the other hand,
that such an illusion should perch exactly on the rail where 'white
man's blood' was later found, would be a very remarkable coincidence.
Finally, the story of the appearance might be explained as an excuse
for laying information against the overseer, already suspected on other
grounds. But while this motive might act among a Celtic population,
naturally credulous of ghosts, and honourably averse to assisting
the law (as in Glenclunie in 1749), it is not a probable motive in
an English Crown colony, as Sydney then was. Nor did the seer inform
against anybody.

The tale is told in 'Tegg's Monthly Magazine' (Sydney, March 1836); in
'Household Words' for 1853; in Mr. John Lang's book, 'Botany Bay' (about
1840), where the yarn is much dressed up; and in Mr. Montgomery Martin's
'History of the British Colonies,' vol. iv. (1835). Nowhere is a date
given, but Mr. Martin says that the events occurred while he was in the
colony. His most intimate surviving friend has often heard him tell the
tale, and discuss it with a legal official, who is said to have been
present at the trial of the overseer.* Other living witnesses have
heard the story from a gentleman who attended the trial. Mr. Martin's
narrative given as a lowest date, the occurrences were before 1835.
Moreover, the yarn of the ghost was in circulation before that year, and
was accepted by a serious writer on a serious subject. But we have still
no date for the murder.


     *So the friend informs me in a letter of November 1896.

That date shall now be given. Frederick Fisher was murdered by George
Worrall, his overseer, at Campbelltown on June 16 (or 17), 1826. After
that date, as Fisher was missing, Worrall told various tales to account
for his absence. The trial of Worrall is reported in the 'Sydney
Gazette' of February 5, 1827. Not one word is printed about Fisher's
ghost; but the reader will observe that there is a lacuna in the
evidence exactly where the ghost, if ghost there were, should have come
in. The search for Fisher's body starts, it will be seen, from a spot
on Fisher's paddock-fence, and the witness gives no reason why that spot
was inspected, or rather no account of how, or by whom, sprinkled blood
was detected on the rail. Nobody saw the murder committed. Chief-Justice
Forbes said, in summing up (on February 2, 1827), that the evidence was
purely circumstantial. We are therefore so far left wholly in the dark
as to why the police began their investigations at a rail in a fence.

At the trial Mr. D. Cooper deposed to having been owed 80 pounds by
Fisher. After Fisher's disappearance Cooper frequently spoke to Worrall
about this debt, which Worrall offered to pay if Cooper would give up to
him certain papers (title-deeds) of Fisher's in his possession. Worrall
even wrote, from Banbury Curran, certifying Cooper of Fisher's departure
from the colony, which, he said, he was authorised to announce. Cooper
replied that he would wait for his 80 pounds if Fisher were still in the
country. Worrall exhibited uneasiness, but promised to show a written
commission to act for Fisher. This document he never produced, but was
most anxious to get back Fisher's papers and to pay the 80 pounds. This
arrangement was refused by Cooper.

James Coddington deposed that on July 8, 1826, when Fisher had been
missing for three weeks, Worrall tried to sell him a colt, which
Coddington believed to be Fisher's. Worrall averred that Fisher had left
the country. A few days later Worrall showed Coddington Fisher's receipt
for the price paid to him by Worrall for the horse. 'Witness, from
having seen Fisher write, had considerable doubt as to the genuineness
of the receipt.'

James Hamilton swore that in August 1826 he bluntly told Worrall that
foul play was suspected; he 'turned pale, and endeavoured to force a
smile.' He merely said that Fisher 'was on salt water,' but could not or
would not name his ship. A receipt to Worrall from Fisher was sworn to
by Lewis Solomon as a forgery.

Samuel Hopkins, who lived under Fisher's roof, last saw Fisher on June
17, 1826 (June 16 may be meant), in the evening. Some other people,
including one Lawrence, were in the house, they left shortly after
Fisher went out that evening, and later remarked on the strangeness
of his not returning. Nathaniel Cole gave evidence to the same effect.
Fisher, in short, strolled out on June 17 (16?), 1826, and was seen no
more in the body.

Robert Burke, of Campbelltown, constable, deposed to having apprehended
Worrall. We may now give in full the evidence as to the search for
Fisher's body on October 20, 1826.

Here let us first remark that Fisher's body was not easily found. A
reward for its discovery was offered by Government on September 27,
1826, when Fisher had been dead for three months, and this may
have stimulated all that was immortal of Fisher to perch on his own
paddock-rail, and so draw attention to the position of his body. But on
this point we have no information, and we proceed to real evidence. From
this it appears that though a reward was offered on September 27, the
local magistrates (to whom the ghost-seer went, in the yarn) did not
bid their constable make SPECIAL researches till October 20, apparently
after the seer told his tale.

'George Leonard, a constable at Campbelltown, stated that by order of
the bench of the magistrates he commenced a search for the body of the
deceased on the 20th of October last: witness WENT TO A PLACE WHERE SOME
BLOOD WAS SAID TO HAVE BEEN DISCOVERED, and saw traces of it on several
rails of a fence at the corner of the deceased's paddock adjoining
the fence of Mr. Bradbury, and about fifty rods from prisoner's house:
witness proceeded to search with an iron rod over the ground, when two
black natives came up and joined in the search till they came to a creek
where one of them saw something on the water: a man named Gilbert, a
black native, went into the water, and scumming some of the top with a
leaf, which he afterwards tasted, called out that "there was the fat of
a white man" [of which he was clearly an amateur]: they then proceeded
to another creek about forty or fifty yards farther up, STILL LED BY
THE NATIVES, when one of them struck the rod into some marshy ground
and called out that "there was something there:" a spade was immediately
found, and the place dug, when the first thing that presented itself
was the left hand of a man lying on his side, which witness, from a long
acquaintance with him, immediately declared to be the hand of Frederick
Fisher: the body was decayed a little, particularly the under-jaw:
witness immediately informed Mr. William Howe and the Rev. Mr. Reddall,
and obtained a warrant to apprehend the parties who were supposed to be
concerned in the murder; the coroner was sent for, and, the body being
taken out of the earth the next morning, several fractures were found
in the head: an inquest was held, and a verdict of wilful murder against
some person or persons unknown was returned: witness particularly
examined the fence: there appeared to have been a fire made under the
lower rail, as if to burn out the mark: the blood seemed as if it were
sprinkled over the rails....

'The declaration of the prisoner' (Worrall) 'was put in and read: it
stated that, on the evening of the 17th of June, a man named Lawrence
got some money from the deceased, and together with four others went
to a neighbouring public-house to drink: that after some time they
returned, and the prisoner being then outside the house, and not seen by
the others, he saw two of them enter, whilst the other two, one of whom
was Lawrence, remained at the door: the prisoner then went down to the
bottom of the yard, and after a little time heard a scuffle, and saw
Lawrence and the others drag something along the yard, which they struck
several times. The prisoner then came forward, and called out to know
who it was. One of them replied, "It is a dog." The prisoner coming
up said, "It is Fisher, and you have prevented him from crying out any
more." They said they had murdered him in order to possess themselves
of what money he had, and bound the prisoner by a solemn pledge not to
reveal it.

'For the prisoner Nathaniel Boom deposed: he knew deceased, and intended
to institute a prosecution against him for forgery when he disappeared.

'Chief-justice summed up: observed it was a case entirely of
circumstances. The jury were first to consider if identity of body with
Fisher was satisfactorily established. If not: no case. If so: they
would then consider testimony as affecting prisoner. Impossible, though
wholly circumstantial, for evidence to be stronger. He offered no
opinion, but left case to jury.

'The jury returned a verdict of guilty. Sentence of death passed.'

          'February 6, 1827.  Sydney Gazette.

'George Worrall, convicted on Friday last of murder of F. Fisher,
yesterday suffered the last penalty of the law. Till about 5 o'clock on
the morning of his execution, he persisted in asserting his innocence,
when he was induced to confess to a gentleman who had sat up with
him during the night, that he alone had perpetrated the murder, but
positively affirmed it was not his intention at the time to do so.'

We need not follow Worrall's attempts to explain away the crime as an
accident. He admitted that 'he had intended to hang Lawrence and Cole.'

It is a curious case. WHY WAS NOBODY INTERROGATED ABOUT THE DISCOVERY,
ON THE RAIL, OF BLOOD THREE MONTHS OLD, if not four months? What was the
apparent date of the fire under the rail? How did the ghost-story get
into circulation, and reach Mr. Montgomery Martin (1835)?

To suggest a solution of these problems, we have a precisely analogous
case in England.

On October 25, 1828, one William Edden, a market-gardener, did not come
home at night. His wife rushed into the neighbouring village, announcing
that she had seen her husband's ghost; that he had a hammer, or some
such instrument, in his hand; that she knew he had been hammered to
death on the road by a man whose name she gave, one Tyler. Her husband
was found on the road, between Aylesbury and Thame, killed by blows of
a blunt instrument, and the wife in vain repeatedly invited the man,
Joseph Tyler, to come and see the corpse. Probably she believed that it
would bleed in his presence, in accordance with the old superstition.
All this the poor woman stated on oath at an inquiry before the
magistrates, reported in the Buckinghamshire county paper of August 29,
1829.

Here is her evidence, given at Aylesbury Petty Sessions, August 22,
before Lord Nugent, Sir J. D. King, R. Brown, Esq., and others:

'"After my husband's corpse was brought home, I sent to Tyler, for some
reasons I had, to come and see the corpse. I sent for him five or six
times. I had some particular reason for sending for him which I never
did divulge.... I will tell my reasons if you gentlemen ask me, in the
face of Tyler, even if my life should be in danger for it. When I
was ironing a shirt, on the Saturday night my husband was murdered,
something came over me--something rushed over me--and I thought my
husband came by me. I looked up, and I thought I heard the voice of my
husband come from near my mahogany table, as I turned from my ironing. I
ran out and said, 'Oh dear God! my husband is murdered, and his ribs are
broken.' I told this to several of my neighbours. Mrs. Chester was the
first to whom I told it. I mentioned it also at the Saracen's Head."

'Sir J. D. King.--"Have you any objection to say why you thought your
husband had been murdered?"

'"No! I thought I saw my husband's apparition and the man that had done
it, and that man was Tyler, and that was the reason I sent for him....
When my neighbours asked me what was the matter when I ran out, I told
them that I had seen my husband's apparition.... When I mentioned it to
Mrs. Chester, I said: 'My husband is murdered, and his ribs are broken;
I have seen him by the mahogany table.' I did not tell her who did
it.... I was always frightened, since my husband had been stopped on the
road." (The deceased Edden had once before been waylaid, but was then
too powerful for his assailants.) "In consequence of what I saw, I
went in search of my husband, until I was taken so ill I could go no
further."

'Lord Nugent.--"What made you think your husband's ribs were broken?"

'"He held up his hand like this" (holds up her arm), "and I saw a
hammer, or something like a hammer, and it came into my mind that his
ribs were broken."

'Sewell stated that the murder was accomplished by means of a hammer.
The examination was continued on August 31 and September 13; and finally
both prisoners were discharged for want of sufficient evidence. Sewell
declared that he had only been a looker-on, and his accusations against
Tyler were so full of prevarications that they were not held sufficient
to incriminate him. The inquiry was again resumed on February 11, 1830,
and Sewell, Tyler, and a man named Gardner were committed for trial.

'The trial (see "Buckingham Gazette," March 13, 1830) took place before
Mr. Baron Vaughan and a grand jury at the Buckingham Lent Assizes, March
5, 1830; BUT IN THE REPORT OF MRS. EDDEN'S EVIDENCE NO MENTION IS MADE
OF THE VISION.

'Sewell and Tyler were found guilty, and were executed, protesting their
innocence, on March 8, 1830.

'Miss Browne, writing to us [Mr. Gurney] from Farnham Castle, in January
1884, gives an account of the vision which substantially accords with
that here recorded, adding:--'"The wife persisted in her account of
the vision; consequently the accused was taken up, and, with some
circumstantial evidence in addition to the woman's story, committed for
trial by two magistrates--my father, Colonel Robert Browne, and the Rev.
Charles Ackfield."

'"The murderer was convicted at the assizes, and hanged at Aylesbury."

'"It may be added that Colonel Browne was remarkably free from
superstition, and was a thorough disbeliever in 'ghost stories.'"'*


     *From Phantasms of the Living, Gurney and Myers, vol. ii. p. 586.

Now, in the report of the trial at assizes in 1830 there is not one
word about the 'ghost,' though he is conspicuous in the hearing at petty
sessions. The parallel to Fisher's case is thus complete. And the reason
for omitting the ghost in a trial is obvious. The murderers of Sergeant
Davies of Guise's, slain in the autumn of 1749 in Glenclunie, were
acquitted by an Edinburgh jury in 1753 in face of overpowering evidence
of their guilt, partly because two Highland witnesses deposed to having
seen the ghost of the sergeant, partly because the jury were Jacobites.
The prisoners' counsel, as one of them told Sir Walter Scott, knew that
their clients were guilty. A witness had seen them in the act. But the
advocate (Lockhart, a Jacobite) made such fun out of the ghost that an
Edinburgh jury, disbelieving in the spectre, and not loving the House
of Hanover, very logically disregarded also the crushing evidence for a
crime which was actually described in court by an eye-witness.

Thus, to secure a view of the original form of the yarn of Fisher's
Ghost, what we need is what we are not likely to get--namely, a copy of
the depositions made before the bench of magistrates at Campbelltown in
October 1826.

For my own part, I think it highly probable that the story of Fisher's
Ghost was told before the magistrates, as in the Buckinghamshire case,
and was suppressed in the trial at Sydney.

Worrall's condemnation is said to have excited popular discontent,
as condemnations on purely circumstantial evidence usually do. That
dissatisfaction would be increased if a ghost were publicly implicated
in the matter, just as in the case of Davies's murder in 1749. We see
how discreetly the wraith or ghost was kept out of the Buckinghamshire
case at the trial, and we see why, in Worrall's affair, no questions
were asked as to the discovery of sprinkled blood, not proved by
analysis to be human, on the rail where Fisher's ghost was said to
perch.

I had concluded my inquiry here, when I received a letter in which Mr.
Rusden kindly referred me to his 'History of Australia' (vol. ii. pp.
44, 45). Mr. Rusden there gives a summary of the story, in agreement
with that taken from the Sydney newspaper. He has 'corrected current
rumours by comparison with the words of a trustworthy informant, a
medical man, who lived long in the neighbourhood, and attended Farley
[the man who saw Fisher's ghost] on his death-bed. He often conversed
with Farley on the subject of the vision which scared him.... These
facts are compiled from the notes of Chief-Justice Forbes, who presided
at the trial, with the exception of the references to the apparition,
which, although it led to the discovery of Fisher's body, could not be
alluded to in a court of justice, or be adduced as evidence.'* There is
no justice for ghosts.


     *Thanks to the kindness of the Countess of Jersey, and the obliging
researches of the Chief Justice of New South Wales, I have received
a transcript of the judge's notes. They are correctly analysed by Mr.
Rusden.

An Australian correspondent adds another example. Long after Fisher's
case, this gentleman was himself present at a trial in Maitland, New
South Wales. A servant-girl had dreamed that a missing man told her who
had killed him, and where his body was concealed. She, being terrified,
wanted to leave the house, but her mistress made her impart the story
to the chief constable, a man known to my informant, who also knew, and
names, the judge who tried the case. The constable excavated at the spot
pointed out in the dream, unearthed the body, and arrested the criminal,
who was found guilty, confessed, and was hanged. Not a word was allowed
to be said in court about the dream. All the chief constable was
permitted to say was, that 'from information received' he went to
Hayes's farm, and so forth.

Here, then, are two parallels to Fisher's ghost, and very hard on
psychical science it is that ghostly evidence should be deliberately
burked through the prejudices of lawyers. Mr. Suttar, in his 'Australian
Stories Retold' (Bathurst, 1887), remarks that the ghost is not a
late mythical accretion in Fisher's story. 'I have the authority of a
gentleman who was intimately connected with the gentleman who had the
charge of the police when the murder was done, that Farley's story did
suggest the search for the body in the creek.' But Mr. Suttar thinks
that Farley invented the tale as an excuse for laying information. That
might apply, as has been said, to Highland witnesses in 1753, but hardly
to an Englishman in Australia. Besides, if Farley knew the facts, and
had the ghost to cover the guilt of peaching, WHY DID HE NOT PEACH?
He only pointed to a fence, and, but for the ingenious black Sherlock
Holmes, the body would never have been found. What Farley did was not
what a man would do who, knowing the facts of the crime, and lured by
a reward of 20 pounds, wished to play the informer under cover of a
ghost-story.

The case for the ghost, then, stands thus, in my opinion. Despite the
silence preserved at the trial, Farley's ghost-story was really told
before the discovery of Fisher's body, and led to the finding of the
body. Despite Mr. Suttar's theory (of information laid under shelter
of a ghost-story), Farley really had experienced an hallucination. Mr.
Rusden, who knew his doctor, speaks of his fright, and, according to
the version of 1836, he was terrified into an illness. Now, the
hallucination indicated the exact spot where Fisher was stricken down,
and left traces of his blood, which no evidence shows to have been
previously noticed. Was it, then, a fortuitous coincidence that Farley
should be casually hallucinated exactly at the one spot--the rail in the
fence--where Fisher had been knocked on the head? That is the question,
and the state of the odds may be reckoned by the mathematician.

As to the Australian servant-girl's dream about the place where another
murdered body lay, and the dreams which led to the discovery of the Red
Barn and Assynt murders, and (May 1903) to the finding of the corpse
of a drowned girl at Shanklin, all these may be mere guesses by the
sleeping self, which is very clever at discovering lost objects.




X. THE MYSTERY OF LORD BATEMAN


Ever and again, in the literary and antiquarian papers, there flickers
up debate as to the Mystery of Lord Bateman. This problem in no way
concerns the existing baronial house of Bateman, which, in Burke,
records no predecessor before a knight and lord mayor of 1717. Our
Bateman comes of lordlier and more ancient lineage. The question really
concerns 'The Loving Ballad of Lord Bateman. Illustrated by George
Cruikshank, London: Charles Tilt, Fleet Street. And Mustapha Syried,
Constantinople. MDCCCXXXIX.'

The tiny little volume in green cloth, with a design of Lord Bateman's
marriage ceremony, stamped in gold, opens with a 'Warning to the Public,
concerning the Loving Ballad of Lord Bateman.' The Warning is signed
George Cruikshank, who, however, adds in a postscript: 'The above is not
my writing.' The ballad follows, and then comes a set of notes, mainly
critical. The author of the Warning remarks: 'In some collection of old
English Ballads there is an ancient ditty, which, I am told, bears some
remote and distant resemblance to the following Epic Poem.'

Again, the text of the ballad, here styled 'The Famous History of Lord
Bateman,' with illustrations by Thackeray, 'plain' (the original designs
were coloured), occurs in the Thirteenth Volume of the Biographical
Edition of Thackeray's works. (pp. lvi-lxi).

The problems debated are: 'Who wrote the Loving Ballad of Lord
Bateman, and who wrote the Notes?' The disputants have not shown much
acquaintance with ballad lore in general.

First let us consider Mr. Thackeray's text of the ballad. It is closely
affiliated to the text of 'The Loving Ballad of Lord Bateman,' whereof
the earliest edition with Cruikshank's illustrations was published in
1839.* The edition here used is that of David Bryce and Son, Glasgow (no
date).


     *There are undated cheap broadside copies, not illustrated, in the
British Museum.

Mr. Blanchard Jerrold, in his 'Life of Cruikshank,' tells us that the
artist sang this 'old English ballad' at a dinner where Dickens and
Thackeray were present. Mr. Thackeray remarked: 'I should like to print
that ballad with illustrations,' but Cruikshank 'warned him off,' as he
intended to do the thing himself. Dickens furnished the learned notes.
This account of what occurred was given by Mr. Walter Hamilton, but Mr.
Sala furnished another version. The 'authorship of the ballad,' Mr. Sala
justly observed, 'is involved in mystery.' Cruikshank picked it up from
the recitation of a minstrel outside a pot-house. In Mr. Sala's opinion,
Mr. Thackeray 'revised and settled the words, and made them fit for
publication.' Nor did he confine himself to the mere critical work;
he added, in Mr. Sala's opinion, that admired passage about 'The young
bride's mother, who never before was heard to speak so free,' also
contributing 'The Proud Young Porter,' Jeames. Now, in fact, both the
interpellation of the bride's mamma, and the person and characteristics
of the proud young porter, are of unknown antiquity, and are not due
to Mr. Thackeray--a scholar too conscientious to 'decorate' an ancient
text. Bishop Percy did such things, and Scott is not beyond suspicion;
but Mr. Thackeray, like Joseph Ritson, preferred the authentic voice of
tradition. Thus, in the text of the Biographical Edition, he does not
imitate the Cockney twang, phonetically rendered in the version of
Cruikshank. The second verse, for example, runs thus:

Cruikshank:

          He sail-ed east, he sail-ed vest,
               Until he came to famed Tur-key,
          Vere he vos taken and put to prisin,
               Until his life was quite wea-ry.

Thackeray:

          He sailed East, and he sailed West,
               Until he came to proud Turkey,
          Where he was taken and put to prison,
               Until his life was almost weary.

There are discrepancies in the arrangement of the verses, and a most
important various reading.

Cruikshank:

          Now sevin long years is gone and past,
               And fourteen days vell known to me;
          She packed up all her gay clouthing,
               And swore Lord Bateman she would go see.

To this verse, in Cruikshank's book, a note (not by Cruikshank) is
added:

          '"Now sevin long years is gone and past,
               And fourteen days well known to me."'

In this may be recognised, though in a minor degree, the same gifted
hand that portrayed the Mussulman, the pirate, the father, and the
bigot, in two words ("This Turk").

'"The time is gone, the historian knows it, and that is enough for the
reader. This is the dignity of history very strikingly exemplified."'

That note to Cruikshank's text is, like all the delightful notes, if
style is evidence, not by Dickens, but by Thackeray. Yet, in his own
text, with an exemplary fidelity, he reads: 'And fourteen days well
known to THEE.' To whom? We are left in ignorance; and conjecture,
though tempting, is unsafe. The reading of Cruikshank, 'vell known to
ME'--that is, to the poet--is confirmed by the hitherto unprinted
'Lord Bedmin.' This version, collected by Miss Wyatt Edgell in 1899, as
recited by a blind old woman in a workhouse, who had learned it in
her youth, now lies before the present writer. He owes this invaluable
document to the kindness of Miss Wyatt Edgell and Lady Rosalind
Northcote. Invaluable it is, because it proves that Lord Bateman (or
Bedmin) is really a volkslied, a popular and current version of the
ancient ballad. 'Famed Turkey' becomes 'Torquay' in this text, probably
by a misapprehension on the part of the collector or reciter. The speech
of the bride's mother is here omitted, though it occurs in older texts;
but, on the whole, the blind old woman's memory has proved itself
excellent. In one place she gives Thackeray's reading in preference to
that of Cruikshank, thus:

Cruikshank:

          Ven he vent down on his bended knee.

Thackeray:

          Down on his bended knees fell he.

Old Woman:

          Down on his bended knee fell he.

We have now ascertained the following facts: Cruikshank and Thackeray
used a text with merely verbal differences, which was popular among
the least educated classes early in last century. Again, Thackeray
contributed the notes and critical apparatus to Cruikshank's version.
For this the internal evidence of style is overpowering: no other man
wrote in the manner and with the peculiar humour of Mr. Titmarsh. In the
humble opinion of the present writer these Notes ought to be appended to
Mr. Thackeray's version of 'Lord Bateman.' Finally, Mr. Sala was wrong
in supposing that Mr. Thackeray took liberties with the text received
from oral tradition.

What was the origin of that text? Professor Child, in the second part of
his 'English and Scottish Popular Ballads'* lays before us the learning
about Lord Bateman, Lord Bedmin, Young Bicham, Young Brechin, Young
Bekie, Young Beichan and Susie Pie (the heroine, Sophia, in Thackeray),
Lord Beichan, Young Bondwell, and Markgraf Backenweil; for by all
these names is Lord Bateman known. The student must carefully note that
'Thackeray's List of Broadsides,' cited, is NOT by Mr. W. M. Thackeray.


     *Pt. ii. p. 454 et seq., and in various other places.

As the reader may not remember the incidents in the Thackeray,
Cruikshank, and Old Woman version (which represents an ancient ballad,
now not so much popularised as vulgarised), a summary may be given.
Lord Bateman went wandering: 'his character, at this time, and his
expedition, would seem to have borne a striking resemblance to those of
Lord Byron.... SOME foreign country he wished to see, and that was the
extent of his desire; any foreign country would answer his purpose--all
foreign countries were alike to him.'--(Note, apud Cruikshank.) Arriving
in Turkey (or Torquay) he was taken and fastened to a tree by his
captor. He was furtively released by the daughter of 'This Turk.' 'The
poet has here, by that bold license which only genius can venture upon,
surmounted the extreme difficulty of introducing any particular Turk, by
assuming a foregone conclusion in the reader's mind; and adverting, in
a casual, careless way, to a Turk hitherto unknown as to an old
acquaintance.... "THIS Turk he had" is a master-stroke, a truly
Shakespearian touch'--(Note.) The lady, in her father's cellar
('Castle,' Old Woman's text), consoles the captive with 'the very best
wine,' secretly stored, for his private enjoyment, by the cruel and
hypocritical Mussulman. She confesses the state of her heart,
and inquires as to Lord Bateman's real property, which is 'half
Northumberland.' To what period in the complicated mediaeval history of
the earldom of Northumberland the affair belongs is uncertain.

The pair vow to be celibate for seven years, and Lord Bateman escapes.
At the end of the period, Sophia sets out for Northumberland, urged,
perhaps, by some telepathic admonition. For, on arriving at Lord
Bateman's palace (Alnwick Castle?), she summons the proud porter,
announces herself, and finds that her lover has just celebrated a
marriage with another lady. In spite of the remonstrances of the bride's
mamma, Lord Bateman restores that young lady to her family, observing

          She is neither the better nor the worse for me.

So Thackeray and Old Woman. Cruikshank prudishly reads,

          O you'll see what I'll do for you and she.

'Lord Bateman then prepared another marriage, having plenty of
superfluous wealth to bestow upon the Church.'--(Note.) All the rest was
bliss.

The reader may ask: How did Sophia know anything about the obscure
Christian captive? WHY did she leave home exactly in time for his
marriage? How came Lord Bateman to be so fickle? The Annotator replies:
'His lordship had doubtless been impelled by despair of ever recovering
his lost Sophia, and a natural anxiety not to die without leaving an
heir to his estate.' Finally how was the difficulty of Sophia's religion
overcome?

To all these questions the Cockney version gives no replies, but the
older forms of the ballad offer sufficient though varying answers, as we
shall see.

Meanwhile one thing is plain from this analysis of the pot-house version
of an old ballad, namely, that the story is constructed out of fragments
from the great universal store of popular romance. The central ideas are
two: first, the situation of a young man in the hands of a cruel captor
(often a god, a giant, a witch, a fiend), but here--a Turk. The youth
is loved and released (commonly through magic spells) by the daughter
of the gaoler, god, giant, witch, Turk, or what not. In Greece, Jason is
the Lord Bateman, Medea is the Sophia, of the tale, which was known
to Homer and Hesiod, and was fully narrated by Pindar. THE OTHER YOUNG
PERSON, the second bride, however, comes in differently, in the Greek.
In far-off Samoa, a god is the captor.* The gaoler is a magician in Red
Indian versions.**


     *Turner's 'Samoa,' p. 102.

     **For a list, though an imperfect one, of the Captor's Daughter story,
see the Author's Custom and Myth, pp. 86-102.

As a rule, in these tales, from Finland to Japan, from Samoa to
Madagascar, Greece and India, the girl accompanies her lover in his
flight, delaying the pursuer by her magic. In 'Lord Bateman' another
formula, almost as widely diffused, is preferred.

The old true love comes back just after her lover's wedding. He returns
to her. Now, as a rule, in popular tales, the lover's fickleness is
explained by a spell or by a breach of a taboo. The old true love has
great difficulty in getting access to him, and in waking him from a
sleep, drugged or magical.

          The bloody shirt I wrang for thee,
          The Hill o' Glass I clamb for thee,
          And wilt thou no waken and speak to me?

He wakens at last, and all is well. In a Romaic ballad the deserted
girl, meeting her love on his wedding-day, merely reminds him of old
kindness. He answers--

          Now he that will may scatter nuts,
               And he may wed that will,
          But she that was my old true love
               Shall be my true love still.

This incident, the strange, often magically caused oblivion of the
lover, whose love returns to him, like Sophia, at, or after, his
marriage, is found in popular tales of Scotland, Norway, Iceland,
Germany, Italy, Greece, and the Gaelic Western Islands. It does not
occur in 'Lord Bateman,' where Mr. Thackeray suggests probable reasons
for Lord Bateman's fickleness. But the world-wide incidents are found in
older versions of 'Lord Bateman,' from which they have been expelled by
the English genius for the commonplace.

Thus, if we ask, how did Sophia at first know of Bateman's existence?
The lovely and delicate daughter of the Turk, doubtless, was unaware
that, in the crowded dungeons of her sire, one captive of wealth,
noble birth, and personal fascination, was languishing. The Annotator
explains: 'She hears from an aged and garrulous attendant, her only
female adviser (for her mother died while she was yet an infant), of the
sorrows and sufferings of the Christian captive.' In ancient versions
of the ballad another explanation occurs. She overhears a song which
he sings about his unlucky condition. This account is in Young Bekie
(Scottish: mark the name, Bekie), where France is the scene and the
king's daughter is the lady. The same formula of the song sung by the
prisoner is usual. Not uncommon, too, is a TOKEN carried by Sophia when
she pursues her lost adorer, to insure her recognition. It is half of
her broken ring. Once more, why does Sophia leave home to find Bateman
in the very nick of time? Thackeray's version does not tell us; but
Scottish versions do. 'She longed fu' sair her love to see.' Elsewhere
a supernatural being, 'The Billy Blin,' or a fairy, clad in green,
gives her warning. The fickleness of the hero is caused, sometimes, by
constraint, another noble 'has his marriage,' as his feudal superior,
and makes him marry, but only in form.

          There is a marriage in yonder hall,
               Has lasted thirty days and three,
          The bridegroom winna bed the bride,
               For the sake o' one that's owre the sea.

In this Scottish version, by the way, occurs--

          Up spoke the young bride's mother,
               Who never was heard to speak so free,

wrongly attributed to Mr. Thackeray's own pen.

The incident of the magical oblivion which comes over the bridegroom
occurs in Scandinavian versions of 'Lord Bateman' from manuscripts of
the sixteenth century.* Finally, the religious difficulty in several
Scottish versions is got over by the conversion and baptism of Sophia,
who had professed the creed of Islam. That all these problems in 'Lord
Bateman' are left unsolved is, then, the result of decay. The modern
vulgar English version of the pot-house minstrel (known as 'The Tripe
Skewer,' according to the author of the Introduction to Cruikshank's
version) has forgotten, has been heedless of, and has dropped the
ancient universal elements of folk-tale and folk-song.


     *Child, ii. 459-461.

These graces, it is true, are not too conspicuous even in the oldest and
best versions of 'Lord Bateman.' Choosing at random, however, we find a
Scots version open thus:

          In the lands where Lord Beichan was born,
               Among the stately steps o' stane,
          He wore the goud at his left shoulder,
               But to the Holy Land he's gane.

That is not in the tone of the ditty sung by the Tripe Skewer. Again, in
his prison,

          He made na his moan to a stock,
               He made na it to a stone,
          But it was to the Queen of Heaven
               That he made his moan.

The lines are from a version of the North of Scotland, and, on the face
of it, are older than the extirpation of the Catholic faith in the loyal
North. The reference to Holy Land preserves a touch of the crusading
age. In short, poor as they may be, the Scottish versions are those of
a people not yet wholly vulgarised, not yet lost to romance. The singers
have 'half remembered and half forgot' the legend of Gilbert Becket
(Bekie, Beichan), the father of St. Thomas of Canterbury. Gilbert, in
the legend, went to Holy Land, was cast into a Saracen's prison, and
won his daughter's heart. He escaped, but the lady followed him, like
Sophia, and, like Sophia, found and wedded him; Gilbert's servant,
Richard, playing the part of the proud young porter. Yet, as Professor
Child justly observes, the ballad 'is not derived from the legend,'
though the legend as to Gilbert Becket exists in a manuscript of about
1300. The Bateman motive is older than Gilbert Becket, and has been
attached to later versions of the adventures of that hero. Gilbert
Becket about 1300 was credited with a floating, popular tale of the
Bateman sort, and out of his legend, thus altered, the existing ballads
drew their 'Bekie' and 'Beichan,' from the name of Becket.

The process is: First, the popular tale of the return of the old true
love; that tale is found in Greece, Scandinavia, Denmark, Iceland,
Faroe, Spain, Germany, and so forth. Next, about 1300 Gilbert Becket is
made the hero of the tale. Next, our surviving ballads retain a trace or
two of the Becket form, but they are not derived from the Becket form.
The fancy of the folk first evolved the situations in the story, then
lent them to written literature (Becket's legend, 1300), and thirdly,
received the story back from written legend with a slight, comparatively
modern colouring.

In the dispute as to the origin of our ballads one school, as Mr. T. F.
Henderson and Professor Courthope, regard them as debris of old literary
romances, ill-remembered work of professional minstrels.* That there are
ballads of this kind in England, such as the Arthurian ballads, I do
not deny. But in my opinion many ballads and popular tales are in origin
older than the mediaeval romances, as a rule. As a rule the romances
are based on earlier popular data, just as the 'Odyssey' is an artistic
whole made up out of popular tales. The folk may receive back a literary
form of its own ballad or story, but more frequently the popular ballad
comes down in oral tradition side by side with its educated child, the
literary romance on the same theme.

Cf. The Queen's Marie.

Mr. Henderson has answered that the people is unpoetical. The degraded
populace of the slums may be unpoetical, like the minstrel named 'Tripe
Skewer,' and may deprave the ballads of its undegraded ancestry into
such modern English forms as 'Lord Bateman.' But I think of the people
which, in Barbour's day, had its choirs of peasant girls chanting rural
snatches on Bruce's victories, or, in still earlier France, of Roland's
overthrow. If THEIR songs are attributed to professional minstrels, I
turn to the Greece of 1830, to the Finland of to-day, to the outermost
Hebrides of to-day, to the Arapahoes of Northern America, to the
Australian blacks, among all of whom the people are their own poets and
make their own dirges, lullabies, chants of victory, and laments for
defeat. THESE peoples are not unpoetical. In fact, when I say that the
people has been its own poet I do not mean the people which goes to
music halls and reads halfpenny newspapers. To the true folk we owe the
legend of Lord Bateman in its ancient germs; and to the folk's degraded
modern estate, crowded as men are in noisome streets and crushed by
labour, we owe the Cockney depravation, the Lord Bateman of Cruikshank
and Thackeray. Even that, I presume, being old, is now forgotten, except
by the ancient blind woman in the workhouse. To the workhouse has come
the native popular culture--the last lingering shadow of old romance.
That is the moral of the ballad of Lord Bateman.

In an article by Mr. Kitton, in Literature (June 24, 1899, p. 699), this
learned Dickensite says: 'The authorship of this version' (Cruikshank's)
'of an ancient ballad and of the accompanying notes has given rise to
much controversy, and whether Dickens or Thackeray was responsible for
them is still a matter of conjecture, although what little evidence
there is seems to favour Thackeray.'

For the ballad neither Thackeray nor Dickens is responsible. The Old
Woman's text settles that question: the ballad is a degraded Volkslied.
As to the notes, internal evidence for once is explicit. The notes are
Thackeray's. Any one who doubts has only to compare Thackeray's notes to
his prize poem on 'Timbuctoo.'

The banter, in the notes, is academic banter, that of a university man,
who is mocking the notes of learned editors. This humour is not
the humour of Dickens, who, however, may very well have written the
Introduction to Cruikshank's version. That morceau is in quite a
different taste and style. I ought, in fairness, to add the following
note from Mr. J. B. Keene, which may be thought to overthrow belief in
Thackeray's authorship of the notes:--

Dear Sir,--Your paper in the 'Cornhill' for this month on the Mystery of
Lord Bateman interested me greatly, but I must beg to differ from you as
to the authorship of the Notes, and for this reason.

I have before me a copy of the first edition of the 'Loving Ballad'
which was bought by my father soon after it was issued. At that
time--somewhere about 1840--there was a frequent visitor at our house,
named Burnett, who had married a sister of Charles Dickens, and who gave
us the story of its production.

He said, as you state, that Cruikshank had got the words from a
pot-house singer, but the locality he named was Whitechapel,* where he
was looking out for characters. He added that Cruikshank sung or hummed
the tune to him, and he gave it the musical notation which follows the
preface. He also said that Charles Dickens wrote the notes. His personal
connection with the work and his relation to Dickens are, I think, fair
evidence on the question.

I am, dear Sir,     Yours truly,
          J. B. KEENE.

Kingsmead House, 1 Hartham Road,     Camden Road, N., Feb. 13,1900.

Mr. Keene's evidence may, perhaps, settle the question. But, if Dickens
wrote the Introduction, that might be confused in Mr. Burnett's memory
with the Notes, from internal evidence the work of Thackeray. If not,
then in the Notes we find a new aspect of the inexhaustible humour
of Dickens. It is certain, at all events, that neither Dickens nor
Thackeray was the author of the 'Loving Ballad.'

P.S.--The preface to the ballad says Battle Bridge.




XI. THE QUEEN'S MARIE


          Little did my mother think
               That day she cradled me
          What land I was to travel in,
               Or what death I should die.

Writing to Mrs. Dunlop on January 25, 1790, Burns quoted these lines,
'in an old Scottish ballad, which, notwithstanding its rude simplicity,
speaks feelingly to the heart.' Mr. Carlyle is said, when young, to have
written them on a pane of glass in a window, with a diamond, adding,
characteristically, 'Oh foolish Thee!' In 1802, in the first edition of
'The Border Minstrelsy,' Scott cited only three stanzas from the same
ballad, not including Burns's verse, but giving

          Yestreen the Queen had four Maries,
               The night she'll hae but three,
          There was Marie Seaton, and Marie Beaton,
               And Marie Carmichael and me.

In later editions Sir Walter offered a made-up copy of the ballad, most
of it from a version collected by Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe.

It now appeared that Mary Hamilton was the heroine, that she was one of
Queen Marie's four Maries, and that she was hanged for murdering a
child whom she bore to Darnley. Thus the character of Mary Hamilton
was 'totally lost,' and Darnley certainly 'had not sufficient for two.'
Darnley, to be sure, told his father that 'I never offended the Queen,
my wife, in meddling with any woman in thought, let be in deed,' and,
whether Darnley spoke truth or not, there was, among the Queen's Maries,
no Mary Hamilton to meddle with, just as there was no Mary Carmichael.

The Maries were attendant on the Queen as children ever since she left
Scotland for France. They were Mary Livingstone (mentioned as 'Lady
Livinston' in one version of the ballad),* who married 'John Sempill,
called the Dancer,' who, says Laing, 'acquired the lands of Beltree, in
Renfrewshire.'**


     *Child, vol. iii. p. 389.

     **Laing's Knox, ii. 415, note 3.

When Queen Mary was a captive in England she was at odds with the
Sempill pair about some jewels of hers in their custody. He was not
a satisfactory character, he died before November 1581. Mary Fleming,
early in 1587, married the famous William Maitland of Lethington, 'being
no more fit for her than I to be a page,' says Kirkcaldy of Grange. Her
life was wretched enough, through the stormy career and sad death of her
lord. Mary Beaton, with whom Randolph, the English ambassador, used to
flirt, married, in 1566, Ogilvy of Boyne, the first love of Lady Jane
Gordon, the bride of Bothwell. Mary Seaton remained a maiden and busked
the Queen's hair during her English captivity. We last hear of her
from James Maitland of Lethington, in 1613, living at Rheims, very old,
'decrepid,' and poor. There is no room in the Four for Mary Hamilton,
and no mention of her appears in the records of the Court.

How, then, did Mary Hamilton find her way into the old ballad about
Darnley and the Queen?

To explain this puzzle, some modern writers have denied that the
ballad of 'The Queen's Marie' is really old; they attribute it to the
eighteenth century. The antiquary who launched this opinion was Scott's
not very loyal friend, Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe. According to him,
a certain Miss Hambledon (no Christian name is given), being Maid of
Honour to the Empress Catherine of Russia, had three children by an
amour, and murdered all three. Peter the Great caused her to be, not
hanged, but decapitated. Sharpe took his facts from 'a German almanac,'
and says: 'The Russian tragedy must be the original.' The late Professor
Child, from more authentic documents, dates Miss Hambledon's or
Hamilton's execution on March 14, 1719. At that time, or nearly then,
Charles Wogan was in Russia on a mission from the Chevalier de St.
George (James III.), and through him the news might reach Scotland.
Mr. Courthope, in his 'History of English Poetry,' followed Sharpe and
Professor Child, and says: 'It is very remarkable that one of the very
latest of the Scottish popular ballads should be one of the very best.'

The occurrence would not only be remarkable, but, as far as possibility
goes in literature, would be impossible, for several reasons. One is
that neither literary men nor mere garreteers and makers of street
ballads appear, about 1719-1730, to have been capable of recapturing the
simplicity and charm of the old ballad style, at its best, or anything
near its best. There is no mistaking the literary touch in such ballads
as Allan Ramsay handled, or in the imitation named 'Hardyknute' in
Allan's 'Tea Table Miscellany,' 1724. 'It was the first poem I ever
learned, the last I shall ever forget,' said Scott, and, misled by
boyish affection, he deemed it 'just old enough,' 'a noble imitation.'*
But the imitation can deceive nobody, and while literary imitators,
as far as their efforts have reached us, were impotent to deceive, the
popular Muse, of 1714-1730, was not attempting deception. Ballads of
the eighteenth century were sarcastic, as in those on Sheriffmuir and
in Skirving's amusing ballad on Preston Pans, or were mere doggerel, or
were brief songs to old tunes. They survive in print, whether in flying
broadsides or in books, but, popular as is 'The Queen's Marie,' in all
its many variants (Child gives no less than eighteen), we do not know
a single printed example before Scott's made-up copy in the 'Border
Minstrelsy.' The latest ballad really in the old popular manner known
to me is that of 'Rob Roy,' namely, of Robin Oig and James More, sons
of Rob Roy, and about their abduction of an heiress in 1752. This is
a genuine popular poem, but in style and tone and versification it is
wholly unlike 'The Queen's Marie.' I scarcely hope that any one can
produce, after 1680, a single popular piece which could be mistaken for
a ballad of or near Queen Mary's time.


     *Lockhart, i. 114, x. 138.

The known person least unlike Mr. Courthope's late 'maker' was
'Mussel-mou'd Charlie Leslie,' 'an old Aberdeenshire minstrel, the very
last, probably, of the race,' says Scott. Charlie died in 1782. He sang,
and sold PRINTED ballads. 'Why cannot you sing other songs than those
rebellious ones?' asked a Hanoverian Provost of Aberdeen. 'Oh ay,
but--THEY WINNA BUY THEM!' said Charlie. 'Where do you buy them?' 'Why,
faur I get them cheapest.' He carried his ballads in 'a large harden
bag, hung over his shoulder.' Charlie had tholed prison for Prince
Charles, and had seen Provost Morison drink the Prince's health in wine
and proclaim him Regent at the Cross of Aberdeen. If Charlie (who lived
to be a hundred and two) composed the song, 'Mussel-mou'd Charlie'
('this sang Charlie made hissel'), then this maker could never have
produced 'The Queen's Marie,' nor could any maker like him. His ballads
were printed, as any successful ballad of 1719 would probably have been,
in broadsides.* Against Mr. Child and Mr. Courthope, then, we argue
that, after 1600, a marked decadence of the old ballad style set
in--that the old style (as far as is known) died soon after Bothwell
Brig (1679), in the execrable ballads of both sides, such as
'Philiphaugh,' and that it soon was not only dead as a form in practical
use, but was entirely superseded by new kinds of popular poetry, of
which many examples survive, and are familiar to every student. How, or
why, then, should a poet, aiming at popularity, about 1719-1730, compose
'The Queen's Marie' in an obsolete manner? The old ballads were still
sung, indeed; but we ask for proof that new ballads were still composed
in the ancient fashion.


     *See, for example, Mr. Macquoid's Jacobite Songs and Ballads, pp.
424, 510, with a picture of Charlie.

Secondly, WHY, and how tempted, would a popular poet of 1719 transfer
a modern tragedy of Russia to the year 1563, or thereabouts? His public
would naturally desire a ballad gazette of the mournful new tale,
concerning a lass of Scottish extraction, betrayed, tortured, beheaded,
at the far-off court of a Muscovite tyrant. The facts 'palpitated with
actuality,' and, since Homer's day, 'men desire' (as Homer says) 'the
new songs' on the new events. What was gained by going back to Queen
Mary? Would a popular 'Musselmou'd Charlie' even know, by 1719, the
names of the Queen's Maries? Mr. Courthope admits that 'he may have
been helped by some ballad,' one of those spoken of, as we shall see,
by Knox. If that ballad told the existing Marian story, what did the
'maker' add? If it did NOT, what did he borrow? No more than the names
could he borrow, and no more than the name 'Hamilton' from the Russian
tragedy could he add. One other thing he might be said to add, the
verses in which Mary asks 'the jolly sailors' not to

         'Let on to my father and mother
               But that I'm coming hame.'

This passage, according to Mr. Courthope, 'was suggested partly by the
fact of a Scotswoman being executed in Russia.' C. K. Sharpe also says:
'If Marie Hamilton was executed in Scotland, it is not likely' (why
not?) 'that her relations resided beyond seas.' They MAY have been in
France, like many another Hamilton! Mr. Child says: 'The appeal to the
sailors shows that Mary Hamilton dies in a foreign land--not that of
her ancestors.' Yet the ballad makes her die in or near the Canongate!
Moreover, the family of the Mary Hamilton of 1719 had been settled in
Russia for generations, and were reckoned of the Russian noblesse. The
verses, therefore, on either theory, are probably out of place, and are
perhaps an interpolation suggested to some reciter (they only occur in
some of the many versions) by a passage in 'The Twa Brithers.'*


     *Child, i. 439.

We now reach the most important argument for the antiquity of 'The
Queen's Marie.' Mr. Courthope has theoretically introduced as existing
in, or after, 1719, 'makers' who could imitate to deception the old
ballad style. Now Maidment remarks that 'this ballad was popular in
Galloway, Selkirkshire, Lanarkshire, and Aberdeen, AND THE VERY STRIKING
DISCREPANCIES GO FAR TO REMOVE EVERY SUSPICION OF FABRICATION.' Chambers
uses (1829) against Sharpe the same argument of 'universal diffusion
in Scotland.' Neither Mr. Child nor Mr. Courthope draws the obvious
inferences from the extraordinary discrepancies in the eighteen
variants. Such essential discrepancies surely speak of a long period of
oral recitation by men or women accustomed to interpolate, alter, and
add, in the true old ballad manner. Did such rhapsodists exist after
1719? Old Charlie, for one, did not sing or sell the old ballads. Again,
if the ballad (as it probably would be in 1719) was PRINTED, or even
if it was not, could the variations have been evolved between 1719 and
1802?

These variations are numerous, striking, and fundamental. In many
variants even the name of the heroine does not tally with that of the
Russian maid of honour. That most important and telling coincidence
wholly disappears. In a version of Motherwell's, from Dumbartonshire,
the heroine is Mary Myle. In a version known to Scott ('Minstrelsy,'
1810, iii. 89, note), the name is Mary Miles. Mr. Child also finds Mary
Mild, Mary Moil, and Lady Maisry. This Maisry is daughter of the Duke
of York! Now, the Duke of York whom alone the Scottish people knew was
James Stuart, later James II. Once more the heroine is daughter of the
Duke of Argyll, therefore a Campbell. Or she is without patronymic, and
is daughter of a lord or knight of the North, or South, or East, and
one of her sisters is a barber's wife, and her father lives in
England!--(Motherwell.) She, at least, might invoke 'Ye mariners,
mariners, mariners!' (as in Scott's first fragment) not to carry her
story. Now we ask whether, after the ringing tragedy of Miss Hamilton in
Russia, in the year of grace 1719, contemporaries who heard the woeful
tale could, between 1719 and 1820, call the heroine--(1) Hamilton; (2)
Mild, Moil, Myle, Miles; (3) make her a daughter of the Duke of York, or
of the Duke of Argyll, or of lords and of knights from all quarters of
the compass, and sister-in-law to an English barber, also one of the
Queen's 'serving-maids.' We at least cannot accept those numerous and
glittering contradictions as corruptions which could be made soon after
the Russian events, when the true old ballad style was dead.

We now produce more startling variations. The lover is not only 'the
King,' 'the Prince,' Darnley, 'the highest Stuart o' a',' but he is also
that old offender, 'Sweet Willie,' or he is Warrenston (Warriston?).
Mary is certainly not hanged (the Russian woman was beheaded) away from
her home; she dies in Edinburgh, near the Tolbooth, the Netherbow, the
Canongate, and--

          O what will my three brothers say
               When they COME HAME frae sea,
          When they see three locks o' my yellow hair
               Hinging under a gallows tree?

It is impossible here to give all the variations. Mary pulls, or does
not pull, or her lover pulls, the leaf of the Abbey, or 'savin,' or
other tree; the Queen is 'auld,' or not 'auld;' she kicks in Mary's door
and bursts the bolts, or does nothing so athletic and inconsistent with
her advanced age. The heroine does, or does not, appeal vainly to her
father. Her dress is of all varieties. She does, or does not, go to the
Tolbooth and other places. She is, or is not, allured to Edinburgh,
'a wedding for to see.' Her infanticide is variously described, or its
details are omitted, and the dead body of the child is found in various
places, or not found at all. Though drowned in the sea, it is between
the bolster and the wall, or under the blankets! She expects, or
does not expect, to be avenged by her kin. The king is now angry, now
clement--inviting Mary to dinner! Mary is hanged, or (Buchan's MS.)
is not hanged, but is ransomed by Warrenston, probably Johnston of
Warriston! These are a few specimens of variations in point of fact: in
language the variations are practically countless. How could they arise,
if the ballad is later than 1719?

We now condescend to appeal to statistics. We have examined the number
of variants published by Mr. Child in his first six volumes, on ballads
which have, or may have, an historical basis. Of course, the older
and more popular the ballads, the more variants do we expect to
discover--time and taste producing frequent changes. Well, of
'Otterburn' Mr. Child has five versions; of the 'Hunting of the Cheviot'
he has two, with minor modifications indicated by letters from the
'lower case.' Of 'Gude Wallace' he has eight. Of 'Johnnie Armstrong' he
has three. Of 'Kinmont Willie' he has one. Of 'The Bonnie Earl o' Moray'
he has two. Of 'Johnnie Cock' he has thirteen. Of 'Sir Patrick Spens'
he has eighteen. And of 'The Queen's Marie' (counting Burns's solitary
verse and other brief fragments) Mr. Child has eighteen versions or
variants

Thus a ballad made, ex hypothesi Sharpiana, in or after 1719, has been
as much altered in oral tradition as the most popular and perhaps the
oldest historical ballad of all, 'Sir Patrick Spens,' and much more than
any other of the confessedly ancient semi-historical popular poems.
The historical event which may have suggested 'Sir Patrick Spens'
is 'plausibly,' says Mr. Child, fixed in 1281: it is the marriage of
Margaret of Scotland to Eric, King of Norway. Others suggest so late a
date as the wooing of Anne of Denmark by James VI. Nothing is known.
No wonder, then, that in time an orally preserved ballad grows rich
in variants. But that a ballad of 1719 should, in eighty modern
non-balladising years, become as rich in extant variants, and far more
discrepant in their details, as 'Sir Patrick Spens' is a circumstance
for which we invite explanation.

Will men say, 'The later the ballad, the more it is altered in oral
tradition'? If so, let them, by all means, produce examples! We should,
on this theory, have about a dozen 'Battles of Philiphaugh,' and at
least fifteen 'Bothwell Brigs,' a poem, by the way, much in the old
manner, prosaically applied, and so recent that, in art at least, it was
produced after the death of the Duke of Monmouth, slain, it avers, by
the machinations of Claverhouse! Of course we are not asking for exact
proportions, since many variants of ballads may be lost, but merely for
proof that, the later a ballad is, the more variants of it occur. But
this contention is probably impossible, and the numerous variations
in 'The Queen's Marie' are really a proof of long existence in oral
tradition, and contradict the theory espoused by Mr. Child, who later
saw the difficulty involved in his hypothesis.

This argument, though statistical, is, we think, conclusive, and the
other considerations which we have produced in favour of the antiquity
of 'The Queen's Marie' add their cumulative weight.

We have been, in brief, invited to suppose that, about 1719, a Scot
wrote a ballad on an event in contemporary Russian Court life; that
(contrary to use and wont) he threw the story back a century and a half;
that he was a master of an old style, in the practice of his age utterly
obsolete and not successfully imitated; that his poem became universally
popular, and underwent, in eighty years, even more vicissitudes than
most other ballads encounter in three or five centuries. Meanwhile it is
certain that there had been real ancient ballads, contemporary with the
Marian events--ballads on the very Maries two or three of whom appear
in the so-called poem of 1719; while exactly the same sort of scandal
as the ballad records had actually occurred at Queen Mary's Court in
a lower social rank. The theory of Mr. Child is opposed to our whole
knowledge of ballad literature, of its age, decadence (about 1620-1700),
and decease (in the old kind) as a popular art.

To agree with Mr. Child, we must not only accept one great ballad-poet,
born at least fifty years too late; we must not only admit that such a
poet would throw back his facts for a century and a half; but we must
also conceive that the balladising humour, with its ancient methods, was
even more vivacious in Scotland for many years after 1719 than, as far
as we know, it had ever been before. Yet there is no other trace known
to us of the existence of the old balladising humour and of the old art
in all that period. We have no such ballad about the English captain
shot by the writer's pretty wife, none about the bewitched son of Lord
Torphichen, none about the Old Chevalier, or Lochiel, or Prince Charlie:
we have merely Shenstone's 'Jemmy Dawson' and the Glasgow bellman's
rhymed history of Prince Charles. In fact, 'Jemmy Dawson' is a fair
instantia contradictoria as far as a ballad by a man of letters is to
the point. Such a ballad that age could indeed produce: it is not very
like 'The Queen's Marie'! No, we cannot take refuge in 'Townley's Ghost'
and his address to the Butcher Cumberland:--

          Imbrued in bliss, imbathed in case,
               Though now thou seem'st to lie,
          My injured form shall gall thy peace,
               And make thee wish to die!

THAT is a ballad of the eighteenth century, and it is not in the manner
of 'The Queen's Marie.'

These considerations, now so obvious to a student of the art of old
popular poetry, if he thinks of the matter, could not occur to Charles
Kirkpatrick Sharpe. He was a great collector of ballads, but not versed
in, or interested in, their 'aesthetic'--in the history and evolution of
ballad-making. Mr. Child, on the other hand, was the Grimm or Kohler of
popular English and Scottish poetry. Our objections to his theory could
scarcely have been collected in such numbers, without the aid of his
own assortment of eighteen versions or fragments, with more lectiones
variae. But he has not allowed for the possible, the constantly
occurring, chance of coincidence between fancy and fact; nor, perhaps,
has he reflected on the changed condition of ballad poetry in the
eighteenth century, on the popular love of a new song about a new
event, and on the entire lack of evidence (as far as I am aware) for the
existence of ballad-poets in the old manner during the reign of George
I. The ballad-reading public of 1719 would have revelled in a fresh
ballad of a Scottish lass, recently betrayed, tortured, and slain far
away by a Russian tyrant. A fresh ballad on Queen Mary's Court, done
in the early obsolete manner, would, on the other hand, have had
comparatively little charm for the ballad-buying lieges in 1719. The
ballad-poet had thus in 1719 no temptation to be 'archaistic,' like
Mr. Rossetti, and to sing of old times. He had, on the contrary, every
inducement to indite a 'rare new ballad' on the last tragic scandal,
with its poignant details, as of Peter kissing the dead girl's head.

The hypothesis of Mr. Child could only be DEMONSTRATED incorrect by
proving that there was no Russian scandal at all, or by producing a
printed or manuscript copy of 'The Queen's Marie' older than 1719. We
can do neither of these things; we can only give the reader his choice
of two improbabilities--(a) that an historical event, in 1718-19,
chanced to coincide with the topic of an old ballad; (b) that, contrary
to all we know of the evolution of ballads and the state of taste, a new
popular poem on a fresh theme was composed in a style long disused,* was
offered most successfully to the public of 1719, and in not much more
than half a century was more subjected to alterations and interpolations
than ballads which for two or three hundred years had run the gauntlet
of oral tradition.


     *A learned Scots antiquary writes to me:  'The real ballad manner
hardly came down to 1600. It was killed by the Francis Roos version
of the Psalms, after which the Scottish folk of the Lowlands cast
everything into that mould.' I think, however, that 'Bothwell Brig' is a
true survival of the ancient style, and there are other examples, as in
the case of the ballad on Lady Warriston's husband murder.

As for our own explanation of the resemblance between the affair of Miss
Hamilton, in 1719, and the ballad story of Mary Hamilton (alias Mild,
Myle, Moil, Campbell, Miles, or Stuart, or anonymous, or Lady Maisry),
we simply, with Scott, regard it as 'a very curious coincidence.' On the
other theory, on Mr. Child's, it is also a curious coincidence that a
waiting-woman of Mary Stuart WAS hanged (not beheaded) for child-murder,
and that there WERE written, simultaneously, ballads on the
Queen's Maries. Much odder coincidences than either have often, and
indisputably, occurred, and it is not for want of instances, but for
lack of space, that we do not give examples.

Turning, now, to a genuine historic scandal of Queen Mary's reign, we
find that it might have given rise to the many varying forms of the
ballad of 'The Queen's Marie.' There is, practically, no such ballad;
that is, among the many variants, we cannot say which comes nearest to
the 'original' lay of the frail maid and her doom. All the variants are
full of historical impossibilities, due to the lapses of memory and the
wandering fancy of reciters, altering and interpolating, through more
than two centuries, an original of which nothing can now be known. The
fancy, if not of the first ballad poet who dealt with a real tragic
event, at least of his successors in many corners of Scotland, raised
the actors and sufferers in a sad story, elevating a French waiting-maid
to the rank of a Queen's Marie, and her lover, a French apothecary, to
the place of a queen's consort, or, at lowest, of a Scottish laird.

At the time of the General Assembly which met on Christmas Day 1563, a
French waiting-maid of Mary Stuart, 'ane Frenche woman that servit in
the Queenis chalmer,' fell into sin 'with the Queenis awin hipoticary.'
The father and mother slew the child, and were 'dampned to be hangit
upoun the publict streit of Edinburgh.' No official report exists: 'the
records of the Court of Justiciary at this time are defective,' says
Maidment, and he conjectures that the accused may have been hanged
without trial, 'redhand.' Now the Queen's apothecary must have left
traces in the royal account-books. No writer on the subject has
mentioned them. I myself have had the Records of Privy Council and the
MS. Treasurer's Accounts examined, with their statement of the expenses
of the royal household. The Rev. John Anderson was kind enough to
undertake this task, though with less leisure than he could have
desired. There is, unluckily, a gap of some months in 1563. In June
1560, Mr. Anderson finds mention of a 'medicinar,' 'apoticarre,'
'apotigar,' but no name is given, and the Queen was then in France. One
Nicholas Wardlaw of the royal household was engaged, in 1562, to a Miss
Seton of Parbroath, but it needed a special royal messenger to bring the
swain to the altar. 'Ane appotigar' of 1562 is mentioned, but not named,
and we hear of Robert Henderson, chirurgeon, who supplied powders
and odours to embalm Huntley. There is no trace of the hanging of any
'appotigar,' or of any one of the Queen's women, 'the maidans,' spoken
of collectively. So far, the search for the apothecary has been a
failure. More can be learned from Randolph's letter to Cecil (December
31, 1563), here copied from the MS. in the Public Record Office. The
austerity of Mary's Court, under Mr. Knox, is amusingly revealed:--'For
newes yt maye please your honour to knowe that the Lord Treasurer of
Scotlande for gettinge of a woman with chylde muste vpon Sondaye nexte
do open penance before the whole congregation and mr knox mayke the
sermonde. Thys my Lord of murraye wylled me to wryte vnto you for a
note of our greate severitie in punyshynge of offenders. THE FRENCHE
POTTICARIE AND THE WOMAN HE GOTTE WITH CHYLDE WERE BOTHE HANGED THYS
PRESENT FRIDAYE. Thys hathe made myche sorrowe in our Courte. Maynie
evle fortunes we have had by our Frenche fowlkes, and yet I feare we
love them over well.'

After recording the condemnation of the waiting-woman and her lover,
Knox tells a false story about 'shame hastening the marriage' of Mary
Livingstone. Dr. Robertson, in his 'Inventories of Queen Mary,' refutes
this slander, which he deems as baseless as the fables against Knox's
own continence. Knox adds: 'What bruit the Maries and the rest of the
danseris of the Courte had, the ballads of that age did witness, quhilk
we for modesteis sake omit.' Unlucky omission, unfortunate 'modestei'!
From Randolph's Letters it is known that Knox, at this date, was
thundering against 'danseris.' Here, then, is a tale of the Queen's
French waiting-woman hanged for murder, and here is proof that there
actually were ballads about the Queen's Maries. These ladies, as we
know from Keith, were, from the first, in the Queen's childhood, Mary
Livingstone, Mary Seatoun, Mary Beatoun, and Mary Fleming.

We have, then, a child-murder, by a woman of the Queen, we have ballads
about her Maries, and, as Scott says, 'the tale has suffered great
alterations, as handed down by tradition, the French waiting-woman
being changed into Mary Hamilton, and the Queen's apothecary into Henry
Darnley,' who, as Mr. Child shows, was not even in Scotland in 1563.
But gross perversion of contemporary facts does not prove a ballad to be
late or apocryphal. Mr. Child even says that accuracy in a ballad would
be very 'suspicious.' Thus, for example, we know, from contemporary
evidence, that the murder of the Bonny Earl Murray, in 1592, by Huntley,
was at once made the topic of ballads. Of these, Aytoun and Mr. Child
print two widely different in details: in the first, Huntley has married
Murray's sister; in the second, Murray is the lover of the Queen of
James VI. Both statements are picturesque; but the former is certainly,
and the latter is probably, untrue. Again, 'King James and Brown,' in
the Percy MS., is accepted as a genuine contemporary ballad of the youth
of gentle King Jamie. James is herein made to say to his nobles,--

         'My grandfather you have slaine,
          And my own mother you hanged on a tree.'

Even if we read 'father' (against the manuscript) this is absurd. James
V. was not 'slaine,' neither Darnley nor Mary was 'hanged on a tree.'
Ballads are always inaccurate; they do not report events, so much
as throw into verse the popular impression of events, the magnified,
distorted, dramatic rumours. That a ballad-writer should promote a
Queen's tirewoman into a Queen's Marie, and substitute Darnley (where
HE is the lover, which is not always) for the Queen's apothecary, is
a license quite in keeping with precedent. Mr. Child, obviously, would
admit this. In producing a Marie who never existed, the 'maker' shows
the same delicacy as Voltaire, when he brings into 'Candide' a Pope who
never was born.

Finally, a fragment of a variant of the ballad among the Abbotsford
MSS.* does mention an apothecary as the lover of the heroine, and, so
far, is true to historical fact, whether the author was well informed,
or merely, in the multitude of variations, deviated by chance into
truth.

There can, on the whole, be no reasonable doubt that the ballad is on an
event in Scotland of 1563, not of 1719, in Russia, and Mr. Child came to
hold that this opinion was, at least, the more probable.**


     *Child, vol. iv. p. 509.

     **Ibid., vol. v. pp. 298, 299.




XII. THE SHAKESPEARE-BACON IMBROGLIO*


The hypothesis that the works of Shakespeare were written by Bacon
has now been before the world for more than forty years. It has been
supported in hundreds of books and pamphlets, but, as a rule, it has
been totally neglected by scholars. Perhaps their indifference may seem
wise, for such an opinion may appear to need no confutation. 'There are
foolisher fellows than the Baconians,' says a sage--'those who argue
against them.' On the other hand, ignorance has often cherished beliefs
which science has been obliged reluctantly to admit. The existence of
meteorites, and the phenomena of hypnotism, were familiar to the ancient
world, and to modern peasants, while philosophy disdained to investigate
them. In fact, it is never really prudent to overlook a widely spread
opinion. If we gain nothing else by examining its grounds, at least we
learn something about the psychology of its advocates. In this case
we can estimate the learning, the logic, and the general intellect of
people who form themselves into Baconian Societies, to prove that the
poems and plays of Shakespeare were written by Bacon. Thus a light is
thrown on the nature and origin of popular delusions.


     *(1) 'Bacon and Shakespeare,' by William Henry Smith (1857);
(2) 'The Authorship of Shakespeare,' by Nathaniel Holmes (1875); (3)
'The Great Cryptogram,' by Ignatius Donnelly (1888); (4) 'The Promus of
Formularies and Elegancies of Francis Bacon,' by Mrs. Henry Pott (1883);
(5) 'William Shakespeare,' by Georg Brandes (1898); (6) 'Shakespeare,'
by Sidney Lee (in the Dictionary of National Biography, 1897); (7)
'Shakespeare Dethroned' (in Pearson's Magazine, December 1897); (8) 'The
Hidden Lives of Shakespeare and Bacon,' by W. G. Thorpe, F.S.A. (1897).
(9) 'The Mystery of William Shakespeare,' by Judge Webb (1902).

The Baconian creed, of course, is scouted equally by special students
of Bacon, special students of Shakespeare, and by almost all persons
who devote themselves to sound literature. It is equally rejected by
Mr. Spedding, the chief authority on Bacon; by Mr. H. H. Furness, the
learned and witty American editor of the 'Variorum Shakespeare;' by Dr.
Brandes, the Danish biographer and critic; by Mr. Swinburne, with his
rare knowledge of Elizabethan and, indeed, of all literature; and by Mr.
Sidney Lee, Shakespeare's latest biographer. Therefore, the first point
which strikes us in the Baconian hypothesis is that its devotees are
nobly careless of authority. We do not dream of converting them, but it
may be amusing to examine the kind of logic and the sort of erudition
which go to support an hypothesis not freely welcomed even in Germany.

The mother of the Baconian theory (though others had touched a guess at
it) was undeniably Miss Delia Bacon, born at Tallmadge, Ohio, in 1811.
Miss Bacon used to lecture on Roman history, illustrating her theme by
recitations from Macaulay's 'Lays.' 'Her very heart was lacerated,' says
Mr. Donnelly, 'and her womanly pride wounded, by a creature in the shape
of a man--a Reverend (!) Alexander MacWhorter.' This Celtic divine was
twenty-five, Miss Bacon was thirty-five; there arose a misunderstanding;
but Miss Bacon had developed her Baconian theory before she knew Mr.
MacWhorter. 'She became a monomaniac on the subject,' writes Mr. Wyman,
and 'after the publication and non-success of her book she lost her
reason WHOLLY AND ENTIRELY.' But great wits jump, and, just as Mr.
Darwin and Mr. Wallace simultaneously evolved the idea of Natural
Selection, so, unconscious of Miss Delia, Mr. William Henry Smith
developed the Baconian verity.

From the days of Mr. William Henry Smith, in 1856, the great Baconian
argument has been that Shakespeare could not conceivably have had the
vast learning, classical, scientific, legal, medical, and so forth, of
the author of the plays. Bacon, on the other hand, and nobody else, had
this learning, and had, though he concealed them, the poetic powers of
the unknown author. Therefore, prima facie, Bacon wrote the works of
Shakespeare. Mr. Smith, as we said, had been partly anticipated, here,
by the unlucky Miss Delia Bacon, to whose vast and wandering book Mr.
Hawthorne wrote a preface. Mr. Hawthorne accused Mr. Smith of plagiarism
from Miss Delia Bacon; Mr. Smith replied that, when he wrote his first
essay (1856), he had never even heard the lady's name. Mr. Hawthorne
expressed his regret, and withdrew his imputation. Mr. Smith is the
second founder of Baconomania.

Like his followers, down to Mr. Ignatius Donnelly, and Mr. Bucke, and
General Butler, and Mr. Atkinson, who writes in 'The Spiritualist,' and
Mrs. Gallup, and Judge Webb, Mr. Smith rested, first, on Shakespeare's
lack of education, and on the wide learning of the author of the poems
and plays. Now, Ben Jonson, who knew both Shakespeare and Bacon, averred
that the former had 'small Latin and less Greek,' doubtless with truth.
It was necessary, therefore, to prove that the author of the plays had
plenty of Latin and Greek. Here Mr. John Churton Collins suggests that
Ben meant no more than that Shakespeare was not, in the strict sense,
a scholar. Yet he might read Latin, Mr. Collins thinks, with ease and
pleasure, and might pick out the sense of Greek books by the aid of
Latin translations. To this view we return later.

Meanwhile we shall compare the assertions of the laborious Mr. Holmes,
the American author of 'The Authorship of Shakespeare' (third edition,
1875), and of the ingenious Mr. Donnelly, the American author of 'The
Great Cryptogram.' Both, alas! derive in part from the ignorance
of Pope. Pope had said: 'Shakespeare follows the Greek authors, and
particularly Dares Phrygius.' Mr. Smith cites this nonsense; so do Mr.
Donnelly and Mr. Holmes. Now the so-called Dares Phrygius is not a
Greek author. No Greek version of his early mediaeval romance, 'De Bello
Trojano,' exists. The matter of the book found its way into Chaucer,
Boccaccio, Lydgate, Guido de Colonna, and other authors accessible
to one who had no Greek at all, while no Greek version of Dares was
accessible to anybody.* Some recent authors, English and American, have
gone on, with the credulity of 'the less than half educated,' taking
a Greek Dares for granted, on the authority of Pope, whose Greek was
'small.' They have clearly never looked at a copy of Dares, never known
that the story attributed to Dares was familiar, in English and French,
to everybody. Mr. Holmes quotes Pope, Mr. Donnelly quotes Mr. Holmes,
for this Greek Dares Phrygius. Probably Shakespeare had Latin enough to
read the pseudo-Dares, but probably he did not take the trouble.


     *See Brandes, William Shakespeare, ii. 198-202.

This example alone proves that men who are not scholars venture to
pronounce on Shakespeare's scholarship, and that men who take absurd
statements at second hand dare to constitute themselves judges of a
question of evidence and of erudition.

The worthy Mr. Donnelly then quotes Mr. Holmes for Shakespeare's
knowledge of the Greek drama. Turning to Mr. Holmes (who takes his
motto, if you please, from Parmenides), we find that the author of
'Richard II.' borrowed from a Greek play by Euripides, called 'Hellene,'
as did the author of the sonnets. There is, we need not say, no Greek
play of the name of 'Hellene.' As Mr. Holmes may conceivably mean the
'Helena' of Euripides, we compare Sonnet cxxi. with 'Helena,' line 270.
The parallel, the imitation of Euripides, appears to be--

          By their dark thoughts my deeds must not be shown,

with--

          Prooton men ouk ons adikoz eimi duskleez,

which means, 'I have lost my reputation though I have done no harm.'
Shakespeare, then, could not complain of calumny without borrowing
from 'Hellene,' a name which only exists in the fancy of Mr. Nathaniel
Holmes. This critic assigns 'Richard II.,' act ii., scene 1, to
'Hellene' 512-514. We can find no resemblance whatever between the three
Greek lines cited, from the 'Helena,' and the scene in Shakespeare. Mr.
Holmes appears to have reposed on Malone, and Malone may have remarked
on fugitive resemblances, such as inevitably occur by coincidence of
thought. Thus the similarity of the situations of Hamlet and of Orestes
in the 'Eumenides' is given by similarity of legend, Danish and Greek.
Authors of genius, Greek or English, must come across analogous ideas in
treating analogous topics. It does not follow that the poet of 'Hamlet'
was able to read AEschylus, least of all that he could read him in
Greek.

Anglicised version of the author's original Greek text.

The 'Comedy of Errors' is based on the 'Menaechmi' of Plautus. It does
not follow that the author of the 'Comedy of Errors' could read the
'Menaechmi' or the 'Amphitryon,' though Shakespeare had probably Latin
enough for the purpose. The 'Comedy of Errors' was acted in December
1594. A translation of the Latin play bears date 1595, but this may be
an example of the common practice of post-dating a book by a month or
two, and Shakespeare may have seen the English translation in the work
itself, in proof, or in manuscript. In those days MSS. often circulated
long before they were published, like Shakespeare's own 'sugared
sonnets.' However, it is highly probable that Shakespeare was equal to
reading the Latin of Plautus.


In 'Twelfth Night' occurs--

Like the Egyptian thief, at point of death, kill what I love.

Mr. Donnelly writes: 'This is an allusion to a story from Heliodorus's
"AEthiopica." I do not know of any English translation of it in the time
of Shakespeare.' The allusion is, we conceive, to Herodotus, ii. 121,
the story of Rhampsinitus, translated by 'B. R.' and published in 1584.
In 'Macbeth' we find--

          All our yesterdays have LIGHTED fools
          The way to dusty death.  Out, out, BRIEF CANDLE.

This is 'traced,' says Mr. Donnelly, 'to Catullus.' He quotes:--

          Soles occidere et redire possunt;
          Nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux,
          Nox est perpetuo una dormienda.

Where is the parallel? It is got by translating Catullus thus:--

          The LIGHTS of heaven go out and return;
          When once our BRIEF CANDLE goes out,
          One night is to be perpetually slept.

But soles are not 'lights,' and brevis lux is not 'brief candle.' If
they were, the passages have no resemblance. 'To be, or not to be,' is
'taken almost verbatim from Plato.' Mr. Donnelly says that Mr. Follett
says that the Messrs. Langhorne say so. But, where is the passage in
Plato?

Such are the proofs by which men ignorant of the classics prove that the
author of the poems attributed to Shakespeare was a classical scholar.
In fact, he probably had a 'practicable' knowledge of Latin, such as a
person of his ability might pick up at school, and increase by casual
study: points to which we return. For the rest, classical lore had
filtered into contemporary literature and translations, such as North's
Plutarch.

As to modern languages, Mr. Donnelly decides that Shakespeare knew
Danish, because he must have read Saxo Grammaticus 'in the original
tongue'--which, of course, is NOT Danish! Saxo was done out of the
Latin into French. Thus Shakespeare is not exactly proved to have been
a Danish scholar. There is no difficulty in supposing that 'a clayver
man,' living among wits, could pick up French and Italian sufficient for
his uses. But extremely stupid people are naturally amazed by even
such commonplace acquirements. When the step is made from cleverness
to genius, then the dull disbelieve, or cry out of a miracle. Now, as
'miracles do not happen,' a man of Shakespeare's education could not
have written the plays attributed to him by his critics, companions,
friends, and acquaintances. Shakespeare, ex hypothesi, was a rude
unlettered fellow. Such a man, the Baconians assume, would naturally be
chosen by Bacon as his mask, and put forward as the author of Bacon's
pieces. Bacon would select a notorious ignoramus as a plausible author
of pieces which, by the theory, are rich in knowledge of the classics,
and nobody would be surprised. Nobody would say: 'Shakespeare is as
ignorant as a butcher's boy, and cannot possibly be the person who
translated Hamlet's soliloquy out of Plato, "Hamlet" at large out of the
Danish; who imitated the "Hellene" of Euripides, and borrowed "Troilus
and Cressida" from the Greek of Dares Phrygius'--which happens not to
exist. Ignorance can go no further than in these arguments. Such are the
logic and learning of American amateurs, who sometimes do not even know
the names of the books they talk about, or the languages in which they
are written. Such learning and such logic are passed off by 'the less
than half educated' on the absolutely untaught, who decline to listen to
scholars.

We cannot of course furnish a complete summary of all that the Baconians
have said in their myriad pages. All those pages, almost, really flow
from the little volume of Mr. Smith. We are obliged to take the points
which the Baconians regard as their strong cards. We have dealt with the
point of classical scholarship, and shown that the American partisans of
Bacon are not scholars, and have no locus standi. We shall take next
in order the contention that Bacon was a poet; that his works contain
parallel passages to Shakespeare, which can only be the result of
common authorship; that Bacon's notes, called 'Promus,' are notes
for Shakespeare's plays; that, in style, Bacon and Shakespeare are
identical. Then we shall glance at Bacon's motives for writing plays by
stealth, and blushing to find it fame. We shall expose the frank folly
of averring that he chose as his mask a man who (some assert) could not
even write; and we shall conclude by citing, once more, the irrefragable
personal testimony to the genius and character of Shakespeare.

To render the Baconian theory plausible it is necessary to show
that Bacon had not only the learning needed for 'the authorship of
Shakespeare,' but that he gives some proof of Shakespeare's poetic
qualities; that he had reasons for writing plays, and reasons for
concealing his pen, and for omitting to make any claim to his own
literary triumphs after Shakespeare was dead. Now, as to scholarship,
the knowledge shown in the plays is not that of a scholar, does not
exceed that of a man of genius equipped with what, to Ben Jonson, seemed
'small Latin and less Greek,' and with abundance of translations, and
books like 'Euphues,' packed with classical lore, to help him. With
the futile attempts to prove scholarship we have dealt. The legal and
medical lore is in no way beyond the 'general information' which
genius inevitably amasses from reading, conversation, reflection, and
experience.

A writer of to-day, Mr. Kipling, is fond of showing how easily a man of
his rare ability picks up the terminology of many recondite trades and
professions. Again, evidence taken on oath proves that Jeanne d'Arc,
a girl of seventeen, developed great military skill, especially in
artillery and tactics, that she displayed political clairvoyance, and
that she held her own, and more, among the subtlest and most hostile
theologians. On the ordinary hypothesis, that Shakespeare was a man of
genius, there is, then, nothing impossible in his knowledge, while
his wildly daring anachronisms could have presented no temptation to
a well-regulated scientific intellect like that of Bacon. The Baconian
hypothesis rests on the incredulity with which dulness regards genius.
We see the phenomenon every day when stupid people talk about people of
ordinary cleverness, and 'wonder with a foolish face of praise.' As Dr.
Brandes remarks, when the Archbishop of Canterbury praises Henry V. and
his universal accomplishments, he says:

          Which is a wonder, how his grace should glean it,
          Since his addiction was to courses vain,
          His companies unletter'd, rude, and shallow,
          His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, sports
          AND NEVER NOTED IN HIM ANY STUDY,
          Any retirement, any sequestration,
          From open haunts and popularity.

Yet, as the Archbishop remarks (with doubtful orthodoxy), 'miracles are
ceased.'

Shakespeare in these lines describes, as only he could describe it, the
world's wonder which he himself was. Or, if Bacon wrote the lines, then
Bacon, unlike his advocates, was prepared to recognise the possible
existence of such a thing as genius. Incredulity on this head could only
arise in an age and in peoples where mediocrity is almost universal. It
is a democratic form of disbelief.

For the hypothesis, as we said, it is necessary to show that Bacon
possessed poetic genius. The proof cannot possibly be found in his prose
works. In the prose of Mr. Ruskin there are abundant examples of what
many respectable minds regard as poetic qualities. But, if the question
arose, 'Was Mr. Ruskin the author of Tennyson's poems?' the answer could
be settled, for once, by internal evidence. We have only to look at Mr.
Ruskin's published verses. These prove that a great writer of 'poetical
prose' may be at the opposite pole from a poet. In the same way, we ask,
what are Bacon's acknowledged compositions in verse? Mr. Holmes is their
admirer. In 1599 Bacon wrote in a letter, 'Though I profess not to be
a poet, I prepared a sonnet,' to Queen Elizabeth. He PREPARED a sonnet!
'Prepared' is good. He also translated some of the Psalms into verse, a
field in which success is not to be won. Mr. Holmes notes, in Psalm xc.,
a Shakespearean parallel. 'We spend our years as a tale that is told.'
Bacon renders:

          As a tale told, which sometimes men attend,
          And sometimes not, our life steals to an end.

In 'King John,' iii. 4, we read:--

          Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
          Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man.

Now, if we must detect a connection, Bacon might have read 'King John'
in the Folio, for he versified the Psalms in 1625. But it is unnecessary
to suppose a reminiscence. Again, in Psalm civ. Bacon has--

          The greater navies look like walking woods.

They looked like nothing of the sort; but Bacon may have remembered
Birnam Wood, either from Boece or Holinshed, or from the play itself.
One thing is certain: Shakespeare did not write Bacon's Psalms or
compare navies to 'walking woods'! Mr. Holmes adds: 'Many of the sonnets
[of Shakespeare] show the strongest internal evidence that they were
addressed [by Bacon] to the Queen, as no doubt they were.' That is,
Bacon wrote sonnets to Queen Elizabeth, and permitted them to pass from
hand to hand, among Shakespeare's 'private friends,' as Shakespeare's
(1598). That was an odd way of paying court to Queen Elizabeth. Chalmers
had already conjectured that Shakespeare (not Bacon) in the sonnets
was addressing the Virgin Queen, whom he recommended to marry and leave
offspring--rather late in life. Shakespeare's apparent allusions to his
profession--

                    I have gone here and there,
          And made myself a motley to the view,

and

          The public means which public manners breeds,

refer, no doubt, to Bacon's versatile POLITICAL behaviour. It has
hitherto been supposed that sonnet lvii. was addressed to Shakespeare's
friend, a man, not to any woman. But Mr. Holmes shows that the Queen is
intended. Is it not obvious?

          I, MY SOVEREIGN, watch the clock for you.

Bacon clearly had an assignation with Her Majesty--so here is 'scandal
about Queen Elizabeth.' Mr. Holmes pleasingly remarks that Twickenham is
'within sight of Her Majesty's Palace of White Hall.' She gave Bacon the
reversion of Twickenham Park, doubtless that, from the windows of White
Hall, she might watch her swain. And Bacon wrote a masque for the Queen;
he skilfully varied his style in this piece from that which he used
under the name of Shakespeare. With a number of other gentlemen, some
named, some unnamed, Bacon once, at an uncertain date, interested
himself in a masque at Gray's Inn, while he and his friends 'partly
devised dumb shows and additional speeches,' in 1588.

Nothing follows as to Bacon's power of composing Shakespeare's plays. A
fragmentary masque, which may or may not be by Bacon, is put forward as
the germ of what Bacon wrote about Elizabeth in the 'Midsummer Night's
Dream.' An Indian WANDERER from the West Indies, near the fountain of
the AMAZON, is brought to Elizabeth to be cured of blindness. Now
the fairy, in the 'Midsummer Night's Dream,' says, capitalised by Mr.
Holmes:

          I DO WANDER EVERYWHERE.

Here then are two wanderers--and there is a river in Monmouth and a
river in Macedon. Puck, also, is 'that merry WANDERER of the night.'
Then 'A BOUNCING AMAZON' is mentioned in the 'Midsummer Night's Dream,'
and 'the fountain of the great river of the Amazons' is alluded to in
the fragment of the masque. Cupid too occurs in the play, and in the
masque the wanderer is BLIND; now Cupid is blind, sometimes, but hardly
when 'a certain aim he took.' The Indian, in the masque, presents
Elizabeth with 'his gift AND PROPERTY TO BE EVER YOUNG,' and the herb,
in the play, has a 'VIRTUOUS PROPERTY.'

For such exquisite reasons as these the masque and the 'Midsummer
Night's Dream' are by one hand, and the masque is by Bacon. For some
unknown cause the play is full of poetry, which is entirely absent
from the masque. Mr. Holmes was a Judge; sat on the bench of American
Themis--and these are his notions of proof and evidence. The parallel
passages which he selects are on a level with the other parallels
between Bacon and Shakespeare. One thing is certain: the writer of the
masque shows no signs of being a poet, and a poet Bacon explicitly 'did
not profess to be.' One piece of verse attributed to Bacon, a loose
paraphrase of a Greek epigram, has won its way into 'The Golden
Treasury.' Apart from that solitary composition, the verses which Bacon
'prepared' were within the powers of almost any educated Elizabethan.
They are on a level with the rhymes of Mr. Ruskin. It was only when he
wrote as Shakespeare that Bacon wrote as a poet.

We have spoken somewhat harshly of Mr. Holmes as a classical scholar,
and as a judge of what, in literary matters, makes evidence. We hasten
to add that he could be convinced of error. He had regarded a sentence
of Bacon's as a veiled confession that Bacon wrote 'Richard II.,'
'which, though it grew from me, went after about in others' names.'
Mr. Spedding averred that Mr. Holmes's opinion rested on a grammatical
misinterpretation, and Mr. Holmes accepted the correction. But 'nothing
less than a miracle' could shake Mr. Holmes's belief in the common
authorship of the masque (possibly Bacon's) and the 'Midsummer Night's
Dream'--so he told Mr. Spedding. To ourselves nothing short of a
miracle, or the visitation of God in the shape of idiocy, could bring
the conviction that the person who wrote the masque could have written
the play. The reader may compare the whole passage in Mr. Holmes's work
(pp. 228-238). We have already set forth some of those bases of his
belief which only a miracle could shake. The weak wind that scarcely
bids the aspen shiver might blow them all away.

Vast space is allotted by Baconians to 'parallel passages' in Bacon
and Shakespeare. We have given a few in the case of the masque and the
'Midsummer Night's Dream.' The others are of equal weight. They are on a
level with 'Punch's' proofs that Alexander Smith was a plagiarist. Thus
Smith:

          No CHARACTER that servant WOMAN asked;

Pope writes:

          Most WOMEN have no CHARACTER at all.

It is tedious to copy out the puerilities of such parallelisms. Thus
Bacon:

          If we simply looked to the fabric of the world;

Shakespeare:

          And, like the baseless fabric of a vision.

Bacon:

          The intellectual light in the top and consummation of thy
workmanship;

Shakespeare:

          Like eyasses that cry out on the top of the question.

Myriads of pages of such matter would carry no proof. Probably the
hugest collection of such 'parallels' is that preserved by Mrs. Pott
in Bacon's 'Promus,' a book of 628 pages. Mrs. Pott's 'sole object' in
publishing 'was to confirm the growing belief in Bacon's authorship
of the plays.' Having acquired the opinion, she laboured to strengthen
herself and others in the faith. The so-called 'Promus' is a manuscript
set of notes, quotations, formulae, and proverbs. As Mr. Spedding says,
there are 'forms of compliment, application, excuse, repartee, etc.'
'The collection is from books which were then in every scholar's
hands.' 'The proverbs may all, or nearly all, be found in the common
collections.' Mrs. Pott remarks that in 'Promus' are 'several hundreds
of notes of which no trace has been discovered in the acknowledged
writings of Bacon, or of any other contemporary writer but Shakespeare.'
She adds that the theory of 'close intercourse' between the two men is
'contrary to all evidence.' She then infers that 'Bacon alone wrote all
the plays and sonnets which are attributed to Shakespeare.' So Bacon
entrusted his plays, and the dread secret of his authorship, to a
boorish cabotin with whom he had no 'close intercourse'! This is lady's
logic, a contradiction in terms. The theory that Bacon wrote the plays
and sonnets inevitably implies the closest intercourse between him and
Shakespeare. They must have been in constant connection. But, as Mrs.
Pott truly says, this is 'contrary to all evidence.'

Perhaps the best way to deal with Mrs. Pott is to cite the author of
her preface, Dr. Abbott. He is not convinced, but he is much struck by a
very exquisite argument of the lady's. Bacon in 'Promus' is writing down
'Formularies and Elegancies,' modes of salutation. He begins with 'Good
morrow!' This original remark, Mrs. Pott reckons, 'occurs in the plays
nearly a hundred times. In the list of upwards of six thousand words
in Appendix E, "Good morrow" has been noted thirty-one times.... "Good
morrow" may have become familiar merely by means of "Romeo and Juliet."'
Dr. Abbott is so struck by this valuable statement that he writes:
'There remains the question, Why did Bacon think it worth while to write
down in a notebook the phrase "Good morrow" if it was at that time in
common use?'

Bacon wrote down 'Good morrow' just because it WAS in common use. All
the formulae were in common use; probably 'Golden sleepe' was a regular
wish, like 'Good rest.' Bacon is making a list of commonplaces about
beginning the day, about getting out of bed, about sleep. Some are in
English, some in various other languages. He is not, as in Mrs. Pott's
ingenious theory, making notes of novelties to be introduced through his
plays. He is cataloguing the commonplace. It is Mrs. Pott's astonishing
contention, as we have seen, that Bacon probably introduced the phrase
'Good morrow!' Mr. Bucke, following her in a magazine article, says:
'These forms of salutation were not in use in England before Bacon's
time, and it was his entry of them in the "Promus" and use of them
in the plays that makes them current coin day by day with us in the
nineteenth century.' This is ignorant nonsense. 'Good morrow' and 'Good
night' were as familiar before Bacon or Shakespeare wrote as 'Good
morning' and 'Good night' are to-day. This we can demonstrate. The very
first Elizabethan handbook of phrases which we consult shows that 'Good
morrow' was the stock phrase in regular use in 1583. The book is 'The
French Littelton, A most Easie, Perfect, and Absolute way to learne the
Frenche Tongue. Set forth by Claudius Holyband. Imprinted at London by
Thomas Vautrollier, dwelling in the blacke-Friers. 1583.' (There is an
edition of 1566.)

On page 10 we read:--

         'Of Scholars and Schoole.

'God give you good morrow, Sir! Good morrow gossip: good morrow my she
gossip: God give you a good morrow and a good year.'

Thus the familiar salutation was not introduced by Bacon; it was, on the
other hand, the very first formula which a writer of an English-French
phrase-book translated into French ten years before Bacon made his
notes. Presently he comes to 'Good evening, good night, good rest,' and
so on.

This fact annihilates Mrs. Pott's contention that Bacon introduced
'Good morrow' through the plays falsely attributed to Shakespeare. There
follows, in 'Promus,' a string of proverbs, salutations, and quotations,
about sleep and waking. Among these occur 'Golden Sleepe' (No. 1207) and
(No. 1215) 'Uprouse. You are up.' Now Friar Laurence says to Romeo:--

          But where unbruised youth with unstuffed brain
          Doth couch his limbs, there GOLDEN SLEEP doth reign:
          Therefore thy earliness doth me assure,
          Thou art UP-ROUSED by some distemperature.

Dr. Abbott writes: 'Mrs. Pott's belief is that the play is indebted for
these expressions to the "Promus;" mine is that the "Promus" is borrowed
from the play.' And why should either owe anything to the other? The
phrase 'Uprouse' or 'Uprose' is familiar in Chaucer, from one of his
best-known lines. 'Golden' is a natural poetic adjective of excellence,
from Homer to Tennyson. Yet in Dr. Abbott's opinion 'TWO of these
entries constitute a coincidence amounting almost to a demonstration'
that either Shakespeare or Bacon borrowed from the other. And this
because each writer, one in making notes of commonplaces on sleep, the
other in a speech about sleep, uses the regular expression 'Uprouse,'
and the poetical commonplace 'Golden sleep' for 'Good rest.' There was
no originality in the matter.

We have chosen Dr. Abbott's selected examples of Mrs. Pott's triumphs.
Here is another of her parallels. Bacon gives the formula, 'I pray God
your early rising does you no hurt.' Shakespeare writes:--

                    Go, you cot-quean, go,
          Get you to bed; faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
          For this night's watching.

Here Bacon notes a morning salutation, 'I hope you are none the worse
for early rising,' while Shakespeare tells somebody not to sit up late.
Therefore, and for similar reasons, Bacon is Shakespeare.

We are not surprised to find Mr. Bucke adopting Mrs. Pott's theory of
the novelty of 'Good morrow.' He writes in the Christmas number of
an illustrated sixpenny magazine, and his article, a really masterly
compendium of the whole Baconian delirium, addresses its natural public.
But we are amazed to find Dr. Abbott looking not too unkindly on such
imbecilities, and marching at least in the direction of Coventry with
such a regiment. He is 'on one point a convert' to Mrs. Pott, and that
point is the business of 'Good morrow,' 'Uprouse,' and 'Golden sleepe.'
It need hardly be added that the intrepid Mr. Donnelly is also a firm
adherent of Mrs. Pott.

'Some idea,' he says, 'may be formed of the marvellous industry of this
remarkable lady when I state that to prove that we are indebted to Bacon
for having enriched the English language, through the plays, with these
beautiful courtesies of speech, 'Good morrow,' 'Good day,' etc., she
carefully examined SIX THOUSAND WORKS ANTERIOR TO OR CONTEMPORARY WITH
BACON.'

Dr. Abbott thought it judicious to 'hedge' about these six thousand
works, and await 'the all-knowing dictionary' of Dr. Murray and
the Clarendon Press. We have deemed it simpler to go to the first
Elizabethan phrase-book on our shelves, and that tiny volume, in its
very first phrase, shatters the mare's-nest of Mrs. Pott, Mr. Donnelly,
and Mr. Bucke.

But why, being a great poet, should Bacon conceal the fact, and choose
as a mask a man whom, on the hypothesis of his ignorance, every one that
knew him must have detected as an impostor? Now, one great author did
choose to conceal his identity, though he never shifted the burden of
the 'Waverley Novels' on to Terry the actor. Bacon may, conceivably,
have had Scott's pleasure in secrecy, but Bacon selected a mask much
more impossible (on the theory) than Terry would have been for Scott.
Again, Sir Walter Scott took pains to make his identity certain, by an
arrangement with Constable, and by preserving his manuscripts, and he
finally confessed. Bacon never confessed, and no documentary traces of
his authorship survive. Scott, writing anonymously, quoted his own poems
in the novels, an obvious 'blind.' Bacon, less crafty, never (as far as
we are aware) mentions Shakespeare.

It is arguable, of course, that to write plays might seem dangerous to
Bacon's professional and social position. The reasons which might make a
lawyer keep his dramatic works a secret could not apply to 'Lucrece.'
A lawyer, of good birth, if he wrote plays at all, would certainly not
vamp up old stock pieces. That was the work of a 'Johannes Factotum,' of
a 'Shakescene,' as Greene says, of a man who occupied the same position
in his theatrical company as Nicholas Nickleby did in that of Mr.
Crummles. Nicholas had to bring in the vulgar pony, the Phenomenon,
the buckets, and so forth. So, in early years, the author of the plays
(Bacon, by the theory) had to work over old pieces. All this is the
work of the hack of a playing company; it is not work to which a man
in Bacon's position could stoop. Why should he? What had he to gain by
patching and vamping? Certainly not money, if the wealth of Shakespeare
is a dark mystery to the Baconian theorists. We are asked to believe
that Bacon, for the sake of some five or six pounds, toiled at
refashioning old plays, and handed the fair manuscripts to Shakespeare,
who passed them off, among the actors who knew him intimately, as his
own. THEY detected no incongruity between the player who was their
Johannes Factotum and the plays which he gave in to the manager. They
seemed to be just the kind of work which Shakespeare would be likely
to write. BE LIKELY TO WRITE, but 'the father of the rest,' Mr. Smith,
believed that Shakespeare COULD NOT WRITE AT ALL.

We live in the Ages of Faith, of faith in fudge. Mr. Smith was certain,
and Mr. Bucke is inclined to suspect, that when Bacon wanted a mask he
chose, as a plausible author of the plays, a man who could not write.
Mr. Smith was certain, and Mr. Bucke must deem it possible, that
Shakespeare's enemy, Greene, that his friends, Jonson, Burbage, Heming,
and the other actors, and that his critics and admirers, Francis Meres
and others, accepted, as author of the pieces which they played in or
applauded, a man who could write no more than his name. Such was the
tool whom Bacon found eligible, and so easily gulled was the literary
world of Eliza and our James. And Bacon took all this trouble for
what reason? To gain five or six pounds, or as much of that sum as
Shakespeare would let him keep. Had Bacon been possessed by the ambition
to write plays he would always have written original dramas, he would
not have assumed the part of Nicholas Nickleby.

There is no human nature in this nonsense. An ambitious lawyer passes
his nights in retouching stock pieces, from which he can reap neither
fame nor profit. He gives his work to a second-rate illiterate actor,
who adopts it as his own. Bacon is so enamoured of this method that he
publishes 'Venus and Adonis' and 'Lucrece' under the name of his actor
friend. Finally, he commits to the actor's care all his sonnets to the
Queen, to Gloriana, and for years these manuscript poems are handed
about by Shakespeare, as his own, among the actors, hack scribblers, and
gay young nobles of his acquaintance. They 'chaff' Shakespeare about his
affection for his 'sovereign;' great Gloriana's praises are stained with
sack in taverns, and perfumed with the Indian weed. And Bacon, careful
toiler after Court favour, 'thinks it all wery capital,' in the words
of Mr. Weller pere. Moreover, nobody who hears Shakespeare talk and sees
him smile has any doubt that he is the author of the plays and amorous
fancies of Bacon.

It is needless to dwell on the pother made about the missing manuscripts
of Shakespeare. 'The original manuscripts, of course, Bacon would take
care to destroy,' says Mr. Holmes, 'if determined that the secret should
die with him.' If he was so determined, for what earthly reason did he
pass his valuable time in vamping up old plays and writing new ones?
'There was no money in it,' and there was no reason. But, if he was not
determined that the secret should die with him, why did not he, like
Scott, preserve the manuscripts? The manuscripts are where Marlowe's and
where Moliere's are, by virtue of a like neglect. Where are the MSS.
of any of the great Elizabethans? We really cannot waste time over Mr.
Donnelly's theory of a Great Cryptogram, inserted by Bacon, as proof of
his claim, in the multitudinous errors of the Folio. Mr. Bucke, too,
has his Anagram, the deathless discovery of Dr. Platt, of Lakewood, New
Jersey. By manipulating the scraps of Latin in 'Love's Labour's
Lost,' he extracts 'Hi Ludi tuiti sibi Fr. Bacono nati': 'These plays,
entrusted to themselves, proceeded from Fr. Bacon.' It is magnificent,
but it is not Latin. Had Bacon sent in such Latin at school, he would
never have survived to write the 'Novum Organon' and his sonnets to
Queen Elizabeth. In that stern age they would have 'killed him--with
wopping.' That Bacon should be a vamper and a playwright for no
appreciable profit, that, having produced his deathless works, he
should make no sign, has, in fact, staggered even the great credulity of
Baconians. He MUST, they think, have made a sign in cipher. Out of the
mass of the plays, anagrams and cryptograms can be fashioned a plaisir,
and the world has heard too much of Mrs. Gallup, while the hunt for
hints in contemporary frontispieces led to mistaking the porcupine of
Sidney's crest for 'a hanged hog' (Bacon).

The theory of the Baconian authorship of Shakespeare's plays and poems
has its most notable and recent British advocate in His Honour Judge
Webb, sometime Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, Regius Professor of
Laws, and Public Orator in the University of Dublin. Judge Webb, as
a scholar and a man used to weighing evidence, puts the case at its
strongest. His work, 'The Mystery of William Shakespeare' (1902), rests
much on the old argument about the supposed ignorance of Shakespeare,
and the supposed learning of the author of the plays. Judge Webb, like
his predecessors, does not take into account the wide diffusion of a
kind of classical and pseudo-scientific knowledge among all Elizabethan
writers, and bases theories on manifest misconceptions of Shakespearean
and other texts. His book, however, has affected the opinions of
some readers who do not verify his references and examine the mass of
Elizabethan literature for themselves.

Judge Webb, in his 'Proem,' refers to Mr. Holmes and Mr. Donnelly as
'distinguished writers,' who 'have received but scant consideration from
the accredited organs of opinion on this side of the Atlantic.' Their
theories have not been more favourably considered by Shakespearean
scholars on the other side of the Atlantic, and how much consideration
they deserve we have tried to show. The Irish Judge opens his case by
noting an essential distinction between 'Shakspere,' the actor, and
'Shakespeare,' the playwright. The name, referring to the man who was
both actor and author, is spelled both 'Shakspeare' and 'Shakespeare'
in the 'Returne from Parnassus' (1602).* The 'school of critics' which
divides the substance of Shakespeare on the strength of the spelling of
a proper name, in the casual times of great Elizabeth, need not detain
the inquirer.


     *The Returne from Parnassus, pp.  56,57,138.  Oxford, 1886.

As to Shakespeare's education, Judge Webb admits that 'there was a
grammar school in the place.' As its registers of pupils have not
survived, we cannot prove that Shakespeare went to the school. Mr.
Collins shows that the Headmaster was a Fellow of Corpus Christi
College, Oxford, and describes the nature of the education, mainly in
Latin, as, according to the standard of the period, it ought to have
been.* There is no doubt that if Shakespeare attended the school (the
age of entry was eight), minded his book, and had 'a good sprag memory,'
he might have learned Latin. Mr. Collins commends the Latin of two
Stratford contemporaries and friends of Shakespeare, Sturley and Quiney,
who probably were educated at the Grammar School. Judge Webb disparages
their lore, and, on the evidence of the epistles, says that Sturley
and Quiney 'were not men of education.' If Judge Webb had compared
the original letters of distinguished Elizabethan officials and
diplomatists--say, Sir William Drury, the Commandant of Berwick--he
would have found that Sturley and Quiney were at least on the ordinary
level of education in the upper classes. But the whole method of the
Baconians rests on neglecting such comparisons.


     *Fortnightly Review, April 1903.

In a letter of Sturley's, eximiae is spelled eximie, without the
digraph, a thing then most usual, and no disproof of Sturley's
Latinity.* The Shakspearean hypothesis is that Shakespeare was rather
a cleverer man than Quiney and Sturley, and, consequently, that, if he
went to school, he probably learned more by a great deal than they did.
There was no reason why he should not acquire Latin enough to astonish
modern reviewers, who have often none at all.


     *Webb, p. 14. Phillipps's Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare, i. p.
150, ii. p. 57.

Judge Webb then discusses the learning of Shakespeare, and easily
shows that he was full of mythological lore. So was all Elizabethan
literature. Every English scribbler then knew what most men have
forgotten now. Nobody was forced to go to the original authorities--say,
Plato, Herodotus, and Plutarch--for what was accessible in translations,
or had long before been copiously decanted into English prose and
poetry. Shakespeare could get Rhodope, not from Pliny, but from B. R.'s
lively translation (1584) of the first two books of Herodotus. 'Even
Launcelot Gobbo talks of Scylla and Charybdis,' says Judge Webb. Who did
not? Had the Gobbos not known about Scylla and Charybdis, Shakespeare
would not have lent them the knowledge.

The mythological legends were 'in the air,' familiar to all the
Elizabethan world. These allusions are certainly no proof 'of trained
scholarship or scientific education.' In five years of contact with the
stage, with wits, with writers for the stage, with older plays, with
patrons of the stage, with Templars, and so on, a man of talent
could easily pick up the 'general information'--now caviare to the
general--which a genius like Shakespeare inevitably absorbed.

We naturally come to Greene's allusion to 'Shakescene' (1592),
concerning which a schoolboy said, in an examination, 'We are tired to
death with hearing about it.' Greene conspicuously insults 'Shakescene'
both as a writer and an actor. Judge Webb says: 'As Mr. Phillipps justly
observes, it' (one of Greene's allusions) 'merely conveys that Shakspere
was one who acted in the plays of which Greene and his three friends
were the authors (ii. 269).'

It is necessary to verify the Judge's reference. Mr. Phillipps writes:
'Taking Greene's words in their contextual and natural sense, he first
alludes to Shakespeare as an actor, one "beautified with our feathers,"
that is, one who acts in their plays; THEN TO THE POET as a writer just
commencing to try his hand at blank verse, and, finally, to him as not
only engaged in both those capacities, but in any other in which he
might be useful to the company.' Mr. Phillipps adds that Greene's
quotation of the line 'TYGER'S HEART WRAPT IN A PLAYER'S HIDE' 'is a
decisive proof of Shakespeare's authorship of the line.'*


     *Webb, p. 57. Phillipps, ii. p. 269.

Judge Webb has manifestly succeeded in not appreciating Mr. Phillipps's
plain English. He says, with obvious truth, that Greene attacks
Shakespeare both as actor and poet, but Judge Webb puts the matter thus:
'The language of Greene... as Mr. Phillipps justly observes, merely
conveys that Shakspere was one who acted in the plays of which Greene
and his three friends were authors.'

The language of Greene IN ONE PART OF HIS TIRADE, 'an upstart crow
beautified in our feathers,' probably refers to Shakespeare as an actor
only, but Greene goes on to insult him as a writer. Judge Webb will
not recognise him as a writer, and omits that part of Mr. Phillipps's
opinion.

There followed Chettle's well-known apology (1592), as editor of
Greene's sally, to Shakespeare. Chettle speaks of his excellence 'in
the quality he professes,' and of his 'facetious grace in writing, that
approves his art,' this on the authority of 'the report of divers of
worship.'

This proves, of course, that Shakespeare was a writer as well as an
actor, and Judge Webb can only murmur that 'we are "left to guess" who
divers of worship' were, and 'what motive' they had for praising his
'facetious grace in writing.' The obvious motive was approval of the
work, for work there WAS, and, as to who the 'divers' were, nobody
knows.

The evidence that, IN THE OPINION OF GREENE, CHETTLE, AND 'DIVERS OF
WORSHIP,' Shakespeare was a writer as well as an actor is absolutely
irrefragable. Had Shakespeare been the ignorant lout of the Baconian
theorists, these men would not have credited him, for example, with his
first signed and printed piece, 'Venus and Adonis.' It appeared early
in 1593, and Greene and Chettle wrote in 1592. 'Divers of worship,'
according to the custom of the time, may have seen 'Venus and Adonis' in
manuscript. It was printed by Richard Field, a Stratford-on-Avon man,
as was natural, a Stratford-on-Avon man being the author.* It was
dedicated, in stately but not servile courtesy, to the Earl of
Southampton, by 'William Shakespeare.'


     *Phillipps, i. p. 101.

Judge Webb asks: 'Was it a pseudonym, or was it the real name of the
author of the poem?' Well, Shakespeare signs 'Shakspere' in two deeds,
in which the draftsman throughout calls him 'Shakespeare:' obviously
taking no difference.* People were not particular, Shakespeare let them
spell his name as best pleased them.


     *Phillipps, ii. pp. 34, 36.

Judge Webb argues that Southampton 'took no notice' of the dedication.
How can he know? Ben Jonson dedicated to Lady Wroth and many others.
Does Judge Webb know what 'notice' they took? He says that on various
occasions 'Southampton did not recognise the existence of the Player.'
How can he know? I have dedicated books to dozens of people. Probably
they 'took notice,' but no record thereof exists. The use of arguments
of this kind demonstrates the feebleness of the case.

That Southampton, however, DID 'take notice' may be safely inferred
from the fact that Shakespeare, in 1594, dedicated to him 'The Rape
of Lucrece.' Had the Earl been an ungrateful patron, had he taken no
notice, Shakespeare had Latin enough to act on the motto Invenies alium
si te hic fastidit Alexin. He speaks of 'the warrant I have of your
honourable disposition,' which makes the poem 'assured of acceptance.'
This could never have been written had the dedication of 'Venus and
Adonis' been disdained. 'The client never acknowledged his obligation
to the patron,' says Judge Webb. The dedication of 'Lucrece' is
acknowledgment enough. The Judge ought to think so, for he speaks, with
needless vigour, of 'the protestations, warm and gushing as a geyser,
of "The Rape."' There is nothing 'warm,' and nothing 'gushing,' in the
dedication of 'Lucrece' (granting the style of the age), but, if it were
as the Judge says, here, indeed, would be the client's 'acknowledgment,'
which, the Judge says, was never made.* To argue against such logic
seems needless, and even cruel, but judicial contentions appear to
deserve a reply.

Webb, p. 67.

We now come to the evidence of the Rev. Francis Meres, in 'Palladis
Tamia' (1598). Meres makes 'Shakespeare among the English' the rival, in
comedy and tragedy, of Plautus and Seneca 'among the Latines.' He names
twelve plays, of which 'Love's Labour's Won' is unknown. 'The soul of
Ovid' lives in his 'Venus and Adonis,' his 'Lucrece,' and his 'sugred
sonnets among his private friends.' Meres also mentions Sidney, Spenser,
Daniel, Drayton, and so forth, a long string of English poetic
names, ending with 'Samuel Page, sometime Fellow of C.C.C. in Oxford,
Churchyard, Bretton.'*


     *Phillipps, ii. pp. 149,150.

Undeniably Meres, in 1598, recognises Shakespeare as both playwright
and poet. So Judge Webb can only reply: 'But who this mellifluous and
honey-tongued Shakespeare was he does not say, AND HE DOES NOT PRETEND
TO KNOW.'* He does not 'pretend to know' 'who' any of the poets
was--except Samuel Page, and he was a Fellow of Corpus. He speaks of
Shakespeare just as he does of Marlowe, Kid, Chapman, and the others
whom he mentions. He 'does not pretend to know who' they were. Every
reader knew who they all were. If I write of Mr. Swinburne or Mr.
Pinero, of Mr. Browning or of Mr. Henry Jones, I do not say 'who they
were,' I do not 'pretend to know.' There was no Shakespeare in the
literary world of London but the one Shakespeare, 'Burbage's deserving
man.'


     *Webb, p. 71.

The next difficulty is that Shakespeare's company, by request of the
Essex conspirators (who paid 2 pounds), acted 'Richard II.' just before
their foolish attempt (February 7, 1601). 'If Coke,' says the Judge,
'had the faintest idea that the player' (Shakespeare) 'was the author
of "Richard II.," he would not have hesitated a moment to lay him by the
heels.' Why, the fact of Shakespeare's authorship had been announced,
in print, by Meres, in 1598. Coke knew, if he cared to know. Judge Webb
goes on: 'And that the Player' (Shakespeare) 'was not regarded as the
author by the Queen is proved by the fact that, with his company,
he performed before the Court at Richmond, on the evening before the
execution of the Earl.'*


     *Webb, pp. 72, 73.

Nothing of the kind is proved. The guilt, if any, lay, not in writing
the drama--by 1601 'olde and outworne'--but in acting it, on the eve of
an intended revolution. This error Elizabeth overlooked, and with it the
innocent authorship of the piece, 'now olde and outworne.'* It is not
even certain, in Mr. Phillipps's opinion, that the 'olde and outworne'
play was that of Shakespeare. It is perfectly certain that, as Elizabeth
overlooked the fault of the players, she would not attack the author of
a play written years before Essex's plot, with no political intentions.


     *Phillipps, ii. pp. 359-362.

We now come to evidence of which Judge Webb says very little, that of
the two plays acted at St. John's College, Cambridge, in 1600-1601,
known as 'The Returne from Parnassus.' These pieces prove that
Shakespeare the poet was identified with Shakespeare the player. They
also prove that Shakespeare's scholarship and art were held very
cheaply by the University wits, who, as always, were disdainful of
non-University men. His popularity is undisputed, but his admirer in the
piece, Gullio, is a vapouring ignoramus, who pretends to have been
at the University of Padua, but knows no more Latin than many modern
critics. Gullio rants thus: 'Pardon, faire lady, though sicke-thoughted
Gullio makes amaine unto thee, and LIKE A BOULD-FACED SUTOR 'GINS TO
WOO THEE.' This, of course, is from 'Venus and Adonis.' Ingenioso says,
aside: 'We shall have nothinge but pure Shakespeare and shreds of
poetry that he hath gathered at the theaters.' Gullio next mouths a
reminiscence of 'Romeo and Juliet,' and Ingenioso whispers, 'Marke,
Romeo and Juliet, O monstrous theft;' however, aloud, he says 'Sweete
Mr. Shakspeare!'--the spelling varies. Gullio continues to praise sweete
Mr. Shakspeare above Spenser and Chaucer. 'Let mee heare Mr. Shakspear's
veyne.' Judge Webb does not cite these passages, which identify
Shakspeare (or Shakespeare) with the poet of 'Venus and Adonis' and
'Romeo and Juliet.'

In the second 'Returne,' Burbage and Kemp, the noted morrice dancer and
clown of Shakespeare's company, are introduced. 'Few of the University
men pen plays well,' says Kemp; 'they smack too much of that writer
Ovid, and that writer Metamorphosis, and talke too much of Proserpina
and Jupiter. Why here's our fellow Shakespeare' (fellow is used in the
sense of companion), 'puts them all downe, ay, and Ben Jonson too. O
that Ben Jonson is a pestilent fellow; he brought up Horace giving the
Poets a pill, but our fellow Shakespeare hath given him a purge that
made him bewray his credit.' At Burbage's request, one of the University
men then recites two lines of 'Richard III.,' by the poet of his
company.

Ben, according to Judge Webb, 'bewrayed his credit' in 'The Poetaster,'
1601-1602, where Pantalabus 'was meant for Shakspere.'* If so,
Pantalabus is described as one who 'pens high, lofty, and in a new
stalking strain,' and if Shakespeare is the Poet Ape of Jonson's
epigram, why then Jonson regards him as a writer, not merely as an
actor. No amount of evil that angry Ben could utter about the plays,
while Shakespeare lived, and, perhaps, was for a time at odds with him,
can obliterate the praises which the same Ben wrote in his milder mood.
The charge against Poet Ape is a charge of plagiarism, such as unpopular
authors usually make against those who are popular. Judge Webb has to
suppose that Jonson, when he storms, raves against some 'works' at that
time somehow associated with Shakespeare; and that, when he praises, he
praises the divine masterpieces of Bacon. But we know what plays really
were attributed to Shakespeare, then as now, while no other 'works' of
a contemptible character, attributed to Shakespeare, are to be heard of
anywhere. Judge Webb does not pretend to know what the things were to
which the angry Jonson referred.** If he really aimed his stupid epigram
at Shakespeare, he obviously alluded to the works which were then, and
now are, recognised as Shakespeare's; but in his wrath he denounced
them. 'Potter is jealous of potter, poet of poet'--it is an old saying
of the Greek. There was perhaps some bitterness between Jonson and
Shakespeare about 1601; Ben made an angry epigram, perhaps against
Shakespeare, and thought it good enough to appear in his collected
epigrams in 1616, the year of Shakespeare's death. By that time the
application to Shakespeare, if to him the epigram applied, might,
in Ben's opinion perhaps, be forgotten by readers. In any case, Ben,
according to Drummond of Hawthornden, was one who preferred his jest to
his friend.


     *Webb, pp. 114-116.

    **Webb, pp. 116-119.

Judge Webb's hypothesis is that Ben, in Shakespeare's lifetime,
especially in 1600-1601, spoke evil of his works, though he allowed that
they might endure to 'after-times'--

                              Aftertimes
          May judge it to be his, as well as ours.

But these works (wholly unknown) were not (on the Judge's theory) the
works which, after Shakespeare's death, Ben praised, as his, in verse;
and, more critically, praised in prose: the works, that is, which the
world has always regarded as Shakespeare's. THESE were Bacon's, and Ben
knew it on Judge Webb's theory. Here Judge Webb has, of course, to deal
with Ben's explicit declarations, in the First Folio, that the works
which he praises are by Shakespeare. The portrait, says Ben,

          Was for gentle Shakespeare cut.

Judge Webb then assures us, to escape this quandary, that 'in the
Sonnets "the gentle Shakespeare himself informs us that Shakespeare was
not his real name, but the "noted weed" in which he "kept invention."'*
The author of the Sonnets does nothing of the kind. Judge Webb
has merely misconstrued his text. The passage which he so quaintly
misinterprets occurs in Sonnet lxxvi.:

      Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
         So far from variation or quick change?
      Why, with the time, do I not glance aside
         To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
      WHY WRITE I STILL ALL ONE, EVER THE SAME,
         AND KEEP INVENTION IN A NOTED WEED,
      THAT EVERY WORD DOES ALMOST TELL MY NAME,
         SHOWING THEIR BIRTH AND WHENCE THEY DO PROCEED?
      Oh, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
         And you and love are still my argument;
      So all my best is dressing old words new,
         Spending again what is already spent:
             For as the sun is daily new and old,
             So is my love still telling what is told.


     *Webb, pp. 125,156,235,264.  Judge Webb is fond of his discovery.

The lines capitalised are thus explained by the Judge: 'Here the author
certainly intimates that Shakespeare is not his real name, and that he
was fearful lest his real name should be discovered.' The author says
nothing about Shakespeare not being his real name, nor about his fear
lest his real name should be discovered. He even 'quibbles on his own
Christian name,' WILL, as Mr. Phillipps and everyone else have noted.
What he means is: 'Why am I so monotonous that every word almost tells
my name?' 'To keep invention in a noted weed' means, of course, to
present his genius always in the same well-known attire. There is
nothing about disguise of a name, or of anything else, in the sonnet.*


     *Webb, pp. 64,156.

But Judge Webb assures us that Shakespeare himself informs us in the
sonnets that 'Shakespeare was not his real name, but the noted weed in
which he kept invention.' As this is most undeniably not the case, it
cannot aid his effort to make out that, in the Folio, by the name of
Shakespeare, Ben Jonson means another person.

In the Folio verses, 'To the Memory of my Beloved, Mr. William
Shakespeare, and What he has Left Us,' Judge Webb finds many mysterious
problems.

                              Soul of the Age,
          The applause, delight, the wonder of our stage,
                    My Shakespeare, rise!

By a pun, Ben speaks of Shakespeare as

                              shaking a lance
          As brandish't at the eyes of Ignorance.

The pun does not fit the name of--Bacon! The apostrophe to 'sweet Swan
of Avon' hardly applies to Bacon either; he was not a Swan of Avon. It
were a sight, says Ben, to see the Swan 'in our waters yet appear,'
and Judge Webb actually argues that Shakespeare was dead, and could not
appear, so somebody else must be meant! 'No poet that ever lived would
be mad enough to talk of a swan as YET appearing, and resuming its
flights, upon the river some seven or eight years after it was dead.'*
The Judge is like the Scottish gentleman who when Lamb, invited to meet
Burns's sons, said he wished it were their father, solemnly replied that
this could not be, for Burns was dead. Wordsworth, in a sonnet, like
Glengarry at Sheriffmuir, sighed for 'one hour of Dundee!' The poet, and
the chief, must have been mad, in Judge Webb's opinion, for Dundee had
fallen long ago, in the arms of victory. A theory which not only rests
on such arguments as Judge Webb's, but takes it for granted that Bacon
might be addressed as 'sweet Swan of Avon,' is conspicuously impossible.


     *Webb, p. 134.

Another of the Judge's arguments reposes on a misconception which
has been exposed again and again. In his Memorial verses Ben gives
to Shakespeare the palm for POETRY: to Bacon for ELOQUENCE, in the
'Discoveries.' Both may stand the comparison with 'insolent Greece
or haughty Rome.' Shakespeare is not mentioned with Bacon in the
'Scriptorum Catalogus' of the 'Discoveries': but no more is any dramatic
author or any poet, as a poet. Hooker, Essex, Egerton, Sandys, Sir
Nicholas Bacon are chosen, not Spenser, Marlowe, or Shakespeare. All
this does not go far to prove that when Ben praised 'the wonder of our
stage,' 'sweet Swan of Avon,' he meant Bacon, not Shakespeare.

When Judge Webb argued that in matters of science ('falsely so called')
Bacon and Shakespeare were identical, Professor Tyrrell, of Trinity
College, Dublin, was shaken, and said so, in 'The Pilot.' Professor
Dowden then proved, in 'The National Review,' that both Shakespeare and
Bacon used the widely spread pseudo-scientific ideas of their time (as
is conspicuously the case), and Mr. Tyrrell confessed that he was sorry
he had spoken. 'When I read Professor Dowden's article, I would gladly
have recalled my own, but it was too late.' Mr. Tyrrell adds, with
an honourable naivete, 'I AM NOT VERSED IN THE LITERATURE OF THE
SHAKESPEAREAN ERA, and I assumed that the Baconians who put forward
the parallelisms had satisfied themselves that the coincidences were
peculiar to the writings of the philosopher and the poet. Professor
Dowden has proved that this is not so....' Professor Dowden has indeed
proved, in copious and minute detail, what was already obvious to
every student who knew even such ordinary Elizabethan books as Lyly's
'Euphues' and Phil Holland's 'Pliny,' and the speculations of such
earlier writers as Paracelsus. Bacon and Shakespeare, like other
Elizabethans, accepted the popular science of their period, and
decorated their pages with queer ideas about beasts, and stones, and
plants; which were mere folklore. A sensible friend of my own was
staggered, if not converted, by the parallelisms adduced in Judge Webb's
chapter 'Of Bacon as a Man of Science.' I told him that the parallelisms
were Elizabethan commonplaces, and were not peculiar to Bacon and
Shakespeare. Professor Dowden, out of the fulness of his reading,
corroborated this obiter dictum, and his article (in 'The National
Review,' vol. xxxix., 1902) absolutely disposes of the Judge's argument.

Mr. Tyrrell went on: 'The evidence of Ben Jonson alone seems decisive of
the question; the other' (the Judge, for one) 'persuades himself (how, I
cannot understand) that it may be explained away.'*


     *Pilot, August 30, 1902, p. 220.

We have seen how Judge Webb 'explains away' the evidence of Ben. But
while people 'not versed in the literature of the Shakespearean
era' assume that the Baconians have examined it, to discover whether
Shakespearo-Baconian parallelisms are peculiar to these two writers or
not, these people may fall into the error confessed by Mr. Tyrrell.

Some excuse is needed for arguing on the Baconian doctrine. 'There is
much doubt and misgiving on the subject among serious men,' says Judge
Webb, and if a humble author can, by luck, allay the doubts of a single
serious man, he should not regret his labour.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1895 Longmans, Green, and Co. edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





ANGLING SKETCHES


Contents:

Preface
Note to New Edition
The Confessions of a Duffer
A Border Boyhood
Loch Awe
Loch-Fishing
Loch Leven
The Bloody Doctor
The Lady or the Salmon?
A Tweedside Sketch
The Double Alibi
The Complete Bungler




DEDICATION


TO MRS HERBERT HILLS

'NO FISHER
BUT A WELL-WISHER
TO THE GAME.'

IN MEMORY OF PLESANT DAYS AT CORBY




PREFACE


Several of the sketches in this volume have appeared in periodicals.  "The
Bloody Doctor" was in _Macmillan's Magazine_, "The Confessions of a
Duffer," "Loch Awe," and "The Lady or the Salmon?" were in the _Fishing
Gazette_, but have been to some extent re-written.  "The Double Alibi"
was in _Longman's Magazine_.  The author has to thank the Editors and
Publishers for permission to reprint these papers.

The gem engraved on the cover is enlarged from a small intaglio in the
collection of Mr. M. H. N. STORY-MASKELYNE, M.P.  Such gems were
recommended by Clemens of Alexandria to the early Christians.  "The
figure of a man fishing will put them in mind of the Apostle."  Perhaps
the Greek is using the red hackle described by AElian in the only known
Greek reference to fly-fishing.




NOTE TO NEW EDITION


The historical version of the Black Officer's career, very unlike the
legend in "Loch Awe," may be read in Mr. Macpherson's _Social Life in the
Highlands_.




THE CONFESSIONS OF A DUFFER


These papers do not boast of great sport.  They are truthful, not like
the tales some fishers tell.  They should appeal to many sympathies.
There is no false modesty in the confidence with which I esteem myself a
duffer, at fishing.  Some men are born duffers; others, unlike persons of
genius, become so by an infinite capacity for not taking pains.  Others,
again, among whom I would rank myself, combine both these elements of
incompetence.  Nature, that made me enthusiastically fond of fishing,
gave me thumbs for fingers, short-sighted eyes, indolence, carelessness,
and a temper which (usually sweet and angelic) is goaded to madness by
the laws of matter and of gravitation.  For example: when another man is
caught up in a branch he disengages his fly; I jerk at it till something
breaks.  As for carelessness, in boyhood I fished, by preference, with
doubtful gut and knots ill-tied; it made the risk greater, and increased
the excitement if one did hook a trout.  I can't keep a fly-book.  I
stuff the flies into my pockets at random, or stick them into the leaves
of a novel, or bestow them in the lining of my hat or the case of my
rods.  Never, till 1890, in all my days did I possess a landing-net.  If
I can drag a fish up a bank, or over the gravel, well; if not, he goes on
his way rejoicing.  On the Test I thought it seemly to carry a landing-
net.  It had a hinge, and doubled up.  I put the handle through a button-
hole of my coat: I saw a big fish rising, I put a dry fly over him; the
idiot took it.  Up stream he ran, then down stream, then he yielded to
the rod and came near me.  I tried to unship my landing-net from my
button-hole.  Vain labour!  I twisted and turned the handle, it would not
budge.  Finally, I stooped, and attempted to ladle the trout out with the
short net; but he broke the gut, and went off.  A landing-net is a
tedious thing to carry, so is a creel, and a creel is, to me, a
superfluity.  There is never anything to put in it.  If I do catch a
trout, I lay him under a big stone, cover him with leaves, and never find
him again.  I often break my top joint; so, as I never carry string, I
splice it with a bit of the line, which I bite off, for I really cannot
be troubled with scissors and I always lose my knife.  When a phantom
minnow sticks in my clothes, I snap the gut off, and put on another, so
that when I reach home I look as if a shoal of fierce minnows had
attacked me and hung on like leeches.  When a boy, I was--once or twice--a
bait-fisher, but I never carried worms in box or bag.  I found them under
big stones, or in the fields, wherever I had the luck.  I never tie nor
otherwise fasten the joints of my rod; they often slip out of the sockets
and splash into the water.  Mr. Hardy, however, has invented a
joint-fastening which never slips.  On the other hand, by letting the
joint rust, you may find it difficult to take down your rod.  When I see
a trout rising, I always cast so as to get hung up, and I frighten him as
I disengage my hook.  I invariably fall in and get half-drowned when I
wade, there being an insufficiency of nails in the soles of my brogues.
My waders let in water, too, and when I go out to fish I usually leave
either my reel, or my flies, or my rod, at home.  Perhaps no other man's
average of lost flies in proportion to taken trout was ever so great as
mine.  I lose plenty, by striking furiously, after a series of short
rises, and breaking the gut, with which the fish swims away.  As to
dressing a fly, one would sooner think of dressing a dinner.  The result
of the fly-dressing would resemble a small blacking-brush, perhaps, but
nothing entomological.

Then why, a persevering reader may ask, do I fish?  Well, it is stronger
than myself, the love of fishing; perhaps it is an inherited instinct,
without the inherited power.  I may have had a fishing ancestor who
bequeathed to me the passion without the art.  My vocation is fixed, and
I have fished to little purpose all my days.  Not for salmon, an almost
fabulous and yet a stupid fish, which must be moved with a rod like a
weaver's beam.  The trout is more delicate and dainty--not the sea-trout,
which any man, woman, or child can capture, but the yellow trout in clear
water.

A few rises are almost all I ask for: to catch more than half a dozen
fish does not fall to my lot twice a year.  Of course, in a Sutherland
loch one man is as good as another, the expert no better than the duffer.
The fish will take, or they won't.  If they won't, nobody can catch them;
if they will, nobody can miss them.  It is as simple as trolling a minnow
from a boat in Loch Leven, probably the lowest possible form of angling.
My ambition is as great as my skill is feeble; to capture big trout with
the dry fly in the Test, that would content me, and nothing under that.
But I can't see the natural fly on the water; I cannot see my own fly,

   Let it sink or let it swim.

I often don't see the trout rise to me, if he is such a fool as to rise;
and I can't strike in time when I do see him.  Besides, I am unteachable
to tie any of the orthodox knots in the gut; it takes me half an hour to
get the gut through one of these newfangled iron eyes, and, when it is
through, I knot it any way.  The "jam" knot is a name to me, and no more.
That, perhaps, is why the hooks crack off so merrily.  Then, if I do spot
a rising trout, and if he does not spot me as I crawl like the serpent
towards him, my fly always fixes in a nettle, a haycock, a rose-bush, or
whatnot, behind me.  I undo it, or break it, and put up another, make a
cast, and, "plop," all the line falls in with a splash that would
frighten a crocodile.  The fish's big black fin goes cutting the stream
above, and there is a _sauve qui peut_ of trout in all directions.

I once did manage to make a cast correctly: the fly went over the fish's
nose; he rose; I hooked him, and he was a great silly brute of a
grayling.  The grayling is the deadest-hearted and the foolishest-headed
fish that swims.  I would as lief catch a perch or an eel as a grayling.
This is the worst of it--this ambition of the duffer's, this desire for
perfection, as if the golfing imbecile should match himself against Mr.
Horace Hutchinson, or as the sow of the Greek proverb challenged Athene
to sing.  I know it all, I deplore it, I regret the evils of ambition;
but _c'est plus fort que moi_.  If there is a trout rising well under the
pendant boughs that trail in the water, if there is a brake of briars
behind me, a strong wind down stream, for that trout, in that impregnable
situation, I am impelled to fish.  If I raise him I strike, miss him,
catch up in his tree, swish the cast off into the briars, break my top,
break my heart, but--that is the humour of it.  The passion, or instinct,
being in all senses blind, must no doubt be hereditary.  It is full of
sorrow and bitterness and hope deferred, and entails the mockery of
friends, especially of the fair.  But I would as soon lay down a love of
books as a love of fishing.

Success with pen or rod may be beyond one, but there is the pleasure of
the pursuit, the rapture of endeavour, the delight of an impossible
chase, the joys of nature--sky, trees, brooks, and birds.  Happiness in
these things is the legacy to us of the barbarian.  Man in the future
will enjoy bricks, asphalte, fog, machinery, "society," even picture
galleries, as many men and most women do already.  We are fortunate who
inherit the older, not "the new spirit"--we who, skilled or unskilled,
follow in the steps of our father, Izaak, by streams less clear, indeed,
and in meadows less fragrant, than his.  Still, they are meadows and
streams, not wholly dispeopled yet of birds and trout; nor can any defect
of art, nor certainty of laborious disappointment, keep us from the
waterside when April comes.

Next to being an expert, it is well to be a contented duffer: a man who
would fish if he could, and who will pleasure himself by flicking off his
flies, and dreaming of impossible trout, and smoking among the sedges
Hope's enchanted cigarettes.  Next time we shall be more skilled, more
fortunate.  Next time!  "To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow."  Grey
hairs come, and stiff limbs, and shortened sight; but the spring is green
and hope is fresh for all the changes in the world and in ourselves.  We
can tell a hawk from a hand-saw, a March Brown from a Blue Dun; and if
our success be as poor as ever, our fancy can dream as well as ever of
better things and more fortunate chances.  For fishing is like life; and
in the art of living, too, there are duffers, though they seldom give us
their confessions.  Yet even they are kept alive, like the incompetent
angler, by this undying hope: they will be more careful, more skilful,
more lucky next time.  The gleaming untravelled future, the bright
untried waters, allure us from day to day, from pool to pool, till, like
the veteran on Coquet side, we "try a farewell throw," or, like Stoddart,
look our last on Tweed.




A BORDER BOYHOOD


A fisher, says our father Izaak, is like a poet: he "must be born so."
The majority of dwellers on the Border are born to be fishers, thanks to
the endless number of rivers and burns in the region between the Tweed
and the Coquet--a realm where almost all trout-fishing is open, and
where, since population and love of the sport have increased, there is
now but little water that merits the trouble of putting up a rod.

Like the rest of us in that country, I was born an angler, though under
an evil star, for, indeed, my labours have not been blessed, and are
devoted to fishing rather than to the catching of fish.  Remembrance can
scarcely recover, "nor time bring back to time," the days when I was not
busy at the waterside; yet the feat is not quite beyond the power of
Mnemosyne.  My first recollection of the sport must date from about the
age of four.  I recall, in a dim brightness, driving along a road that
ran between banks of bracken and mica-veined rocks, and the sunlight on a
shining bend of a highland stream, and my father, standing in the shallow
water, showing me a huge yellow fish, that gave its last fling or two on
the grassy bank.  The fish seemed as terrible and dangerous to me as to
Tobit, in the Apocrypha, did that ferocious half-pounder which he carries
on a string in the early Italian pictures.  How oddly Botticelli and his
brethren misconceived the man-devouring fish, which must have been a
crocodile strayed from the Nile into the waters of the Euphrates!  A half-
pounder!  To have been terrified by a trout seems a bad beginning; and,
thereafter, the mist gather's over the past, only to lift again when I
see myself, with a crowd of other little children, sent to fish, with
crooked pins, for minnows, or "baggies" as we called them, in the
Ettrick.  If our parents hoped that we would bring home minnows for bait,
they were disappointed.  The party was under the command of a nursery
governess, and probably she was no descendant of the mother of us all,
Dame Juliana Berners.  We did not catch any minnows, and I remember
sitting to watch a bigger boy, who was angling in a shoal of them when a
parr came into the shoal, and we had bright visions of alluring that
monarch of the deep.  But the parr disdained our baits, and for months I
dreamed of what it would have been to capture him, and often thought of
him in church.  In a moment of profane confidence my younger brother once
asked me: "What do _you_ do in sermon time?  I," said he in a
whisper--"mind you don't tell--_I_ tell stories to myself about catching
trout."  To which I added similar confession, for even so I drove the
sermon by, and I have not "told"--till now.

By this time we must have been introduced to trout.  Who forgets his
first trout?  Mine, thanks to that unlucky star, was a double deception,
or rather there were two kinds of deception.  A village carpenter very
kindly made rods for us.  They were of unpainted wood, these first rods;
they were in two pieces, with a real brass joint, and there was a ring at
the end of the top joint, to which the line was knotted.  We were still
in the age of Walton, who clearly knew nothing, except by hearsay, of a
reel; he abandons the attempt to describe that machine as used by the
salmon-fishers.  He thinks it must be seen to be understood.  With these
innocent weapons, and with the gardener to bait our hooks, we were taken
to the Yarrow, far up the stream, near Ladhope.  How well one remembers
deserting the gardener, and already appreciating the joys of having no
gillie nor attendant, of being "alone with ourselves and the goddess of
fishing"!  I cast away as well as I could, and presently jerked a trout,
a tiny one, high up in the air out of the water.  But he fell off the
hook again, he dropped in with a little splash, and I rushed up to
consult my tutor on his unsportsmanlike behaviour, and the disappointing,
nay, heart-breaking, occurrence.  Was the trout not morally caught, was
there no way of getting him to see this and behave accordingly?  The
gardener feared there was none.  Meanwhile he sat on the bank and angled
in a pool.  "Try my rod," he said, and, as soon as I had taken hold of
it, "pull up," he cried, "pull up."  I did "pull up," and hauled my first
troutling on shore.  But in my inmost heart I feared that he was not my
trout at all, that the gardener had hooked him before he handed the rod
to me.  Then we met my younger brother coming to us with quite a great
fish, half a pound perhaps, which he had caught in a burn.  Then, for the
first time, my soul knew the fierce passion of jealousy, the envy of the
angler.  Almost for the last time, too; for, I know not why it is, and it
proves me no true fisherman, I am not discontented by the successes of
others.  If one cannot catch fish oneself, surely the next best thing is
to see other people catch them.

My own progress was now checked for long by a constitutional and
insuperable aversion to angling with worm.  If the gardener, or a pretty
girl-cousin of the mature age of fourteen, would put the worm on, I did
not "much mind" fishing with it.  Dost thou remember, fair lady of the
ringlets?  Still, I never liked bait-fishing, and these mine allies were
not always at hand.  We used, indeed, to have great days with perch at
Faldonside, on the land which Sir Walter Scott was always so anxious to
buy from Mr. Nichol Milne.  Almost the last entry in his diary, at
Naples, breathes this unutterable hope.  He had deluded himself into
believing that his debts were paid, and that he could soon "speak a word
to young Nichol Milne."  The word, of course, was never spoken, and the
unsupplanted laird used to let us fish for his perch to our hearts'
desire.  Never was there such slaughter.  The corks which we used as
floats were perpetually tipping, bobbing, and disappearing, and then the
red-finned perch would fly out on to dry land.  Here I once saw two corks
go down, two anglers haul up, and one perch, attached to both hooks,
descend on the grassy bank.  My brother and I filled two baskets once,
and strung dozens of other perch on a stick.

But this was not legitimate business.  Not till we came to fly-fishing
were we really entered at the sport, and this initiation took place, as
it chanced, beside the very stream where I was first shown a trout.  It
is a charming piece of water, amber-coloured and clear, flowing from the
Morvern hills under the limes of an ancient avenue--trees that have long
survived the house to which, of old, the road must have led.  Our gillie
put on for us big bright sea-trout flies--nobody fishes there for yellow
trout; but, in our inexperience, small "brownies" were all we caught.
Probably we were only taken to streams and shallows where we could not
interfere with mature sportsmen.  At all events, it was demonstrated to
us that we could actually catch fish with fly, and since then I have
scarcely touched a worm, except as a boy, in burns.  In these early days
we had no notion of playing a trout.  If there was a bite, we put our
strength into an answering tug, and, if nothing gave way, the trout flew
over our heads, perhaps up into a tree, perhaps over into a branch of the
stream behind us.  Quite a large trout will yield to this artless method,
if the rod be sturdy--none of your glued-up cane-affairs.  I remember
hooking a trout which, not answering to the first haul, ran right across
the stream and made for a hole in the opposite bank.  But the second lift
proved successful and he landed on my side of the water.  He had a great
minnow in his throat, and must have been a particularly greedy animal.  Of
course, on this system there were many breakages, and the method was
abandoned as we lived into our teens, and began to wade and to understand
something about fly-fishing.

It was worth while to be a boy then in the south of Scotland, and to fish
the waters haunted by old legends, musical with old songs, and renowned
in the sporting essays of Christopher North and Stoddart.  Even then,
thirty long years ago, the old stagers used to tell us that "the waiter
was owr sair fished," and they grumbled about the system of draining the
land, which makes a river a roaring torrent in floods, and a bed of grey
stones with a few clear pools and shallows, during the rest of the year.
In times before the hills were drained, before the manufacturing towns
were so populous, before pollution, netting, dynamiting, poisoning,
sniggling, and the enormous increase of fair and unfair fishing, the
border must have been the angler's paradise.  Still, it was not bad when
we were boys.  We had Ettrick within a mile of us, and a finer natural
trout-stream there is not in Scotland, though now the water only holds a
sadly persecuted remnant.  There was one long pool behind Lindean,
flowing beneath a high wooded bank, where the trout literally seemed
never to cease rising at the flies that dropped from the pendant boughs.
Unluckily the water flowed out of the pool in a thin broad stream,
directly at right angles to the pool itself.  Thus the angler had, so to
speak, the whole of lower Ettrick at his back when he waded: it was a
long way up stream to the bank, and, as we never used landing-nets then,
we naturally lost a great many trout in trying to unhook them in mid
water.  They only averaged as a rule from three to two to the pound, but
they were strong and lively.  In this pool there was a large tawny, table-
shaped stone, over which the current broke.  Out of the eddy behind this
stone, one of my brothers one day caught three trout weighing over seven
pounds, a feat which nowadays sounds quite incredible.  As soon as the
desirable eddy was empty, another trout, a trifle smaller than the
former, seems to have occupied it.  The next mile and a half, from
Lindean to the junction with Tweed, was remarkable for excellent sport.
In the last pool of Ettrick, the water flowed by a steep bank, and, if
you cast almost on to the further side, you were perfectly safe to get
fish, even when the river was very low.  The flies used, three on a cast,
were small and dusky, hare's ear and woodcock wing, black palmers, or, as
Stoddart sings,

   Wee dour looking huiks are the thing,
   Mouse body and laverock wing.

Next to Ettrick came Tweed: the former river joins the latter at the bend
of a long stretch of water, half stream, half pool, in which angling was
always good.  In late September there were sea-trout, which, for some
reason, rose to the fly much more freely than sea-trout do now in the
upper Tweed.  I particularly remember hooking one just under the railway
bridge.  He was a two-pounder, and practised the usual sea-trout tactics
of springing into the air like a rocket.  There was a knot on my line, of
course, and I was obliged to hold him hard.  When he had been dragged up
on the shingle, the line parted, broken in twain at the knot; but it had
lasted just long enough, during three exciting minutes.  This accident of
a knot on the line has only once befallen me since, with the strongest
loch-trout I ever encountered.  It was on Branxholme Loch, where the
trout run to a great size, but usually refuse the fly.  I was alone in a
boat on a windy day; the trout soon ran out the line to the knot, and
then there was nothing for it but to lower the top almost to the water's
edge, and hold on in hope.  Presently the boat drifted ashore, and I
landed him--better luck than I deserved.  People who only know the trout
of the Test and other chalk streams, cannot imagine how much stronger are
the fish of the swift Scottish streams and dark Scottish lochs.  They're
worse fed, but they are infinitely more powerful and active; it is all
the difference between an alderman and a clansman.

Tweed, at this time, was full of trout, but even then they were not easy
to catch.  One difficulty lay in the nature of the wading.  There is a
pool near Ashiesteil and Gleddis Weil which illustrated this.  Here Scott
and Hogg were once upset from a boat while "burning the water"--spearing
salmon by torchlight.  Herein, too, as Scott mentions in his Diary, he
once caught two trout at one cast.  The pool is long, is paved with small
gravel, and allures you to wade on and on.  But the water gradually
deepens as you go forward, and the pool ends in a deep pot under each
bank.  Then to recover your ground becomes by no means easy, especially
if the water is heavy.  You get half-drowned, or drowned altogether,
before you discover your danger.  Many of the pools have this
peculiarity, and in many, one step made rashly lets you into a very
uncomfortable and perilous place.  Therefore expeditions to Tweedside
were apt to end in a ducking.  It was often hard to reach the water where
trout were rising, and the rise was always capricious.  There might not
be a stir on the water for hours, and suddenly it would be all boiling
with heads and tails for twenty minutes, after which nothing was to be
done.  To miss "the take" was to waste the day, at least in fly-fishing.
From a high wooded bank I have seen the trout feeding, and they have
almost ceased to feed before I reached the waterside.  Still worse was it
to be allured into water over the tops of your waders, early in the day,
and then to find that the rise was over, and there was nothing for it but
a weary walk home, the basket laden only with damp boots.  Still, the
trout were undeniably _there_, and that was a great encouragement.  They
are there still, but infinitely more cunning than of old.  Then, if they
were feeding, they took the artificial fly freely; now it must be exactly
of the right size and shade or they will have none of it.  They come
provokingly short, too; just plucking at the hook, and running out a foot
of line or so, then taking their departure.  For some reason the Tweed is
more difficult to fish with the dry fly than--the Test, for example.  The
water is swifter and very dark, it drowns the fly soon, and on the
surface the fly is less easily distinguished than at Whitchurch, in the
pellucid streams.  The Leader a tributary, may be fished with dry fly; on
the Tweed one can hardly manage it.  There is a plan by which rising
trout may be taken--namely, by baiting with a small red worm and casting
as in fly-fishing.  But that is so hard on the worm!  Probably he who can
catch trout with fly on the Tweed between Melrose and Holy Lee can catch
them anywhere.  On a good day in April great baskets are still made in
preserved parts of the Tweed, but, if they are made in open water, it
must be, I fancy, with worm, or with the "screw," the larva of the May-
fly.  The screw is a hideous and venomous-looking animal, which is fixed
on a particular kind of tackle, and cast up stream with a short line.  The
heaviest trout are fond of it, but it can only be used at a season when
either school or Oxford keeps one far from what old Franck, Walton's
contemporary, a Cromwellian trooper, calls "the glittering and resolute
streams of Tweed."

Difficult as it is, that river is so beautiful and alluring that it
scarcely needs the attractions of sport.  The step banks, beautifully
wooded, and in spring one mass of primroses, are crowned here and there
with ruined Border towers--like Elibank, the houses of Muckle Mou'ed Meg;
or with fair baronial houses like Fernilea.  Meg made a bad exchange when
she left Elibank with the salmon pool at its foot for bleak Harden,
frowning over the narrow "den" where Harden kept the plundered cattle.
There is no fishing in the tiny Harden burn, that joins the brawling
Borthwick Water.

The burns of the Lowlands are now almost barren of trout.  The spawning
fish, flabby and useless, are killed in winter.  All through the rest of
the year, in the remotest places, tourists are hard at them with worm.  In
a small burn a skilled wormer may almost depopulate the pools, and, on
the Border, all is fish that comes to the hook; men keep the very
fingerlings, on the pretext that they are "so sweet" in the frying-pan.
The crowd of anglers in glens which seem not easily accessible is
provoking enough.  Into the Meggat, a stream which feeds St. Mary's Loch,
there flows the Glengaber, or Glencaber burn: the burn of the pine-tree
stump.  The water runs in deep pools and streams over a blue slatey rock,
which contains gold under the sand, in the worn holes and crevices.  My
friend, Mr. McAllister, the schoolmaster at St. Mary's, tells me that one
day, when fish were not rising, he scooped out the gravel of one of these
holes with his knife, and found a tiny nugget, after which the
gold-hunting fever came on him for a while.  But little is got nowadays,
though in some earlier period the burn has been diverted from its bed,
and the people used solemnly to wash the sand, as in California or
Australia.  Well, whether in consequence of the gold, as the alchemical
philosophers would have held, or not, the trout of the Glengaber burn
were good.  They were far shorter, thicker and stronger than those of the
many neighbouring brooks.  I have fished up the burn with fly, when it
was very low, hiding carefully behind the boulders, and have been
surprised at the size and gameness of the fish.  As soon as the fly had
touched the brown water, it was sucked down, and there was quite a fierce
little fight before the fish came to hand.

"This, all this, was in the olden time, long ago."

The Glengaber burn is about twenty miles from any railway station, but,
on the last occasion when I visited it, three louts were worming their
way up it, within twenty yards of each other, each lout, with his huge
rod, showing himself wholly to any trout that might be left in the water.
Thirty years ago the burns that feed St. Mary's Loch were almost
unfished, and rare sport we had in them, as boys, staying at Tibbie
Sheil's famous cottage, and sleeping in her box-beds, where so often the
Ettrick Shepherd and Christopher North have lain, after copious toddy.
"'Tis gone, 'tis gone:" not in our time will any man, like the Ettrick
Shepherd, need a cart to carry the trout he has slain in Meggat Water.
That stream, flowing through a valley furnished with a grass-grown track
for a road, flows, as I said, into St. Mary's Loch.  There are two or
three large pools at the foot of the loch, in which, as a small boy
hardly promoted to fly, I have seen many monsters rising greedily.  Men
got into the way of fishing these pools after a flood with minnow, and
thereby made huge baskets, the big fish running up to feed, out of the
loch.  But, when last I rowed past Meggat foot, the delta of that
historic stream was simply crowded with anglers, stepping in in front of
each other.  I asked if this mob was a political "demonstration," but
they stuck to business, as if they had been on the Regent's Canal.  And
this, remember, was twenty miles from any town!  Yet there is a burn on
the Border still undiscovered, still full of greedy trout.  I shall give
the angler such a hint of its whereabouts as Tiresias, in Hades, gave to
Odysseus concerning the end of his second wanderings.

When, O stranger, thou hast reached a burn where the shepherd asks thee
for the newspaper wrapped round thy sandwiches, that he may read the
news, then erect an altar to Priapus, god of fishermen, and begin to
angle boldly.

Probably the troops who fish our Border-burns still manage to toss out
some dozens of tiny fishes, some six or eight to the pound.  Are not
these triumphs chronicled in the "Scotsman?"  But they cannot imagine
what angling was in the dead years, nor what great trout dwelt below the
linns of the Crosscleugh burn, beneath the red clusters of the rowan
trees, or in the waters of the "Little Yarrow" above the Loch of the
Lowes.  As to the lochs themselves, now that anyone may put a boat on
them, now that there is perpetual trolling, as well as fly-fishing, so
that every fish knows the lures, the fun is mainly over.  In April, no
doubt, something may still be done, and in the silver twilights of June,
when as you drift on the still surface you hear the constant sweet plash
of the rising trout, a few, and these good, may be taken.  But the water
wants re-stocking, and the burns in winter need watching, in the
interests of spawning fish.  It is nobody's interest, that I know of, to
take trouble and incur expense; and free fishing, by the constitution of
the universe, must end in bad fishing or in none at all.  The best we can
say for it is that vast numbers of persons may, by the still waters of
these meres, enjoy the pleasures of hope.  Even solitude is no longer to
be found in the scene which Scott, in "Marmion," chooses as of all places
the most solitary.

   Here, have I thought, 'twere sweet to dwell,
   And rear again the chaplain's cell.

But no longer does

   "Your horse's hoof tread sound too rude,
   So stilly is the solitude."

Stilly! with the horns and songs from omnibusses that carry tourists, and
with yells from nymphs and swains disporting themselves in the boats.
Yarrow is only the old Yarrow in winter.  Ages and revolutions must pass
before the ancient peace returns; and only if the golden age is born
again, and if we revive in it, shall we find St. Mary's what St. Mary's
was lang syne--

   Ah, Buddha, if thy tale be true,
      Of still returning life,
   A monk may I be born anew,
      In valleys free from strife,--
   A monk where Meggat winds and laves
   The lone St. Mary's of the Waves.

Yarrow, which flows out of St. Mary's Loch was never a great favourite of
mine, as far as fishing goes.  It had, and probably deserved, a great
reputation, and some good trout are still taken in the upper waters, and
there must be monsters in the deep black pools, the "dowie dens" above
Bowhill.  But I never had any luck there.  The choicest stream of all was
then, probably, the Aill, described by Sir Walter in "William of
Deloraine's Midnight Ride"--

      Where Aill, from mountains freed,
   Down from the lakes did raving come;
   Each wave was crested with tawny foam,
      Like the mane of a chestnut steed.

As not uncommonly happens, Scott uses rather large language here.  The
steepy, grassy hillsides, the great green tablelands in a recess of which
the Aill is born, can hardly be called "mountains."  The "lakes," too,
through which it passes, are much more like tarns, or rather, considering
the flatness of their banks, like well-meaning ponds.  But the Aill, near
Sinton and Ashkirk, was a delightful trout-stream, between its willow-
fringed banks, a brook about the size of the Lambourne.  Nowhere on the
Border were trout more numerous, better fed, and more easily beguiled.  A
week on Test would I gladly give for one day of boyhood beside the Aill,
where the casting was not scientific, but where the fish rose gamely at
almost any fly.  Nobody seemed to go there then, and, I fancy, nobody
need go there now.  The nets and other dismal devices of the poachers
from the towns have ruined that pleasant brook, where one has passed so
many a happy hour, walking the long way home wet and weary, but well
content.  Into Aill flows a burn, the Headshaw burn, where there used to
be good fish, because it runs out of Headshaw Loch, a weed-fringed lonely
tarn on the bleak level of the tableland.  Bleak as it may seem, Headshaw
Loch has the great charm of absolute solitude: there are no tourists nor
anglers here, and the life of the birds is especially free and charming.
The trout, too, are large, pink of flesh, and game of character; but the
world of mankind need not rush thither.  They are not to be captured by
the wiles of men, or so rarely that the most enthusiastic anglers have
given them up.  They are as safe in their tarn as those enchanted fish of
the "Arabian Nights."  Perhaps a silver sedge in a warm twilight may
somewhat avail, but the adventure is rarely achieved.

These are the waters with which our boyhood was mainly engaged; it is a
pleasure to name and number them.  Memory, that has lost so much and
would gladly lose so much more, brings vividly back the golden summer
evenings by Tweedside, when the trout began to plash in the
stillness--brings back the long, lounging, solitary days beneath the
woods of Ashiesteil--days so lonely that they sometimes, in the end,
begat a superstitious eeriness.  One seemed forsaken in an enchanted
world; one might see the two white fairy deer flit by, bringing to us, as
to Thomas Rhymer, the tidings that we must back to Fairyland.  Other
waters we knew well, and loved: the little salmon-stream in the west that
doubles through the loch, and runs a mile or twain beneath its alders,
past its old Celtic battle-field, beneath the ruined shell of its feudal
tower, to the sea.  Many a happy day we had there, on loch or stream,
with the big sea-trout which have somehow changed their tastes, and to-
day take quite different flies from the green body and the red body that
led them to the landing-net long ago.  Dear are the twin Alines, but
dearer is Tweed, and Ettrick, where our ancestor was drowned in a flood,
and his white horse was found, next day, feeding near his dead body, on a
little grassy island.  There is a great pleasure in trying new methods,
in labouring after the delicate art of the dry fly-fisher in the clear
Hampshire streams, where the glassy tide flows over the waving tresses of
crow's-foot below the poplar shade.  But nothing can be so good as what
is old, and, as far as angling goes, is practically ruined, the alternate
pool and stream of the Border waters, where

         The triple pride
   Of Eildon looks over Strathclyde,

and the salmon cast murmurs hard by the Wizard's grave.  They are all
gone now, the old allies and tutors in the angler's art--the kind
gardener who baited our hooks; the good Scotch judge who gave us our
first collection of flies; the friend who took us with him on his salmon-
fishing expedition, and made men of us with real rods, and "pirns" of
ancient make.  The companions of those times are scattered, and live
under strange stars and in converse seasons, by troutless waters.  It is
no longer the height of pleasure to be half-drowned in Tweed, or lost on
the hills with no luncheon in the basket.  But, except for scarcity of
fish, the scene is very little altered, and one is a boy again, in heart,
beneath the elms of Yair, or by the Gullets at Ashiesteil.  However bad
the sport, it keeps you young, or makes you young again, and you need not
follow Ponce de Leon to the western wilderness, when, in any river you
knew of yore, you can find the Fountain of Youth.




LOCH AWE


THE BOATMAN'S YARNS


Good trout-fishing in Scotland, south of the Pentland Firth, is almost
impossible to procure.  There are better fish, and more of them, in the
Wandle, within twenty minutes of Victoria Station, than in any equal
stretch of any Scotch river with which I am acquainted.  But the pleasure
of angling, luckily, does not consist merely of the catching of fish.  The
Wandle is rather too suburban for some tastes, which prefer smaller
trout, better air, and wilder scenery.  To such spirits, Loch Awe may,
with certain distinct cautions, be recommended.  There is more chance for
anglers, now, in Scotch lochs than in most Scotch rivers.  The lochs
cannot so easily be netted, lined, polluted, and otherwise made empty and
ugly, like the Border streams.  They are farther off from towns and
tourists, though distance is scarcely a complete protection.  The best
lochs for yellow trout are decidedly those of Sutherland.  There are no
railways, and there are two hundred lochs and more in the Parish of
Assynt.  There, in June, the angler who is a good pedestrian may actually
enjoy solitude, sometimes.  There is a loch near Strathnaver, and far
from human habitations, where a friend of my own recently caught sixty-
five trout weighing about thirty-eight pounds.  They are numerous and
plucky, but not large, though a casual big loch-trout may be taken by
trolling.  But it is truly a far way to this anonymous lake and all round
the regular fishing inns, like Inchnadampf and Forsinard there is usually
quite a little crowd of anglers.  The sport is advertised in the
newspapers; more and more of our eager fellow-creatures are attracted,
more and more the shooting tenants are preserving waters that used to be
open.  The distance to Sutherland makes that county almost beyond the
range of a brief holiday.  Loch Leven is nearer, and at Loch Leven the
scenery is better than its reputation, while the trout are excellent,
though shy.  But Loch Leven is too much cockneyfied by angling
competitions; moreover, its pleasures are expensive.  Loch Awe remains, a
loch at once large, lovely, not too distant, and not destitute of sport.

The reader of Mr. Colquhoun's delightful old book, "The Moor and the
Loch," must not expect Loch Awe to be what it once was.  The railway,
which has made the north side of the lake so ugly, has brought the
district within easy reach of Glasgow and of Edinburgh.  Villas are built
on many a beautiful height; here couples come for their honeymoon, here
whole argosies of boats are anchored off the coasts, here do steam
launches ply.  The hotels are extremely comfortable, the boatmen are
excellent boatmen, good fishers, and capital company.  All this is
pleasant, but all this attracts multitudes of anglers, and it is not in
nature that sport should be what it once was.  Of the famous _salmo
ferox_ I cannot speak from experience.  The huge courageous fish is still
at home in Loch Awe, but now he sees a hundred baits, natural and
artificial, where he saw one in Mr. Colquhoun's time.  The truly
contemplative man may still sit in the stern of the boat, with two rods
out, and possess his soul in patience, as if he were fishing for tarpon
in Florida.  I wish him luck, but the diversion is little to my mind.
Except in playing the fish, if he comes, all the skill is in the boatmen,
who know where to row, at what pace, and in what depth of water.  As to
the chances of salmon again, they are perhaps less rare, but they are not
very frequent.  The fish does not seem to take freely in the loch, and on
his way from the Awe to the Orchy.  As to the trout-fishing, it is very
bad in the months when most men take their holidays, August and
September.  From the middle of April to the middle of June is apparently
the best time.  The loch is well provided with bays, of different merit,
according to the feeding which they provide; some come earlier, some
later into season.  Doubtless the most beautiful part of the lake is
around the islands, between the Loch Awe and the Port Sonachan hotels.
The Green Island, with its strange Celtic burying-ground, where the
daffodils bloom among the sepulchres with their rude carvings of battles
and of armed men, has many trout around its shores.  The favourite
fishing-places, however, are between Port Sonachan and Ford.  In the
morning early, the steam-launch tows a fleet of boats down the loch, and
they drift back again, fishing all the bays, and arriving at home in time
for dinner.  Too frequently the angler is vexed by finding a boat busy in
his favourite bay.  I am not sure that, when the trout are really taking,
the water near Port Sonachan is not as good as any other.  Much depends
on the weather.  In the hard north-east winds of April we can scarcely
expect trout to feed very freely anywhere.  These of Loch Awe are very
peculiar fish.  I take it that there are two species--one short, thick,
golden, and beautiful; but these, at least in April, are decidedly
scarce.  The common sort is long, lanky, of a dark green hue, and the
reverse of lovely.  Most of them, however, are excellent at breakfast,
pink in the flesh, and better flavoured, I think, than the famous trout
of Loch Leven.  They are also extremely game for their size; a half-pound
trout fights like a pounder.  From thirty to forty fish in a day's
incessant angling is reckoned no bad basket.  In genial May weather,
probably the trout average two to the pound, and a pounder or two may be
in the dish.  But three to the pound is decidedly nearer the average, at
least in April.  The flies commonly used are larger than what are
employed in Loch Leven.  A teal wing and red body, a grouse hackle, and
the prismatic Heckham Peckham are among the favourites; but it is said
that flies no bigger than Tweed flies are occasionally successful.  In my
own brief experience I have found the trout "dour," occasionally they
would rise freely for an hour at noon, or in the evening; but often one
passed hours with scarcely a rising fish.  This may have been due to the
bitterness of the weather, or to my own lack of skill.  Not that lochs
generally require much artifice in the angler.  To sink the flies deep,
and move them with short jerks, appears, now and then, to be efficacious.
There has been some controversy about Loch Awe trouting; this is as
favourable a view of the sport as I can honestly give.  It is not
excellent, but, thanks to the great beauty of the scenery, the many
points of view on so large and indented a lake, the charm of the wood and
wild flowers, Loch Awe is well worth a visit from persons who do not
pitch their hopes too high.

Loch Awe would have contented me less had I been less fortunate in my
boatman.  It is often said that tradition has died out in the Highlands;
it is living yet.

After three days of north wind and failure, it occurred to me that my
boatman might know the local folklore--the fairy tales and traditions.  As
a rule, tradition is a purely professional part of a guide's stock-in-
trade, but the angler who had my barque in his charge proved to be a
fresh fountain of legend.  His own county is not Argyleshire, but
Inverness, and we did not deal much in local myth.  True, he told me why
Loch Awe ceased--like the site of Sodom and Gomorrah--to be a cultivated
valley and became a lake, where the trout are small and, externally,
green.

"Loch Awe was once a fertile valley, and it belonged to an old dame.  She
was called Dame Cruachan, the same as the hill, and she lived high up on
the hillside.  Now there was a well on the hillside, and she was always
to cover up the well with a big stone before the sun set.  But one day
she had been working in the valley and she was weary, and she sat down by
the path on her way home and fell asleep.  And the sun had gone down
before she reached the well, and in the night the water broke out and
filled all the plain, and what was land is now water."  This, then, was
the origin of Loch Awe.  It is a little like the Australian account of
the Deluge.  That calamity was produced by a man's showing a woman the
mystic turndun, a native sacred toy.  Instantly water broke out of the
earth and drowned everybody.

This is merely a local legend, such as boatmen are expected to know.  As
the green trout utterly declined to rise, I tried the boatman with the
Irish story of why the Gruagach Gaire left off laughing, and all about
the hare that came and defiled his table, as recited by Mr. Curtin in his
"Irish Legends" (Sampson, Low, & Co.).  The boatman did not know this
fable, but he did know of a red deer that came and spoke to a gentleman.
This was a story from the Macpherson country.  I give it first in the
boatman's words, and then we shall discuss the history of the legend as
known to Sir Walter Scott and James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd.



THE YARN OF THE BLACK OFFICER


"It was about 'the last Christmas of the hundred'--the end of last
century.  They wanted men for the Black Watch (42nd Highlanders), and the
Black Officer, as they called him, was sent to his own country to enlist
them.  Some he got willingly, and others by force.  He promised he would
only take them to London, where the King wanted to review them, and then
let them go home.  So they came, though they little liked it, and he was
marching them south.  Now at night they reached a place where nobody
would have halted them except the Black Officer, for it was a great place
for ghosts.  And they would have run away if they had dared, but they
were afraid of him.  So some tried to sleep in threes and fours, and some
were afraid to sleep, and they sat up round the fire.  But the Black
Officer, he went some way from the rest, and lay down beneath a tree.

"Now as the night wore on, and whiles it would be dark and whiles the
moon shone, a man came--they did not know from where--a big red man, and
drew up to the fire, and was talking with them.  And he asked where the
Black Officer was, and they showed him.  Now there was one man, Shamus
Mackenzie they called him, and he was very curious, and he must be seeing
what they did.  So he followed the man, and saw him stoop and speak to
the officer, but he did not waken; then this individual took the Black
Officer by the breast and shook him violently.  Then Shamus knew who the
stranger was, for no man alive durst have done as much to the Black
Officer.  And there was the Black Officer kneeling to him!

"Well, what they said, Shamus could not hear, and presently they walked
away, and the Black Officer came back alone.

"He took them to England, but never to London, and they never saw the
King.  He took them to Portsmouth, and they were embarked for India,
where we were fighting the French.  There was a town we couldn't get
into" (Seringapatam?), "and the Black Officer volunteered to make a
tunnel under the walls.  Now they worked three days, and whether it was
the French heard them and let them dig on, or not, any way, on the third
day the French broke in on them.  They kept sending men into the tunnel,
and more men, and still they wondered who was fighting within, and how we
could have so large a party in the tunnel; so at last they brought
torches, and there was no man alive on our side but the Black Officer,
and he had a wall of corpses built up in front of him, and was fighting
across it.  He had more light to see by than the French had, for it was
dark behind him, and there would be some light on their side.  So at last
they brought some combustibles and blew it all up.  Three days after that
we took the town.  Some of our soldiers were sent to dig out the tunnel,
and with them was Shamus Mackenzie."

"And they never found the Black Officer," I said, thinking of young
Campbell in Sekukoeni's fighting koppie.

"Oh, yes," said the boatman, "Shamus found the body of the Black Officer,
all black with smoke, and he laid him down on a green knoll, and was
standing over the dead man, and was thinking of how many places they had
been in together, and of his own country, and how he wished he was there
again.  Then the dead man's face moved.

"Shamus turned and ran for his life, and he was running till he met some
officers, and he told them that the Black Officer's body had stirred.
They thought he was lying, but they went off to the place, and one of
them had the thought to take a flask of brandy in his pocket.  When they
came to the lifeless body it stirred again, and with one thing and
another they brought him round.

"The Black Officer was not himself again for long, and they took him home
to his own country, and he lay in bed in his house.  And every day a red
deer would come to the house, and go into his room and sit on a chair
beside the bed, speaking to him like a man.

"Well, the Black Officer got better again, and went about among his
friends; and once he was driving home from a dinner-party, and Shamus was
with him.  It was just the last night of the hundred.  And on the road
they met a man, and Shamus knew him--for it was him they had seen by the
fire on the march, as I told you at the beginning.  The Black Officer got
down from his carriage and joined the man, and they walked a bit apart;
but Shamus--he was so curious--whatever happened he must see them.  And
he came within hearing just as they were parting, and he heard the
stranger say, 'This is the night.'

"'No,' said the Black Officer, 'this night next year.'

"So he came back, and they drove home.  A year went by, and the Black
Officer was seeking through the country for the twelve best men he could
find to accompany him to some deer-hunt or the like.  And he asked
Shamus, but he pretended he was ill--Oh, he was very unwell!--and he
could not go, but stayed in bed at home.  So the Black Officer chose
another man, and he and the twelve set out--the thirteen of them.  But
they were never seen again."

"Never seen again?  Were they lost in the snow?"

"It did come on a heavy fall, sir."

"But their bodies were found?"

"No, sir--though they searched high and low; they are not found, indeed,
till this day.  It was thought the Black Officer had sold himself and
twelve other men, sir."

"To the Devil?"

"It would be that."

For the narrator never mentions our ghostly foe, which produces a solemn
effect.

This story was absolutely new to me, and much I wished that Mr. Louis
Stevenson could have heard it.  The blending of the far East with the
Highlands reminds one of his "Master of Ballantrae," and what might he
not make of that fairy red deer!  My boatman, too, told me what Mr.
Stevenson says the Highlanders will not tell--the name of the man who
committed the murder of which Alan Breck was accused.  But this secret I
do not intend to divulge.

The story of the Black Officer then seemed absolutely unpublished.  But
when Sir Walter Scott's diary was given to the world in October, 1890, it
turned out that he was not wholly ignorant of the legend.  In 1828 he
complains that he has been annoyed by a lady, because he had printed "in
the 'Review'" a rawhead and bloody-bones story of her father, Major
Macpherson, who was lost in a snowstorm.  This Major Macpherson was
clearly the Black Officer.  Mr. Douglas, the publisher of Scott's diary,
discovered that the "Review" mentioned vaguely by Scott was the "Foreign
Quarterly," No. I, July, 1827.  In an essay on Hoffmann's novels, Sir
Walter introduced the tale as told to him in a letter from a nobleman
some time deceased, not more distinguished for his love of science than
his attachment to literature in all its branches.

The tale is too long to be given completely.  Briefly, a Captain M., on
St. Valentine's day, 1799, had been deer-shooting (at an odd time of the
year) in the hills west of D-.  He did not return, a terrible snowstorm
set in, and finally he and his friends were found dead in a bothy, which
the tempest had literally destroyed.  Large stones from the walls were
found lying at distances of a hundred yards; the wooden uprights were
twisted like broken sticks.  The Captain was lying dead, without his
clothes, on the bed; one man was discovered at a distance, another near
the Captain.  Then it was remembered that, at the same bothy a month
before, a shepherd lad had inquired for the Captain, had walked with him
for some time, and that, on the officer's return, "a mysterious anxiety
hung about him."  A fire had also been seen blazing on an opposite
height, and when some of the gillies went to the spot, "there was no fire
to be seen."  On the day when the expedition had started, the Captain was
warned of the ill weather, but he said "he _must_ go."  He was an
unpopular man, and was accused of getting money by procuring recruits
from the Highlands, often by cruel means.  "Our informer told us nothing
more; he neither told us his own opinion, nor that of the country, but
left it to our own notions of the manner in which good and evil is
rewarded in this life to suggest the author of the miserable event.  He
seemed impressed with superstitious awe on the subject, and said, 'There
was na the like seen in a' Scotland.'  The man is far advanced in years
and is a schoolmaster in the neighbourhood of Rannoch."

Sir Walter says that "the feeling of superstitious awe annexed to the
catastrophe could not have been improved by any circumstances of
additional horror which a poet could have invented."  But is there not
something more moving still in the boatman's version: "they were never
seen again . . . they were not found indeed till this day"?

The folklorist, of course, is eager to know whether the boatman's much
more complete and connected narrative is a popular mythical development
in the years between 1820 and 1890, or whether the schoolmaster of
Rannoch did not tell all he knew.  It is unlikely, I think, that the
siege of Seringapatam would have been remembered so long in connection
with the Black Officer if it had not formed part of his original legend.
Meanwhile the earliest printed notice of the event with which I am
acquainted, a notice only ten years later than the date of the Major's
death in 1799, is given by Hogg in "The Spy," 1810-11, pp. 101-3.  I
offer an abridgment of the narrative.

"About the end of last century Major Macpherson and a party of friends
went out to hunt on the Grampians between Athole and Badenoch.  They were
highly successful, and in the afternoon they went into a little bothy,
and, having meat and drink, they abandoned themselves to jollity.

"During their merry-making a young man entered whose appearance
particularly struck and somewhat shocked Macpherson; the stranger
beckoned to the Major, and he followed him instantly out of the bothy.

"When they parted, after apparently having had some earnest conversation,
the stranger was out of sight long before the Major was half-way back,
though only twenty yards away.

"The Major showed on his return such evident marks of trepidation that
the mirth was marred and no one cared to ask him questions.

"This was early in the week, and on Friday the Major persuaded his
friends to make a second expedition to the mountains, from which they
never returned.

"On a search being made their dead bodies were found in the bothy, some
considerably mangled, but some were not marked by any wound.

"It was visible that this had not been effected by human agency: the
bothy was torn from its foundations and scarcely a vestige left of it,
and one huge stone, which twelve men could not have raised, was tossed to
a considerable distance.

"On this event Scott's beautiful ballad of 'Glenfinlas' is said to have
been founded."

As will be seen presently, Hogg was wrong about 'Glenfinlas'; the boatman
was acquainted with a traditional version of that wild legend.  I found
another at Rannoch.

The Highland fairies are very vampirish.  The Loch Awe boatman lives at a
spot haunted by a shadowy maiden.  Her last appearance was about thirty
years ago.  Two young men were thrashing corn one morning, when the joint
of the flail broke.  The owner went to Larichban and entered an outhouse
to look for a piece of sheepskin wherewith to mend the flail.  He was
long absent, and his companion went after him.  He found him struggling
in the arms of a ghostly maid, who had nearly murdered him, but departed
on the arrival of his friend.  It is not easy to make out what these
ghoulish women are--not fairies exactly, nor witches, nor vampires.  For
example, three shepherds at a lonely sheiling were discoursing of their
loves, and it was, "Oh, how happy I should be if Katie were here, or
Maggie, or Bessie!" as the case might be.  So they would say and so they
would wish, and lo! one evening, the three girls came to the door of the
hut.  So they made them welcome; but one of the shepherds was playing the
Jew's-harp, and he did not like the turn matters were taking.

The two others stole off into corners of the darkling hut with their
lovers, but this prudent lad never took his lips off the Jew's-harp.

"Harping is good if no ill follows it," said the semblance of his
sweetheart; but he never answered.  He played and thrummed, and out of
one dark corner trickled red blood into the fire-light, and out of
another corner came a current of blood to meet it.  Then he slowly rose,
still harping, and backed his way to the door, and fled into the hills
from these cruel airy shapes of false desire.

"And do the people actually believe all that?"

"Ay, do they!"

That is the boatman's version of Scott's theme in "Glenfinlas."  Witches
played a great part in his narratives.

In the boatman's country there is a plain, and on the plain is a knoll,
about twice the height of a one-storeyed cottage, and pointed "like a
sugar-loaf."  The old people remember, or have heard, that this mound was
not there when they were young.  It swelled up suddenly out of the grave
of a witch who was buried there.

The witch was a great enemy of a shepherd.  Every morning she would put
on the shape of a hare, and run before his dogs, and lead them away from
the sheep.  He knew it was right to shoot at her with a crooked sixpence,
and he hit her on the hind leg, and the dogs were after her, and chased
the hare into the old woman's cottage.  The shepherd ran after them, and
there he found them, tearing at the old woman; but the hare was twisted
round their necks, and she was crying, "Tighten, hare, tighten!" and it
was choking them.  So he tore the hare off the dogs; and then the old
woman begged him to save her from them, and she promised never to plague
him again.  "But if the old dog's teeth had been as sharp as the young
one's, she would have been a dead woman."

When this witch died she knew she could never lie in safety in her grave;
but there was a very safe churchyard in Aberdeenshire, a hundred and
fifty miles away, and if she could get into that she would be at rest.
And she rose out of her grave, and off she went, and the Devil after her,
on a black horse; but, praise to the swiftness of her feet, she won the
churchyard before him.  Her first grave swelled up, oh, as high as that
green hillock!

Witches are still in active practice.  There was an old woman very
miserly.  She would alway be taking one of her neighbours' sheep from the
hills, and they stood it for long; they did not like to meddle with her.
At last it grew so bad that they brought her before the sheriff, and she
got eighteen months in prison.  When she came out she was very angry, and
set about making an image of the woman whose sheep she had taken.  When
the image was made she burned it and put the ashes in a burn.  And it is
a very curious thing, but the woman she made it on fell into a decline,
and took to her bed.

The witch and her family went to America.  They kept a little inn, in a
country place, and people who slept in it did not come out again.  They
were discovered, and the eldest son was hanged; he confessed that he had
committed nineteen murders before he left Scotland.

"They were not a nice family."

"The father was a very respectable old man."

The boatman gave me the name of this wicked household, but it is perhaps
better forgotten.

The extraordinary thing is that this appears to be the Highland
introduction to, or part first of, a gloomy and sanguinary story of a
murder hole--an inn of assassins in a lonely district of the United
States, which Mr. Louis Stevenson heard in his travels there, and told to
me some years ago.  The details have escaped my memory, but, as Mr.
Stevenson narrated them, they rivalled De Quincey's awful story of
Williams's murders in the Ratcliffe Highway.

Life must still be haunted in Badenoch, as it was on Ida's hill, by forms
of unearthly beauty, the goddess or the ghost yet wooing the shepherd;
indeed, the boatman told me many stories of living superstition and
terrors of the night; but why should I exhaust his wallet?  To be sure,
it seemed very full of tales; these offered here may be but the legends
which came first to his hand.  The boatman is not himself a believer in
the fairy world, or not more than all sensible men ought to be.  The
supernatural is too pleasant a thing for us to discard in an earnest,
scientific manner like Mr. Kipling's Aurelian McGubben.  Perhaps I am
more superstitious than the boatman, and the yarns I swopped with him
about ghosts I have met would seem even more mendacious to possessors of
pocket microscopes and of the modern spirit.  But I would rather have one
banshee story than fifteen pages of proof that "life, which began as a
cell, with a c, is to end as a sell, with an s."  It should be added that
the boatman has given his consent to the printing of his yarns.  On being
offered a moiety of the profits, he observed that he had no objection to
these, but that he entirely declined to be responsible for any share of
the expenses.  Would that all authors were as sagacious, for then the
amateur novelist and the minor poet would vex us no more.

Perhaps I should note that I have not made the boatman say "whateffer,"
because he doesn't.  The occasional use of the imperfect is almost his
only Gaelic idiom.  It is a great comfort and pleasure, when the trout do
not rise, to meet a skilled and unaffected narrator of the old beliefs,
old legends, as ancient as the hills that girdle and guard the loch, or
as antique, at least, as man's dwelling among the mountains--the Yellow
Hill, the Calf Hill, the Hill of the Stack.  The beauty of the scene, the
pleasant talk, the daffodils on the green isle among the Celtic graves,
compensate for a certain "dourness" among the fishes of Loch Awe.  On the
occasions when they are not dour they rise very pleasant and free, but,
in these brief moments, it is not of legends and folklore that you are
thinking, but of the landing-net.  The boatman, by the way, was either
not well acquainted with _Marchen_--Celtic nursery-tales such as Campbell
of Islay collected, or was not much interested in them, or, perhaps, had
the shyness about narrating this particular sort of old wives' fables
which is so common.  People who do know them seldom tell them in
Sassenach.




LOCH-FISHING


LITTLE LOCH BEG


There is something mysterious in loch-fishing, in the tastes and habits
of the fish which inhabit the innumerable lakes and tarns of Scotland.  It
is not always easy to account either for their presence or their absence,
for their numbers or scarcity, their eagerness to take or their
"dourness."  For example, there is Loch Borlan, close to the well-known
little inn of Alt-na-geal-gach in Sutherland.  Unless that piece of water
is greatly changed, it is simply full of fish of about a quarter of a
pound, which will rise at almost any time to almost any fly.  There is
not much pleasure in catching such tiny and eager trout, but in the
season complacent anglers capture and boast of their many dozens.  On the
other hand, a year or two ago, a beginner took a four-pound trout there
with the fly.  If such trout exist in Borlan, it is hard to explain the
presence of the innumerable fry.  One would expect the giants of the deep
to keep down their population.  Not far off is another small lake, Loch
Awe, which has invisible advantages over Loch Borlan, yet there the trout
are, or were, "fat and fair of flesh," like Tamlane in the ballad.
Wherefore are the trout in Loch Tummell so big and strong, from one to
five pounds, and so scarce, while those in Loch Awe are numerous and
small?  One occasionally sees examples of how quickly trout will increase
in weight, and what curious habits they will adopt.  In a county of south-
western Scotland there is a large village, populated by a keenly devoted
set of anglers, who miss no opportunity.  Within a quarter of a mile of
the village is a small tarn, very picturesquely situated among low hills,
and provided with the very tiniest feeder and outflow.  There is a sluice
at the outflow, and, for some reason, the farmer used to let most of the
water out, in the summer of every year.  In winter the tarn is used by
the curling club.  It is not deep, has rather a marshy bottom, and many
ducks, snipe, and wild-fowl generally dwell among the reeds and marish
plants of its sides.  Nobody ever dreamed of fishing here, but one day a
rustic, "glowering" idly over the wall of the adjacent road, saw fish
rising.  He mentioned his discovery to an angler, who is said to have
caught some large trout, but tradition varies about everything, except
that the fish are very "dour."  One evening in August, a warm, still
evening, I happened to visit the tarn.  As soon as the sun fell below the
hills, it was literally alive with large trout rising.  As far as one
could estimate from the brief view of heads and shoulders, they were
sometimes two or three pounds in weight.  I got my rod, of course, as did
a rural friend.  Mine was a small cane rod, his a salmon-rod.  I fished
with one Test-fly; he with three large loch-flies.  The fish were rising
actually at our feet, but they seemed to move about very much, never, or
seldom, rising twice exactly at the same place.  The hypothesis was
started that there were but few of them, and that they ran round and
round, like a stage army, to give an appearance of multitude.  But this
appears improbable.  What is certain was our utter inability ever to get
a rise from the provoking creatures.  The dry fly is difficult to use on
a loch, as there is no stream to move it, and however gently you draw it
it makes a "wake"--a trail behind it.  Wet or dry, or "twixt wet and
dry," like the convivial person in the song, we could none of us raise
them.  I did catch a small but beautifully proportioned and pink-fleshed
trout with the alder, but everything else, silver sedge and all,
everything from midge to May-fly, in the late twilight, was offered to
them in vain.  In windy or cloudy weather it was just as useless; indeed,
I never saw them rise, except in a warm summer stillness, at and after
sunset.  Probably they would have taken a small red worm, pitched into
the ripple of a rise; but we did not try that.  After a few evenings,
they seemed to give up rising altogether.  I don't feel certain that they
had not been netted: yet no trout seemed to be on sale in the village.
Their presence in the water may perhaps be accounted for thus: they may
have come into the loch from the river, by way of the tiny feeder; but
the river-trout are both scarce and small.  A new farmer had given up
letting the water off, and probably there must have been very rich
feeding, water-shrimps or snails, which might partly account for the
refusal to rise at the artificial fly.  Or they may have been ottered by
the villagers, though that would rather have made them rise short than
not rise at all.

There is another loch on an extremely remote hillside, eight miles from
the smallest town, in a pastoral country.  There are trout enough in the
loch, and of excellent size and flavour, but you scarcely ever get them.
They rise freely, but they _always_ rise short.  It is, I think, the most
provoking loch I ever fished.  You raise them; they come up freely,
showing broad sides of a ruddy gold, like the handsomest Test trout, but
they almost invariably miss the hook.  You do not land one out of twenty.
The reason is, apparently, that people from the nearest town use the
otter in the summer evenings, when these trout rise best.  In a
Sutherland loch, Mr. Edward Moss tells us (in "A Season in Sutherland"),
that he once found an elegant otter, a well-made engine of some
unscrupulous tourist, lying in the bottom of the water on a sunny day.  At
Loch Skene, on the top of a hill, twenty miles from any town, otters are
occasionally found by the keeper or the shepherds, concealed near the
shore.  The practice of ottering can give little pleasure to any but a
depraved mind, and nothing educates trout so rapidly into "rising short";
why they are not to be had when they are rising most vehemently, "to
themselves," is another mystery.  A few rises are encouraging, but when
the water is all splashing with rises, as a rule the angler is only
tantalised.  A windy day, a day with a large ripple, but without white
waves breaking, is, as a rule, best for a loch.  In some lochs the sea-
trout prefer such a hurricane that a boat can hardly be kept on the
water.  I have known a strong north wind in autumn put down the
sea-trout, whereas the salmon rose, with unusual eagerness, just in the
shallows where the waves broke in foam on the shore.  The best day I ever
had with sea-trout was muggy and grey, and the fish were most eager when
the water was still, except for a tremendously heavy shower of rain, "a
singing shower," as George Chapman has it.  On that day two rods caught
thirty-nine sea-trout, weighing forty pounds.  But it is difficult to say
beforehand what day will do well, except that sunshine is bad, a north
wind worse, and no wind at all usually means an empty basket.  Even to
this rule there are exceptions, and one of these is in the case of a tarn
which I shall call, pleonastically, Little Loch Beg.

This is not the real name of the loch--quite enough people know its real
name already.  Nor does it seem necessary to mention the district where
the loch lies hidden; suffice it to say that a land of more streams and
scarcer trout you will hardly find.  We had tried all the rivers and
burns to no purpose, and the lochs are capricious and overfished.  One
loch we had not tried, Loch Beg.  You walk, or drive, a few miles from
any village, then you climb a few hundred yards of hill, and from the
ridge you see, on one hand a great amphitheatre of green and purple
mountain-sides, in the west; on the east, within a hundred yards under a
slope, is Loch Beg.  It is not a mile in circumference, and all but some
eighty yards of shore is defended against the angler by wide beds of
water-lilies, with their pretty white floating lamps, or by tall sedges
and reeds.  Nor is the wading easy.  Four steps you make with safety, at
the fifth your foremost leg sinks in mud apparently bottomless.  Most
people fish only the eastern side, whereof a few score yards are open,
with a rocky and gravelly bottom.

Now, all lochs have their humours.  In some trout like a big fly, in some
a small one, but almost all do best with a rough wind or rain.  I knew
enough of Loch Beg to approach it at noon on a blazing day of sunshine,
when the surface was like glass.  It was like that when first I saw it,
and a shepherd warned us that we "would dae naething"; we did little,
indeed, but I rose nearly every rising fish I cast over, losing them all,
too, and in some cases being broken, as I was using very fine gut, and
the fish were heavy.  Another trial seemed desirable, and the number of
rising trout was most tempting.  All over it trout were rising to the
natural fly, with big circles like those you see in the Test at twilight;
while in the centre, where no artificial fly can be cast for want of a
boat, a big fish would throw himself out of the water in his eagerness.
One such I saw which could not have weighed under three pounds, a short,
thick, dark-yellow fish.

I was using a light two-handed rod, and fancied that a single Test-fly on
very fine tackle would be the best lure.  It certainly rose the trout, if
one threw into the circle they made; but they never were hooked.  One
fish of about a pound and a half threw himself out of the water at it,
hit it, and broke the fine tackle.  So I went on raising them, but never
getting them.  As long as the sun blazed and no breeze ruffled the water,
they rose bravely, but a cloud or even a ripple seemed to send them down.

At last I tried a big alder, and with that I actually touched a few, and
even landed several on the shelving bank.  Their average weight, as we
proved on several occasions, was exactly three-quarters of a pound; but
we never succeeded in landing any of the really big ones.

A local angler told me he had caught one of two pounds, and lost another
"like a young grilse," after he had drawn it on to the bank.  I can
easily believe it, for in no loch, but one, have I ever seen so many
really big and handsome fish feeding.  Loch Beg is within a mile of a
larger and famous loch, but it is infinitely better, though the other
looks much more favourable in all ways for sport.  The only place where
fishing is easy, as I have said, is a mere strip of coast under the hill,
where there is some gravel, and the mouth of a very tiny feeder, usually
dry.  Off this place the trout rose freely, but not near so freely as in
a certain corner, quite out of reach without a boat, where the leviathans
lived and sported.

After the little expanse of open shore had been fished over a few times,
the trout there seemed to grow more shy, and there was a certain monotony
in walking this tiny quarter-deck of space.  So I went round to the west
side, where the water-lilies are.  Fish were rising about three yards
beyond the weedy beds, and I foolishly thought I would try for them.  Now,
you cannot overestimate the difficulty of casting a fly across yards of
water-lilies.  You catch in the weeds as you lift your line for a fresh
cast, and then you have to extricate it laboriously, shortening line, and
then to let it out again, and probably come to grief once more.

I saw a trout rise, with a huge sullen circle dimpling round him, cast
over him, raised him, and missed him.  The water was perfectly still, and
the "plop" made by these fish was very exciting and tantalising.  The
next that rose took the alder, and, of course, ran right into the broad
band of lilies.  I tried all the dodges I could think of, and all that
Mr. Halford suggests.  I dragged at him hard.  I gave him line.  I sat
down and endeavoured to disengage my thoughts, but I never got a glimpse
of him, and finally had to wade as far in as I dared, and save as much of
the casting line as I could; it was very little.

There was one thing to be said for the trout on this side: they meant
business.  They did not rise shyly, like the others, but went for the fly
if it came at all near them, and then, down they rushed, and bolted into
the lily-roots.

A new plan occurred to me.  I put on about eighteen inches of the
stoutest gut I had, to the end I knotted the biggest sea-trout fly I
possessed, and, hooking the next fish that rose, I turned my back on the
loch and ran uphill with the rod.  Looking back I saw a trout well over a
pound flying across the lilies; but alas! the hold was not strong enough,
and he fell back.  Again and again I tried this method, invariably
hooking the trout, though the heavy short casting-line and the big fly
fell very awkwardly in the dead stillness of the water.  I had some
exciting runs with them, for they came eagerly to the big fly, and did
not miss it, as they had missed the Red Quill, or Whitchurch Dun, with
which at first I tried to beguile them.  One, of only the average weight,
I did drag out over the lilies; the others fell off in mid-journey, but
they never broke the uncompromising stout tackle.

With the first chill of evening they ceased rising, and I left them, not
ungrateful for their very peculiar manners and customs.  The chances are
that the trout beyond the band of weeds never see an artificial fly, and
they are, therefore, the more guileless--at least, late in the season.  In
spring, I believe, the lilies are less in the way, and I fear some one
has put a Berthon boat on the loch in April.  But it is not so much what
one catches in Loch Beg, as the monsters which one might catch that make
the tarn so desirable.

The loch seems to prove that any hill-tarn might be made a good place for
sport, if trout were introduced where they do not exist already.  But the
size of these in Loch Beg puzzles me, nor can one see how they breed, as
breed they do: for twice or thrice I caught a fingerling, and threw him
in again.  No burn runs out of the loch, and, even in a flood, the feeder
is so small, and its course so extremely steep, that one cannot imagine
where the fish manage to spawn.  The only loch known to me where the
common trout are of equal size, is on the Border.  It is extremely deep,
with very clear water, and with scarce any spawning ground.  On a summer
evening the trout are occasionally caught; three weighing seven pounds
were taken one night, a year or two ago.  I have not tried the evening
fishing, but at all other times of day have found them the "dourest" of
trout, and they grow dourer.  But one is always lured on by the spectacle
of the monsters which throw themselves out of water, with a splash that
echoes through all the circuit of the low green hills.  They probably
reach at least four or five pounds, but it is unlikely that the biggest
take the fly, and one may doubt whether they propagate their species, as
small trout are never seen there.

There are two ways of enlarging the size of trout which should be
carefully avoided.  Pike are supposed to keep down the population and
leave more food for the survivors, minnows are supposed to be nourishing
food.  Both of these novelties are dangerous.  Pike have been introduced
in that long lovely sheet of water, Loch Ken, and I have never once seen
the rise of a trout break that surface, so "hideously serene."  Trout, in
lochs which have become accustomed to feeding on minnows, are apt to
disdain fly altogether.  Of course there are lochs in which good trout
coexist with minnows and with pike, but these inmates are too dangerous
to be introduced.  The introduction, too, of Loch Leven trout is often
disappointing.  Sometimes they escape down the burn into the river in
floods; sometimes, perhaps for lack of proper food and sufficient, they
dwindle terribly in size, and become no better than "brownies."  In St.
Mary's Loch, in Selkirkshire, some Canadian trout were introduced.  Little
or nothing has been seen of them, unless some small creatures of a
quarter of a pound, extraordinarily silvery, and more often in the air
than in the water when hooked, are these children of the remote West.  If
they grew up, and retained their beauty and sprightliness, they would be
excellent substitutes for sea-trout.  Almost all experiments in stocking
lochs have their perils, except the simple experiment of putting trout
where there were no trout before.  This can do no harm, and they may
increase in weight, let us hope not in wisdom, like the curiously heavy
and shy fish mentioned in the beginning of this paper.



LOCH LEVEN


I had a friend once, an angler, who in winter was fond of another sport.
He liked to cast his _louis_ into the green baize pond at Monte Carlo,
and, on the whole, he was generally "broken."  He seldom landed the
golden fish of the old man's dream in Theocritus.  When the croupier had
gaffed all his money he would repent and say, "Now, that would have kept
me at Loch Leven for a fortnight."  One used to wonder whether a
fortnight of Loch Leven was worth an afternoon of the pleasure of losing
at Monte Carlo.  The loch has a name for being cockneyfied, beset by
whole fleets of competitive anglers from various angling clubs in
Scotland.  That men should competitively angle shows, indeed, a great
want of true angling sentiment.  To fish in a crowd is odious, to work
hard for prizes of flasks and creels and fly-books is to mistake the true
meaning of the pastime.  However, in this crowded age men are so
constituted that they like to turn a contemplative exercise into a kind
of Bank Holiday.  There is no use in arguing with such persons; the worst
of their pleasure is that it tends to change a Scotch loch into something
like the pond of the Welsh Harp, at Hendon.  It is always good news to
read in the papers how the Dundee Walton Society had a bad day, and how
the first prize was won by Mr. Macneesh, with five trout weighing three
pounds and three quarters.  Loch Leven, then, is crowded and cockneyfied
by competitions; it has also no great name for beauty of landscape.  Every
one to his own taste in natural beauty, but in this respect I think Loch
Leven is better than its reputation.  It is certainly more pictorial, so
to speak, than some remote moor lochs up near Cape Wrath; Forsinard in
particular, where the scenery looks like one gigantic series of brown
"baps," flat Scotch scones, all of low elevation, all precisely similar
to each other.

Loch Leven is not such a cockney place as the majority of men who have
not visited it imagine.  It really is larger than the Welsh Harp at
Hendon, and the scenery, though not like that of Ben Cruachan or Ben
Mohr, excels the landscape of Middlesex.  At the northern end is a small
town, grey, with some red roofs and one or two characteristic Fifeshire
church-towers, squat and strong.  There are also a few factory chimneys,
which are not fair to outward view, nor appropriate by a loch-side.  On
the west are ranges of distant hills, low but not uncomely.  On the east
rises a beautiful moorland steep with broken and graceful outlines.  When
the sun shines on the red tilled land, in spring; when the smoke of
burning gorse coils up all day long into the sky, as if the Great Spirit
were taking his pipe of peace on the mountains; when the islands are
mirrored on the glassy water, then the artist rejoices, though the angler
knows that he will waste his day.  As far as fishing goes, he is bound to
be "clean," as the boatmen say--to catch nothing; but the solemn peace,
and the walls and ruined towers of Queen Mary's prison, may partially
console the fisher.  The accommodation is agreeable, there is a pleasant
inn--an old town-house, perhaps, of some great family, when the great
families did not rush up to London, but spent their winters in such
country towns as Dumfries and St. Andrews.  The inn has a great green
garden at its doors, and if the talk is mainly of fishing, and if every
one tells of his monster trout that escaped the net, there is much worse
conversation than that.

When you reach Kinross, and, after excellent ham and eggs, begin to make
a start, the cockney element is most visible at the first.  Everybody's
name is registered in a book; each pays a considerable, but not
exorbitant, fee for the society--often well worth the money--and the
assistance of boatmen.  These gentlemen are also well provided with
luncheon and beer, and, on the whole, there is more pleasure in the life
of a Loch Leven boatman than in most arts, crafts, or professions.  He
takes the rod when his patron is lazy; it is said that he often catches
the trout; {1} he sees a good deal of good company, and, if his basket be
heavy, who so content as he?  The first thing is to row out to a good
bay, and which will prove a good bay depends on the strength and
direction of the wind.  Perhaps the best fishing is farthest off, at the
end of a long row, but the best scenery is not so distant.  A good deal
hangs on an early start when there are many boats out.

Loch Leven is a rather shallow loch, seldom much over fifteen feet deep,
save where a long narrow rent or geological flaw runs through the bottom.
The water is of a queer glaucous green, olive-coloured, or rather like
the tint made when you wash out a box of water-colour paints.  This is
not so pretty as the black wave of Loch Awe or Loch Shin, but has a
redeeming quality in the richness of the feeding for trout.  These are
fabled to average about a pound, but are probably a trifle under that
weight, on the whole.  They are famous, and, according to Sir Walter
Scott, were famous as long ago as in Queen Mary's time, for the bright
silver of their sides, for their pink flesh, and gameness when hooked.
Theorists have explained all this by saying that they are the descendants
of land-locked salmon.  The flies used on the loch are smaller than those
favoured in the Highlands; they are sold attached to casts, and four
flies are actually employed at once.  Probably two are quite enough at a
time.  If a veteran trout is attracted by seeing four flies, all of
different species, and these like nothing in nature, all conspiring to
descend on him at once, he must be less cautious than we generally find
him.  The Hampshire angler, of course, will sneer at the whole
proceeding, the "chucking and chancing it," in the queer-coloured wave,
and the use of so many fanciful entomological specimens.  But the
Hampshire angler is very welcome to try his arts, in a calm, and his
natural-looking cocked-up flies.  He will probably be defeated by a
grocer from Greenock, sinking his four flies very deep, as is, by some
experts, recommended.  The trout are capricious, perhaps as capricious as
any known to the angler, but they are believed to prefer a strong east
wind and a dark day.  The east wind is nowhere, perhaps, so bad as people
fancy; it is certainly not so bad as the north wind, and on Loch Leven it
is the favourite.  The man who is lucky enough to hit on the right day,
and to land a couple of dozen Loch Leven trout, has very good reason to
congratulate himself, and need envy nobody.  But such days and such takes
are rare, and the summer of 1890 was much more unfortunate than that of
1889.

One great mistake is made by the company which farms the Loch, stocks it,
supplies the boats, and regulates the fishing.  They permit trolling with
angels, or phantoms, or the natural minnow.  Now, trolling may be
comparatively legitimate, when the boat is being pulled against the wind
to its drift, but there is no more skill in it than in sitting in an
omnibus.  But for trolling, many a boat would come home "clean" in the
evening, on days of calm, or when, for other reasons of their own, the
trout refuse to take the artificial fly.  Yet there are men at Loch Leven
who troll all day, and poor sport it must be, as a trout of a pound or so
has no chance on a trolling-rod.  This method is inimical to fly-fishing,
but is such a consolation to the inefficient angler that one can hardly
expect to see it abolished.  The unsuccessful clamour for trolling,
instead of consoling themselves, as sportsmen should do, with the
conversation of the gillies, their anecdotes of great trout, and their
reminiscences of great anglers, especially of the late Mr. Russell, the
famed editor of the "Scotsman."  This humourist is gradually "winning his
way to the mythical."  All fishing stories are attached to him; his
eloquence is said (in the language of the historian of the Buccaneers) to
have been "florid"; he is reported to have thrown his fly-book into Loch
Leven on an unlucky day, saying, "You brutes, take your choice," and a
rock, which he once hooked and held on to, is named after him, on the
Tweed.  In addition to the humane and varied conversation of the boatmen,
there is always the pure pleasure of simply gazing at the hillsides and
at the islands.  They are as much associated with the memory of Mary
Stuart as Hermitage or even Holyrood.  On that island was her prison;
here the rude Morton tried to bully her into signing away her rights;
hence she may often have watched the shore at night for the lighting of a
beacon, a sign that a rescue was at hand.

The hills, at least, are much as she may have seen them, and the square
towers and crumbling walls on the island met her eyes when they were all
too strong.  The "quay" is no longer "rude," as when "The Abbot" was
written, and is crowded with the green boats of the Loch Leven Company.
But you still land on her island under "the huge old tree" which Scott
saw, which the unhappy Mary may herself have seen.  The small garden and
the statues are gone, the garden whence Roland Graeme led Mary to the
boat and to brief liberty and hope unfulfilled.  Only a kind of ground-
plan remains of the halls where Lindesay and Ruthven browbeat her forlorn
Majesty.  But you may climb the staircase where Roland Graeme stood
sentinel, and feel a touch, of what Pepys felt when he kissed a dead
Queen--Katherine of Valois.  Like Roland Graeme, the Queen may have been
"wearied to death of this Castle of Loch Leven," where, in spring, all
seems so beautiful, the trees budding freshly above the yellow celandine
and among the grey prison walls.  It was a kindlier prison house than
Fotheringay, and minds peaceful and contented would gladly have taken
"this for a hermitage."

The Roman Emperors used to banish too powerful subjects to the lovely
isles that lie like lilies on the AEgean.  Plutarch tried to console
these exiles, by showing them how fortunate they were, far from the
bustle of the Forum, the vices, the tortures, the noise and smoke of
Rome, happy, if they chose, in their gardens, with the blue waters
breaking on the rocks, and, as he is careful to add, _with plenty of
fishing_.  Mr. Mahaffy calls this "rhetorical consolation," and the
exiles may have been of his mind.  But the exiles would have been wise to
listen to Plutarch, and, had I enjoyed the luck of Mary Stuart, when Loch
Leven was not overfished, when the trout were uneducated, never would I
have plunged into politics again.  She might have been very happy, with
Ronsard's latest poems, with Italian romances, with a boat on the loch,
and some Rizzio to sing to her on the still summer days.  From her Castle
she would hear how the politicians were squabbling, lying, raising a man
to divinity and stoning him next day, cutting each other's heads off,
swearing and forswearing themselves, conspiring and caballing.  _Suave
mari_, and the peace of Loch Leven and the island hermitage would have
been the sweeter for the din outside.  A woman, a Queen, a Stuart, could
not attain, and perhaps ought not to have attained, this epicureanism.
Mary Stuart had her chance, and missed it; perhaps, after all, her
shrewish female gaoler made the passionless life impossible.

These, at Loch Leven, are natural reflections.  The place has a charm of
its own, especially if you make up your mind not to be disappointed, not
to troll, and not to envy the more fortunate anglers who shout to you the
number of their victories across the wave.  Even at Loch Leven we may be
contemplative, may be quiet, and go a-fishing. {2}




THE BLOODY DOCTOR.  (A BAD DAY ON CLEARBURN)


Thou askest me, my brother, how first and where I met the Bloody Doctor?
The tale is weird, so weird that to a soul less proved than thine I
scarce dare speak of the adventure.

* * * * *

This, perhaps, would be the right way of beginning a story (not that it
is a story exactly), with the title forced on me by the name and nature
of the hero.  But I do not think I could keep up the style without a lady-
collaborator; besides, I have used the term "weird" twice already, and
thus played away the trumps of modern picturesque diction.  To return to
our Doctor: many a bad day have I had on Clearburn Loch, and never a good
one.  But one thing draws me always to the loch when I have the luck to
be within twenty miles of it.  There are trout in Clearburn!  The Border
angler knows that the trout in his native waters is nearly as extinct as
the dodo.  Many causes have combined to extirpate the shy and spirited
fish.  First, there are too many anglers:

   Twixt Holy Lee and Clovenfords,
   A tentier bit ye canna hae,

sang that good old angler, now with God, Mr. Thomas Tod Stoddart.  But
between Holy Lee and Clovenfords you may see half a dozen rods on every
pool and stream.  There goes that leviathan, the angler from London, who
has been beguiled hither by the artless "Guide" of Mr. Watson Lyall.
There fishes the farmer's lad, and the schoolmaster, and the wandering
weaver out of work or disinclined to work.  In his rags, with his thin
face and red "goatee" beard, with his hazel wand and his home-made reel,
there is withal something kindly about this poor fellow, this true
sportsman.  He loves better to hear the lark sing than the mouse cheep;
he wanders from depopulated stream to depopulated burn, and all is fish
that comes to his fly.  Fingerlings he keeps, and does not return to the
water "as pitying their youth."  Let us not grudge him his sport as long
as he fishes fair, and he is always good company.  But he, with all the
other countless fishermen, make fish so rare and so wary that, except
after a flood in Meggat or the Douglas burn, trout are scarce to be taken
by ordinary skill.  As for

   Thae reiving cheils
   Frae Galashiels,

who use nets, and salmon roe, and poisons, and dynamite, they are
miscreants indeed; they spoil the sport, not of the rich, but of their
own class, and of every man who would be quiet, and go angling in the
sacred streams of Christopher North and the Shepherd.  The mills, with
their dyes and dirt, are also responsible for the dearth of trout.

   Untainted yet thy stream, fair Teviot, runs,

Leyden sang; but now the stream is very much tainted indeed below Hawick,
like Tweed in too many places.  Thus, for a dozen reasons, trout are nigh
as rare as red deer.  Clearburn alone remains full of unsophisticated
fishes, and I have the less hesitation in revealing this, because I do
not expect the wanderer who may read this page to be at all more
successful than myself.  No doubt they are sometimes to be had, by the
basketful, but not often, nor by him who thinks twice before risking his
life by smothering in a peaty bottom.

To reach Clearburn Loch, if you start from the Teviot, you must pass
through much of Scott's country and most of Leyden's.  I am credibly
informed that persons of culture have forgotten John Leyden.  He was a
linguist and a poet, and the friend of Walter Scott, and knew

   The mind whose fearless frankness naught could move,
   The friendship, like an elder brother's love.

We remember what distant and what deadly shore has Leyden's cold remains,
and people who do not know may not care to be reminded.

Leaving Teviot, with Leyden for a guide, you walk, or drive,

   Where Bortha hoarse, that loads the meads with sand,
   Rolls her red tide.

Not that it was red when we passed, but _electro purior_.

   Through slaty hills whose sides are shagged with thorn,
   Where springs, in scattered tufts, the dark green corn,
   Towers wood-girt Harden far above the vale.

And very dark green, almost blue, was the corn in September, 1888.
Upwards, always upwards, goes the road till you reach the crest, and
watch far below the wide champaign, like a sea, broken by the shapes of
hills, Windburg and Eildon, and Priesthaughswire, and "the rough skirts
of stormy Ruberslaw," and Penchrise, and the twin Maidens, shaped like
the breasts of Helen.  It is an old land, of war, of Otterburn, and
Ancrum, and the Raid of the Fair Dodhead; but the plough has passed over
all but the upper pastoral solitudes.  Turning again to the downward
slope you see the loch of Alemoor, small and sullen, with Alewater
feeding it.  Nobody knows much about the trout in it.  "It is reckoned
the residence of the water-cow," a monster like the Australian bunyip.
There was a water-cow in Scott's loch of Cauldshiels, above Abbotsford.
The water-cow has not lately emerged from Alemoor to attack the casual
angler.  You climb again by gentle slopes till you reach a most desolate
tableland.  Far beyond it is the round top of Whitecombe, which again
looks down on St. Mary's Loch, and up the Moffat, and across the Meggat
Water; but none of these are within the view.  Round are _pastorum loca
vasta_, lands of Buccleugh and Bellenden, Deloraine, Sinton, Headshaw,
and Glack.  Deloraine, by the way, is pronounced "Delorran," and perhaps
is named from Orran, the Celtic saint.  On the right lies, not far from
the road, a grey sheet of water, and this is Clearburn, where first I met
the Doctor.

The loch, to be plain, is almost unfishable.  It is nearly round, and
everywhere, except in a small segment on the eastern side, is begirt with
reeds of great height.  These reeds, again, grow in a peculiarly
uncomfortable, quaggy bottom, which rises and falls, or rather which
jumps and sinks when you step on it, like the seat of a very luxurious
arm-chair.  Moreover, the bottom is pierced with many springs, wherein if
you set foot you shall have thrown your last cast.

By watching the loch when it is frozen, a man might come to learn
something of the springs; but, even so, it is hard to keep clear of them
in summer.  Now the wind almost always blows from the west, dead against
the little piece of gravelly shore at the eastern side, so that casting
against it is hard work and unprofitable.  On this day, by a rare chance,
the wind blew from the east, though the sky at first was a brilliant
blue, and the sun hot and fierce.  I walked round to the east side, waded
in, and caught two or three small fellows.  It was slow work, when
suddenly there began the greatest rise of trout I ever saw in my life.
From the edge of the loch as far as one could clearly see across it there
was that endless plashing murmur, of all sounds in this world the
sweetest to the ear.  Within the view of the eye, on each cast, there
were a dozen trout rising all about, never leaping, but seriously and
solemnly feeding.  Now is my chance at last, I fancied; but it was not
so--far from it.  I might throw over the very noses of the beasts, but
they seldom even glanced at the (artificial) fly.  I tried them with
Greenwell's Glory, with a March brown, with "the woodcock wing and hare-
lug," but it was almost to no purpose.  If one did raise a fish, he meant
not business--all but "a casual brute," which broke the already weakened
part of a small "glued-up" cane rod.  I had to twist a piece of paper
round the broken end, wet it, and push it into the joint, where it hung
on somehow, but was not pleasant to cast with.  From twelve to half-past
one the gorging went merrily forward, and I saw what the fish were rising
at.  The whole surface of the loch, at least on the east side, was
absolutely peppered with large, hideous insects.  They had big grey-white
wings, bodies black as night, and brilliant crimson legs, or feelers, or
whatever naturalists call them.  The trout seemed as if they could not
have too much of these abominable wretches, and the flies were blown
across the loch, not singly, but in populous groups.  I had never seen
anything like them in any hook-book, nor could I deceive the trout by the
primitive dodge of tying a red thread round the shank of a dark fly.  So
I waded out, and fell to munching a frugal sandwich and watching Nature,
not without a cigarette.

Now Nature is all very well.  I have nothing to say against her of a
Sunday, or when trout are not rising.  But she was no comfort to me now.
Smiling she gazed on my discomfiture.  The lovely lines of the hills,
curving about the loch, and with their deepest dip just opposite where I
sat, were all of a golden autumn brown, except in the violet distance.
The grass of Parnassus grew thick and white around me, with its moonlight
tint of green in the veins.  On a hillside by a brook the countryfolk
were winning their hay, and their voices reached me softly from far off.
On the loch the marsh-fowl flashed and dipped, the wild ducks played and
dived and rose; first circling high and higher, then, marshalled in the
shape of a V, they made for Alemoor.  A solitary heron came quite near
me, and tried his chance with the fish, but I think he had no luck.  All
this is pleasant to remember, and I made rude sketches in the fly-leaves
of a copy of Hogg's poems, where I kept my flies.  But what joy was there
in this while the "take" grew fainter and ceased at least near the shore?
Out in the middle, where few flies managed to float, the trout were at it
till dark.  But near shore there was just one trout who never stopped
gorging all day.  He lived exactly opposite the nick in the distant
hills, and exactly a yard farther out than I could throw a fly.  He was a
big one, and I am inclined to think that he was the Devil.  For, if I had
stepped in deeper, and the water had come over my wading boots, the odds
are that my frail days on earth would have been ended by a chill, and I
knew this, and yet that fish went on tempting me to my ruin.  I suppose I
tried to reach him a dozen times, and cast a hundred, but it was to no
avail.  At length, as the afternoon grew grey and chill, I pitched a rock
at him, by way of showing that I saw through his fiendish guile, and I
walked away.

There was no rise now, and the lake was leaden and gloomy.  When I
reached the edge of the deep reeds I tried, once or twice, to wade
through them within casting distance of the water, but was always driven
off by the traitorous quagginess of the soil.  At last, taking my courage
in both hands, I actually got so near that I could throw a fly over the
top of the tall reeds, and then came a heavy splash, and the wretched
little broken rod nearly doubled up.  "Hooray, here I am among the big
ones!" I said, and held on.  It was now that I learned the nature of
Nero's diversion when he was an angler in the Lake of Darkness.  The loch
really did deserve the term "grim"; the water here was black, the sky was
ashen, the long green reeds closed cold about me, and beyond them there
was trout that I could not deal with.  For when he tired of running,
which was soon, he was as far away as ever.  Draw him through the forest
of reeds I could not.  At last I did the fatal thing.  I took hold of the
line, and then, "plop," as the poet said.  He was off.  A young sportsman
on the bank who had joined me expressed his artless disappointment.  I
cast over the confounded reeds once more.  "Splash!"--the old story!  I
stuck to the fish, and got him into the watery wood, and then he went
where the lost trout go.  No more came on, so I floundered a yard or two
farther, and climbed into a wild-fowl's nest, a kind of platform of
matted reeds, all yellow and faded.  The nest immediately sank down deep
into the water, but it stopped somewhere, and I made a cast.  The black
water boiled, and the trout went straight down and sulked.  I merely held
on, till at last it seemed "time for us to go," and by cautious tugging I
got him through the reedy jungle, and "gruppit him," as the Shepherd
would have said.  He was simply but decently wrapped round, from snout to
tail, in very fine water-weeds, as in a garment.  Moreover, he was as
black as your hat, quite unlike the comely yellow trout who live on the
gravel in Clearburn.  It hardly seemed sensible to get drowned in this
gruesome kind of angling, so, leaving the Lake of Darkness, we made for
Buccleugh, passing the cleugh where the buck was ta'en.  Surely it is the
deepest, the steepest, and the greenest cleugh that is shone on by the
sun!  Thereby we met an angler, an ancient man in hodden grey, strolling
home from the Rankle burn.  And we told him of our bad day, and asked him
concerning that hideous fly, which had covered the loch and lured the
trout from our decent Greenwells and March browns.  And the ancient man
listened to our description of the monster, and He said: "Hoot, ay; ye've
jest forgathered wi' the Bloody Doctor."

This, it appears, is the Border angler's name for the horrible insect, so
much appreciated by trout.  So we drove home, when all the great
tableland was touched with yellow light from a rift in the west, and all
the broken hills looked blue against the silvery grey.  God bless them!
for man cannot spoil them, nor any revolution shape them other than they
are.  We see them as the folk from Flodden saw them, as Leyden knew them,
as they looked to William of Deloraine, as they showed in the eyes of Wat
of Harden and of Jamie Telfer of the Fair Dodhead.  They have always
girdled a land of warriors and of people fond of song, from the oldest
ballad-maker to that Scotch Probationer who wrote,

   Lay me here, where I may see
   Teviot round his meadows flowing,
   And about and over me
   Winds and clouds for ever going.

It was dark before we splashed through the ford of Borthwick Water, and
dined, and wrote to Mr. Anderson of Princes Street, Edinburgh, for a
supply of Bloody Doctors.  But we never had a chance to try them.  I have
since fished Clearburn from a boat, but it was not a day of rising fish,
and no big ones came to the landing-net.  There are plenty in the loch,
but you need not make the weary journey; they are not for you nor me.




THE LADY OR THE SALMON?


The circumstances which attended and caused the death of the Hon.
Houghton Grannom have not long been known to me, and it is only now that,
by the decease of his father, Lord Whitchurch, and the extinction of his
noble family, I am permitted to divulge the facts.  That the true tale of
my unhappy friend will touch different chords in different breasts, I am
well aware.  The sportsman, I think, will hesitate to approve him; the
fair, I hope, will absolve.  Who are we, to scrutinise human motives, and
to award our blame to actions which, perhaps, might have been our own,
had opportunity beset and temptation beguiled us?  There is a certain
point at which the keenest sense of honour, the most chivalrous affection
and devotion, cannot bear the strain, but break like a salmon line under
a masterful stress.  That my friend succumbed, I admit; that he was his
own judge, the severest, and passed and executed sentence on himself, I
have now to show.

I shall never forget the shock with which I read in the "Scotsman," under
"Angling," the following paragraph:

"Tweed.--Strange Death of an Angler.--An unfortunate event has cast a
gloom over fishers in this district.  As Mr. K---, the keeper on the B---
water, was busy angling yesterday, his attention was caught by some
object floating on the stream.  He cast his flies over it, and landed a
soft felt hat, the ribbon stuck full of salmon-flies.  Mr. K--- at once
hurried up-stream, filled with the most lively apprehensions.  These were
soon justified.  In a shallow, below the narrow, deep and dangerous
rapids called 'The Trows,' Mr. K--- saw a salmon leaping in a very
curious manner.  On a closer examination, he found that the fish was
attached to a line.  About seventy yards higher he found, in shallow
water, the body of a man, the hand still grasping in death the butt of
the rod, to which the salmon was fast, all the line being run out.  Mr.
K--- at once rushed into the stream, and dragged out the body, in which
he recognised with horror the Hon. Houghton Grannom, to whom the water
was lately let.  Life had been for some minutes extinct, and though Mr.
K--- instantly hurried for Dr. ---, that gentleman could only attest the
melancholy fact.  The wading in 'The Trows' is extremely dangerous and
difficult, and Mr. Grannom, who was fond of fishing without an attendant,
must have lost his balance, slipped, and been dragged down by the weight
of his waders.  The recent breaking off of the hon. gentleman's
contemplated marriage on the very wedding-day will be fresh in the memory
of our readers."

This was the story which I read in the newspaper during breakfast one
morning in November.  I was deeply grieved, rather than astonished, for I
have often remonstrated with poor Grannom on the recklessness of his
wading.  It was with some surprise that I received, in the course of the
day, a letter from him, in which he spoke only of indifferent matters, of
the fishing which he had taken, and so forth.  The letter was
accompanied, however, by a parcel.  Tearing off the outer cover, I found
a sealed document addressed to me, with the superscription, "Not to be
opened until after my father's decease."  This injunction, of course, I
have scrupulously obeyed.  The death of Lord Whitchurch, the last of the
Grannoms, now gives me liberty to publish my friend's _Apologia pro morte
et vita sua_.

"Dear Smith" (the document begins), "Before you read this--long before, I
hope--I shall have solved the great mystery--if, indeed, we solve it.  If
the water runs down to-morrow, and there is every prospect that it will
do so, I must have the opportunity of making such an end as even
malignity cannot suspect of being voluntary.  There are plenty of fish in
the water; if I hook one in 'The Trows,' I shall let myself go whither
the current takes me.  Life has for weeks been odious to me; for what is
life without honour, without love, and coupled with shame and remorse?
Repentance I cannot call the emotion which gnaws me at the heart, for in
similar circumstances (unlikely as these are to occur) I feel that I
would do the same thing again.

"Are we but automata, worked by springs, moved by the stronger impulse,
and unable to choose for ourselves which impulse that shall be?  Even
now, in decreeing my own destruction, do I exercise free-will, or am I
the sport of hereditary tendencies, of mistaken views of honour, of a
seeming self-sacrifice, which, perhaps, is but selfishness in disguise?  I
blight my unfortunate father's old age; I destroy the last of an ancient
house; but I remove from the path of Olive Dunne the shadow that must
rest upon the sunshine of what will eventually, I trust, be a happy life,
unvexed by memories of one who loved her passionately.  Dear Olive! how
pure, how ardent was my devotion to her none knows better than you.  But
Olive had, I will not say a fault, though I suffer from it, but a
quality, or rather two qualities, which have completed my misery.  Lightly
as she floats on the stream of society, the most casual observer, and
even the enamoured beholder, can see that Olive Dunne has great pride,
and no sense of humour.  Her dignity is her idol.  What makes her, even
for a moment, the possible theme of ridicule is in her eyes an
unpardonable sin.  This sin, I must with penitence confess, I did indeed
commit.  Another woman might have forgiven me.  I know not how that may
be; I throw myself on the mercy of the court.  But, if another could pity
and pardon, to Olive this was impossible.  I have never seen her since
that fatal moment when, paler than her orange blossoms, she swept through
the porch of the church, while I, dishevelled, mud-stained,
half-drowned--ah! that memory will torture me if memory at all remains.
And yet, fool, maniac, that I was, I could not resist the wild, mad
impulse to laugh which shook the rustic spectators, and which in my case
was due, I trust, to hysterical but _not_ unmanly emotion.  If any woman,
any bride, could forgive such an apparent but most unintentional insult,
Olive Dunne, I knew, was not that woman.  My abject letters of
explanation, my appeals for mercy, were returned unopened.  Her parents
pitied me, perhaps had reasons for being on my side, but Olive was of
marble.  It is not only myself that she cannot pardon, she will never, I
know, forgive herself while my existence reminds her of what she had to
endure.  When she receives the intelligence of my demise, no suspicion
will occur to her; she will not say 'He is fitly punished;' but her peace
of mind will gradually return.

"It is for this, mainly, that I sacrifice myself, but also because I
cannot endure the dishonour of a laggard in love and a recreant
bridegroom.

"So much for my motives: now to my tale.

"The day before our wedding-day had been the happiest in my life.  Never
had I felt so certain of Olive's affections, never so fortunate in my
own.  We parted in the soft moonlight; she, no doubt, to finish her
nuptial preparations; I, to seek my couch in the little rural inn above
the roaring waters of the Budon. {3}

   "Move eastward, happy earth, and leave
      Yon orange sunset fading slow;
   From fringes of the faded eve
      Oh, happy planet, eastward go,

I murmured, though the atmospheric conditions were not really those
described by the poet.

   "Ah, bear me with thee, smoothly borne,
   Dip forward under starry light,
   And move me to my marriage morn,
   And round again to--

"'River in grand order, sir,' said the voice of Robins, the keeper, who
recognised me in the moonlight.  'There's a regular monster in the
Ashweil,' he added, naming a favourite cast; 'never saw nor heard of such
a fish in the water before.'

"'Mr. Dick must catch him, Robins,' I answered; 'no fishing for me to-
morrow.'

"'No, sir,' said Robins, affably.  'Wish you joy, sir, and Miss Olive,
too.  It's a pity, though!  Master Dick, he throws a fine fly, but he
gets flurried with a big fish, being young.  And this one is a topper.'

"With that he gave me good-night, and I went to bed, but not to sleep.  I
was fevered with happiness; the past and future reeled before my wakeful
vision.  I heard every clock strike; the sounds of morning were astir,
and still I could not sleep.  The ceremony, for reasons connected with
our long journey to my father's place in Hampshire, was to be early--half-
past ten was the hour.  I looked at my watch; it was seven of the clock,
and then I looked out of the window: it was a fine, soft grey morning,
with a south wind tossing the yellowing boughs.  I got up, dressed in a
hasty way, and thought I would just take a look at the river.  It was,
indeed, in glorious order, lapping over the top of the sharp stone which
we regarded as a measure of the due size of water.

"The morning was young, sleep was out of the question; I could not settle
my mind to read.  Why should I not take a farewell cast, alone, of
course?  I always disliked the attendance of a gillie.  I took my salmon
rod out of its case, rigged it up, and started for the stream, which
flowed within a couple of hundred yards of my quarters.  There it raced
under the ash tree, a pale delicate brown, perhaps a little thing too
coloured.  I therefore put on a large Silver Doctor, and began steadily
fishing down the ash-tree cast.  What if I should wipe Dick's eye, I
thought, when, just where the rough and smooth water meet, there boiled
up a head and shoulders such as I had never seen on any fish.  My heart
leaped and stood still, but there came no sensation from the rod, and I
finished the cast, my knees actually trembling beneath me.  Then I gently
lifted the line, and very elaborately tested every link of the powerful
casting-line.  Then I gave him ten minutes by my watch; next, with
unspeakable emotion, I stepped into the stream and repeated the cast.
Just at the same spot he came up again; the huge rod bent like a switch,
and the salmon rushed straight down the pool, as if he meant to make for
the sea.  I staggered on to dry land to follow him the easier, and
dragged at my watch to time the fish; a quarter to eight.  But the slim
chain had broken, and the watch, as I hastily thrust it back, missed my
pocket and fell into the water.  There was no time to stoop for it; the
fish started afresh, tore up the pool as fast as he had gone down it,
and, rushing behind the torrent, into the eddy at the top, leaped clean
out of the water.  He was 70 lbs. if he was an ounce.  Here he slackened
a little, dropping back, and I got in some line.  Now he sulked so
intensely that I thought he had got the line round a rock.  It might be
broken, might be holding fast to a sunken stone, for aught that I could
tell; and the time was passing, I knew not how rapidly.  I tried all
known methods, tugging at him, tapping the butt, and slackening line on
him.  At last the top of the rod was slightly agitated, and then, back
flew the long line in my face.  Gone!  I reeled up with a sigh, but the
line tightened again.  He had made a sudden rush under my bank, but there
he lay again like a stone.  How long?  Ah!  I cannot tell how long!  I
heard the church clock strike, but missed the number of the strokes.  Soon
he started again down-stream into the shallows, leaping at the end of his
rush--the monster.  Then he came slowly up, and 'jiggered' savagely at
the line.  It seemed impossible that any tackle could stand these short
violent jerks.  Soon he showed signs of weakening.  Once his huge silver
side appeared for a moment near the surface, but he retreated to his old
fastness.  I was in a tremor of delight and despair.  I should have
thrown down my rod, and flown on the wings of love to Olive and the
altar.  But I hoped that there was time still--that it was not so very
late!  At length he was failing.  I heard ten o'clock strike.  He came up
and lumbered on the surface of the pool.  Gradually I drew him, plunging
ponderously, to the gravelled beach, where I meant to 'tail' him.  He
yielded to the strain, he was in the shallows, the line was shortened.  I
stooped to seize him.  The frayed and overworn gut broke at a knot, and
with a loose roll he dropped back towards the deep.  I sprang at him,
stumbled, fell on him, struggled with him, but he slipped from my arms.
In that moment I knew more than the anguish of Orpheus.  Orpheus!  Had I,
too, lost my Eurydice?  I rushed from the stream, up the steep bank,
along to my rooms.  I passed the church door.  Olive, pale as her orange-
blossoms, was issuing from the porch.  The clock pointed to 10.45.  I was
ruined, I knew it, and I laughed.  I laughed like a lost spirit.  She
swept past me, and, amidst the amazement of the gentle and simple, I sped
wildly away.  Ask me no more.  The rest is silence."

* * * * *

Thus ends my hapless friend's narrative.  I leave it to the judgment of
women and of men.  Ladies, would you have acted as Olive Dunne acted?
Would pride, or pardon, or mirth have ridden sparkling in your eyes?  Men,
my brethren, would ye have deserted the salmon for the lady, or the lady
for the salmon?  I know what I would have done had I been fair Olive
Dunne.  What I would have done had I been Houghton Grannom I may not
venture to divulge.  For this narrative, then, as for another, "Let every
man read it as he will, and every woman as the gods have given her wit."
{4}




A TWEEDSIDE SKETCH


The story of the following adventure--this deplorable confession, one may
say--will not have been written in vain if it impresses on young minds
the supreme necessity of carefulness about details.  Let the "casual" and
regardless who read it--the gatless, as they say in Suffolk--ponder the
lesson which it teaches: a lesson which no amount of bitter experience
has ever impressed on the unprincipled narrator.  Never do anything
carelessly whether in fishing or in golf, and carry this important maxim
even into the most serious affairs of life.  Many a battle has been lost,
no doubt, by lack of ammunition, or by plenty of ammunition which did not
happen to suit the guns; and many a salmon has been lost, ay, and many a
trout, for want of carefulness, and through a culpable inattention to the
soundness of your gut, and tackle generally.  What fiend is it that
prompts a man just to try a hopeless cast, in a low water, without
testing his tackle?  As sure as you do that, up comes the fish, and with
his first dash breaks your casting line, and leaves you lamenting.  This
doctrine I preach, being my own "awful example."  "Bad and careless
little boy," my worthy master used to say at school; and he would have
provoked a smile in other circumstances.  But Mr. Trotter, of the
Edinburgh Academy, had something about him (he usually carried it in the
tail-pocket of his coat) which inspired respect and discouraged ribaldry.
Would that I had listened to Mr. Trotter; would that I had corrected, in
early life, the happy-go-lucky disposition to scatter my Greek accents,
as it were, with a pepper-caster, to fish with worn tackle, and,
generally, to make free with the responsibilities of life and literature.
It is too late to amend, but others may learn wisdom from this spectacle
of deserved misfortune and absolute discomfiture.

I am not myself a salmon-fisher, though willing to try that art again,
and though this is a tale of salmon.  To myself the difference between
angling for trout and angling for salmon is like the difference between a
drawing of Lionardo's, in silver point, and a loaded landscape by
MacGilp, R.A.  Trout-fishing is all an idyll, all delicacy--that is,
trout-fishing on the Test or on the Itchen.  You wander by clear water,
beneath gracious poplar-trees, unencumbered with anything but a slim rod
of Messrs. Hardy's make, and a light toy-box of delicate flies.  You need
seldom wade, and the water is shallow, the bottom is of silver gravel.
You need not search all day at random, but you select a rising trout, and
endeavour to lay the floating fly delicately over him.  If you part with
him, there is always another feeding merrily:

   Invenies alium si te hic fastidit.

It is like an excursion into Corot's country, it is rich in memories of
Walton and Cotton: it is a dream of peace, and they bring you your tea by
the riverside.  In salmon-fishing, on the Tweed at least, all is
different.  The rod, at all events the rod which some one kindly lent me,
is like a weaver's beam.  The high heavy wading trousers and boots are
even as the armour of the giant of Gath.  You have to plunge waist deep,
or deeper, into roaring torrents, and if the water be at all "drumly" you
have not an idea where your next step may fall.  It may be on a hidden
rock, or on a round slippery boulder, or it may be into a deep "pot" or
hole.  The inexperienced angler staggers like a drunken man, is
occasionally drowned, and more frequently is ducked.  You have to cast
painfully, with steep precipitous banks behind you, all overgrown with
trees, with bracken, with bramble.  It is a boy's work to disentangle the
fly from the branches of ash and elm and pine.  There is no delicacy, and
there is a great deal of exertion in all this.  You do not cast subtilely
over a fish which you know is there, but you swish, swish, all across the
current, with a strong reluctance to lift the line after each venture and
try another.  The small of the back aches, and it is literally in the
sweat of your brow that you take your diversion.  After all, there are
many blank days, when the salmon will look at no fly, or when you
encounter the Salmo irritans, who rises with every appearance of earnest
good-will, but never touches the hook, or, if he does touch it, runs out
a couple of yards of line, and vanishes for ever.  What says the poet?

   There's an accommodating fish,
   In pool or stream, by rock or pot,
   Who rises frequent as you wish,
   At "Popham," "Parson," or "Jock Scott,"
   Or almost any fly you've got
   In all the furred and feathered clans.
   You strike, but ah, you strike him not
   He is the _Salmo irritans_!

It may be different in Norway or on the lower casts of the Tweed, as at
Floors, or Makerstoun; but higher up the country, in Scott's own country,
at Yair or Ashiesteil, there is often a terrible amount of fruitless work
to be done.  And I doubt if, except in throwing a very long line, and
knowing the waters by old experience, there is very much skill in salmon-
fishing.  It is all an affair of muscle and patience.  The choice of
flies is almost a pure accident.  Every one believes in the fly with
which he has been successful.  These strange combinations of blues, reds,
golds, of tinsel and worsted, of feathers and fur, are purely fantastic
articles.  They are like nothing in nature, and are multiplied for the
fanciful amusement of anglers.  Nobody knows why salmon rise at them;
nobody knows why they will bite on one day and not on another, or rather,
on many others.  It is not even settled whether we should use a bright
fly on a bright day, and a dark fly on a dark day, as Dr. Hamilton
advises, or reverse the choice as others use.  Muscles and patience,
these, I repeat, are the only ingredients of ultimate success.

However, one does do at Rome as the Romans do, and fishes for salmon in
Tweed when the nets are off in October, when the yellowing leaves begin
to fall, and when that beautiful reach of wooded valley from Elibank to
the meeting of Tweed and Ettrick is in the height of its autumnal charm.
Why has Yarrow been so much more besung than Tweed, in spite of the
greater stream's far greater and more varied loveliness?  The fatal duel
in the Dowie Dens of Yarrow and the lamented drowning of Willie there
have given the stream its 'pastoral melancholy,' and engaged Wordsworth
in the renown of the water.  For the poetry of Tweed we have chiefly,
after Scott, to thank Mr. Stoddart, its loyal minstrel.  "Dearer than all
these to me," he says about our other valleys, "is sylvan Tweed."

   Let ither anglers choose their ain,
   And ither waters tak' the lead
   O' Hieland streams we covet nane,
   But gie to us the bonny Tweed;
   And gie to us the cheerfu' burn,
   That steals into its valley fair,
   The streamlets that, at ilka turn,
   Sae saftly meet and mingle there.

He kept his promise, given in the following verse:

   And I, when to breathe is a labour, and joy
   Forgets me, and life is no longer the boy,
   On the labouring staff, and the tremorous knee,
   Will wander, bright river, to thee!

Life is always "the boy" when one is beside the Tweed.  Times change, and
we change, for the worse.  But the river changes little.  Still he
courses through the keen and narrow rocks beneath the bridge of Yair.

   From Yair, which hills so closely bind,
   Scarce can the Tweed his passage find,
   Though much he fret, and chafe, and toil,
   Till all his eddying currents boil.

Still the water loiters by the long boat-pool of Yair, as though loath to
leave the drooping boughs of the elms.  Still it courses with a deep eddy
through the Elm Wheel, and ripples under Fernilea, where the author of
the "Flowers of the Forest" lived in that now mouldering and roofless
hall, with the peaked turrets.  Still Neidpath is fair, Neidpath of the
unhappy maid, and still we mark the tiny burn at Ashiesteil, how in
November,

   Murmuring hoarse, and frequent seen,
   Through bush and briar, no longer green,
   An angry brook, it sweeps the glade,
   Brawls over rock and wild cascade,
   And foaming brown, with doubled speed,
   Hurries its waters to the Tweed.

Still the old tower of Elibank is black and strong in ruin; Elibank, the
home of that Muckle Mou'd Meg, who made Harden after all a better bride
than he would have found in the hanging ash-tree of her father.  These
are unaltered, mainly, since Scott saw them last, and little altered is
the homely house of Ashiesteil, where he had been so happy.  And we, too,
feel but little change among those scenes of long ago, those best-beloved
haunts of boyhood, where we have had so many good days and bad, days of
rising trout and success; days of failure, and even of half-drowning.

One cannot reproduce the charm of the strong river in pool and stream, of
the steep rich bank that it rushes or lingers by, of the green and
heathery hills beyond, or the bare slopes where the blue slate breaks
through among the dark old thorn-trees, remnants of the forest.  It is
all homely and all haunted, and, if a Tweedside fisher might have his
desire, he would sleep the long sleep in the little churchyard that lies
lonely above the pool of Caddon-foot, and hard by Christopher North's
favourite quarters at Clovenfords.

However, while we are still on earth, Caddon-foot is more attractive for
her long sweep of salmon-pool--the home of sea-trout too--than precisely
for her kirk-yard.  There will be time enough for that, and time it is to
recur to the sad story of the big fish and the careless angler.  It was
about the first day of October, and we had enjoyed a "spate."
Salmon-fishing is a mere child of the weather; with rain almost anybody
may raise fish, without it all art is apt to be vain.  We had been
blessed with a spate.  On Wednesday the Tweed had been roaring red from
bank to bank.  Salmon-fishing was wholly out of the question, and it is
to be feared that the innumerable trout-fishers, busy on every eddy, were
baiting with salmon roe, an illegal lure.  On Thursday the red tinge had
died out of the water, but only a very strong wader would have ventured
in; others had a good chance, if they tried it, of being picked up at
Berwick.  Friday was the luckless day of my own failure and broken heart.
The water was still very heavy and turbid, a frantic wind was lashing the
woods, heaps of dead leaves floated down, and several sheaves of corn
were drifted on the current.  The long boat-pool at Yair, however, is
sheltered by wooded banks, and it was possible enough to cast, in spite
of the wind's fury.  We had driven from a place about five miles distant,
and we had not driven three hundred yards before I remembered that we had
forgotten the landing-net.  But, as I expected nothing, it did not seem
worth while to go back for this indispensable implement.  We reached the
waterside, and found that the trout were feeding below the pendent
branches of the trees and in the quiet, deep eddies of the long
boat-pool.  One cannot see rising trout without casting over them, in
preference to labouring after salmon, so I put up a small rod and
diverted myself from the bank.  It was to little purpose.  Tweed trout
are now grown very shy and capricious; even a dry fly failed to do any
execution worth mentioning.  Conscience compelled me, as I had been sent
out by kind hosts to fish for salmon, not to neglect my orders.  The
armour--the ponderous gear of the fisher--was put on with the enormous
boots, and the gigantic rod was equipped.  Then came the beginning of
sorrows.  We had left the books of salmon flies comfortably reposing at
home.  We had also forgotten the whiskey flask.  Everything, in fact,
except cigarettes, had been left behind.  Unluckily, not quite
everything: I had a trout fly-book, and therein lay just one large salmon
fly, not a Tweed fly, but a lure that is used on the beautiful and
hopeless waters of the distant Ken, in Galloway.  It had brown wings, a
dark body, and a piece of jungle-cock feather, and it was fastened to a
sea-trout casting-line.  Now, if I had possessed no salmon flies at all,
I must either have sent back for some, or gone on innocently dallying
with trout.  But this one wretched fly lured me to my ruin.  I saw that
the casting-line had a link which seemed rather twisted.  I tried it;
but, in the spirit of Don Quixote with his helmet, I did not try it hard.
I waded into the easiest-looking part of the pool, just above a huge tree
that dropped its boughs to the water, and began casting, merely from a
sense of duty.  I had not cast a dozen times before there was a heavy,
slow plunge in the stream, and a glimpse of purple and azure.

"That's him," cried a man who was trouting on the opposite bank.
Doubtless it was "him," but he had not touched the hook.  I believe the
correct thing would have been to wait for half an hour, and then try the
fish with a smaller fly.  But I had no smaller fly, no other fly at all.
I stepped back a few paces, and fished down again.  In Major Traherne's
work I have read that the heart leaps, or stands still, or otherwise
betrays an uncomfortable interest, when one casts for the second time
over a salmon which has risen.  I cannot honestly say that I suffered
from this tumultuous emotion.  "He will not come again," I said, when
there was a long heavy drag at the line, followed by a shrieking of the
reel, as in Mr. William Black's novels.  Let it be confessed that the
first hooking of a salmon is an excitement unparalleled in trout-fishing.
There have been anglers who, when the salmon was once on, handed him over
to the gillie to play and land.  One would like to act as gillie to those
lordly amateurs.  My own fish rushed down stream, where the big tree
stands.  I had no hope of landing him if he took that course, because one
could neither pass the rod under the boughs, nor wade out beyond them.
But he soon came back, while one took in line, and discussed his probable
size with the trout-fisher opposite.  His size, indeed!  Nobody knows
what it was, for when he had come up to the point whence he had started,
he began a policy of violent short tugs--not "jiggering," as it is
called, but plunging with all his weight on the line.  I had clean
forgotten the slimness of the tackle, and, as he was clearly well hooked,
held him perhaps too hard.  Only a very raw beginner likes to take hours
over landing a fish.  Perhaps I held him too tight: at all events, after
a furious plunge, back came the line; the casting line had snapped at the
top link.

There was no more to be said or done, except to hunt for another fly in
the trout fly-book.  Here there was no such thing, but a local spectator
offered me a huge fly, more like a gaff, and equipped with a large iron
eye for attaching the gut to.  Withal I suspect this weapon was meant,
not for fair fishing, but for "sniggling."  Now "sniggling" is a form of
cold-blooded poaching.  In the open water, on the Ettrick, you may see
half a dozen snigglers busy.  They all wear high wading trousers; they
are all armed with stiff salmon-rods and huge flies.  They push the line
and the top joints of the rod deep into the water, drag it along, and
then bring the hook out with a jerk.  Often it sticks in the side of a
salmon, and in this most unfair and unsportsmanlike way the free sport of
honest people is ruined, and fish are diminished in number.  Now, the big
fly _may_ have been an honest character, but he was sadly like a rake-
hook in disguise.  He did not look as if an fish could fancy him.  I,
therefore, sent a messenger across the river to beg, buy, or borrow a fly
at "The Nest."  But this pretty cottage is no longer the home of the
famous angling club, which has gone a mile or two up the water and
builded for itself a new dwelling.  My messenger came back with one small
fatigued-looking fly, a Popham, I think, which had been lent by some one
at a farmhouse.  The water was so heavy that the small fly seemed
useless; however, we fastened it on as a dropper, using the sniggler as
the trail fly; so exhausted were our resources, that I had to cut a piece
of gut off a minnow tackle and attach the small fly to that.  The tiny
gut loop of the fly was dreadfully frayed, and with a heavy heart I began
fishing again.  My friend on the opposite side called out that big fish
were rising in the bend of the stream, so thither I went, stumbling over
rocks, and casting with much difficulty, as the high overgrown banks
permit no backward sweep of the line.  You are obliged to cast by a kind
of forward thrust of the arms, a knack not to be acquired in a moment.  I
splashed away awkwardly, but at last managed to make a straight, clean
cast.  There was a slight pull, such as a trout gives in mid-stream under
water.  I raised the point, and again the reel sang aloud and gleefully
as the salmon rushed down the stream farther and faster than the first.
It is a very pleasant thing to hook a salmon when you are all alone, as I
was then--alone with yourself and the Goddess of Fishing.  This salmon,
just like the other, now came back, and instantly began the old tactics
of heavy plunging tugs.  But I knew the gut was sound this time, and as I
fancied he had risen to the sniggler, I had no anxiety about the tackle
holding.  One more plunge, and back came the line as before.  He was off.
One could have sat down and gnawed the reel.  What had gone wrong?  Why,
the brute had taken the old fly from the farmhouse and had snapped the
loop that attaches the gut.  The little loop was still on the fragment of
minnow tackle which fastened it to the cast.

There was no more chance, for there were now no more flies, except a
small "cobbery," a sea-trout fly from the Sound of Mull.  It was time for
us to go, with a heavy heart and a basket empty, except for two or three
miserable trout.  The loss of those two salmon, whether big or little
fish, was not the whole misfortune.  All the chances of the day were
gone, and seldom have salmon risen so freely.  I had not been casting
long enough to smoke half a cigarette, when I hooked each of those fish.
They rose at flies which were the exact opposites of each other in size,
character, and colour.  They were ready to rise at anything but the
sniggler.  And I had nothing to offer them, absolutely nothing bigger
than a small red-spinner from the Test.  On that day a fisher, not far
off, hooked nine salmon and landed four of them, in one pool, I never had
such a chance before; the heavy flood and high wind had made the salmon
as "silly" as perch.  One might have caught half a dozen of the great
sturdy fellows, who make all trout, even sea-trout, seem despicable
minnows.  Next day I fished again in the same water, with a friend.  I
rose a fish, but did not hook it, and he landed a small one, five minutes
after we started, and we only had one other rise all the rest of the day.
Probably it was not dark and windy enough, but who can explain the
caprices of salmon?  The only certain thing is, that carelessness always
brings misfortune; that if your tackle is weak fish will hook themselves
on days, and in parts of the water, where you expected nothing, and then
will go away with your fly and your casting-lines.  Fortune never
forgives.  He who is lazy, and takes no trouble because he expects no
fish, will always be meeting heart-breaking adventures.  One should never
make a hopeless or careless cast; bad luck lies in wait for that kind of
performance.  These are the experiences that embitter a man, as they
embittered Dean Swift, who, old and ill, neglected and in Irish exile,
still felt the pang of losing a great trout when he was a boy.  What
pleasure is there in landscape and tradition when such accidents befall
you?

   The sun upon the Weirdlaw hill,
   In Ettrick's vale is sinking sweet.

There is a fire of autumn colour in the tufted woods that embosom
Fernilea.  "Bother the setting sun," we say, and the Maid of Neidpath,
and the "Flowers of the Forest," and the memories of Scott at Ashiesteil,
and of Muckle Mou'd Meg, at Elibank.  These are filmy, shadowy pleasures
of the fancy, these cannot minister to the mind of him who has been
"broken" twice, who cannot resume the contest for want of ammunition, and
who has not even brought the creature-comfort of a flask.  Since that
woful day I have lain on the bank and watched excellent anglers skilfully
flogging the best of water, and that water full of fish, without hooking
one.  Salmon-fishing, then, is a matter of chance, or of plodding
patience.  They will rise on one day at almost any fly (but the
sniggler), however ill-presented to them.  On a dozen other days no fly
and no skill will avail to tempt them.  The salmon is a brainless brute
and the grapes are sour!

If only the gut had held, this sketch would have ended with sentiment,
and a sunset, and the music of Ettrick, the melody of Tweed.  In the
gloaming we'd be roaming homeward, telling, perhaps, the story of the
ghost seen by Sir Walter Scott near Ashiesteil, or discussing the Roman
treasure still buried near Oakwood Tower, under an inscribed stone which
men saw fifty years ago.  Or was it a treasure of Michael Scott's, who
lived at Oakwood, says tradition?  Let Harden dig for Harden's gear, it
is not for me to give hints as to its whereabouts.  After all that ill-
luck, to be brief, one is not in the vein for legendary lore, nor
memories of boyhood, nor poetry, nor sunsets.  I do not believe that one
ever thinks of the landscape or of anything else, while there is a chance
for a fish, and no abundance of local romance can atone for an empty
creel.  Poetical fishers try to make people believe these fallacies;
perhaps they impose on themselves; but if one would really enjoy
landscape, one should leave, not only the fly-book and the landing-net,
but the rod and reel at home.  And so farewell to the dearest and fairest
of all rivers that go on earth, fairer than Eurotas or Sicilian Anapus
with its sea-trout; farewell--for who knows how long?--to the red-fringed
Gleddis-wheel, the rock of the Righ-wheel, the rushing foam of the
Gullets, the woodland banks of Caddon-foot.

   The valleys of England are wide,
   Her rivers rejoice every one,
   In grace and in beauty they glide,
   And water-flowers float at their side,
   As they gleam in the rays of the sun.

   But where are the speed and the spray--
   The dark lakes that welter them forth,
   Tree and heath nodding over their way--
   The rock and the precipice grey,
   That bind the wild streams of the North?

Well, both, are good, the streams of north and south, but he who has
given his heart to the Tweed, as did Tyro, in Homer, to the Enipeus will
never change his love.

P.S.--That Galloway fly--"The Butcher and Lang"--has been avenged.  A
copy of him, on the line of a friend, has proved deadly on the Tweed,
killing, among other victims, a sea-trout of thirteen pounds.




THE DOUBLE ALIBI


Glen Aline is probably the loneliest place in the lone moorlands of
Western Galloway.  The country is entirely pastoral, and I fancy that the
very pasture is bad enough.  Stretches of deer-grass and ling, rolling
endlessly to the feet of Cairnsmure and the circle of the eastern hills,
cannot be good feeding for the least Epicurean of sheep, and sheep do not
care for the lank and sour herbage by the sides of the "lanes," as the
half-stagnant, black, deep, and weedy burns are called in this part of
the country.  The scenery is not unattractive, but tourists never wander
to these wastes where no inns are, and even the angler seldom visits
them.  Indeed, the fishing is not to be called good, and the "lanes,"
which "seep," as the Scotch say, through marshes and beneath low
hillsides, are not such excellent company as the garrulous and brawling
brooks of the Border or of the Highlands.  As the lanes flow, however,
from far-away lochs, it happens that large trout make their way into
them--trout which, if hooked, offer a gallant resistance before they can
be hauled over the weeds that usually line the watercourses.

Partly for the sake of trying this kind of angling, partly from a
temporary distaste for the presence of men and women, partly for the
purpose of finishing a work styled "A History of the Unexplained," I once
spent a month in the solitudes of Glen Aline.  I stayed at the house of a
shepherd who, though not an unintelligent man was by no means possessed
of the modern spirit.  He and his brother swains had sturdily and
successfully resisted an attempt made by the schoolmaster at a village
some seven miles off to get a postal service in the glen more frequently
than once a week.  A post once a week was often enough for lucky people
who did not get letters twice a year.  It was not my shepherd, but
another, who once came with his wife to the village, after a twelve
miles' walk across the hills, to ask "what the day of the week was?"  They
had lost count, and the man had attended to his work on a day which the
dame averred to be the Sabbath.  He denied that it _was_ the Sabbath, and
I believe that it turned out to be a Tuesday.  This little incident gives
some idea of the delightful absence of population in Glen Aline.  But no
words can paint the utter loneliness, which could actually be felt--the
empty moors, the empty sky.  The heaps of stones by a burnside, here and
there, showed that a cottage had once existed where now was no
habitation.  One such spot was rather to be shunned by the superstitious,
for here, about 1698, a cottar family had been evicted by endless
unaccountable disturbances in the house.  Stones were thrown by invisible
hands--though occasionally, by the way, a white hand, with no apparent
body attached to it, _was_ viewed by the curious who came to the spot.
Heavy objects of all sorts floated in the air; rappings and voices were
heard; the end wall was pulled down by an unknown agency.  The story is
extant in a pious old pamphlet called "Sadducees Defeated," and a great
deal more to the same effect--a masterpiece by the parish minister,
signed and attested by the other ministers of the Glen Kens.  The
Edinburgh edition of the pamphlet is rare; the London edition may be
procured without much difficulty.

The site of this ruined cottage, however, had no terrors for the
neighbours, or rather for the neighbour, my shepherd.  In fact, he seemed
to have forgotten the legend till I reminded him of it, for I had come
across the tale in my researches into the Unexplained.  The shepherd and
his family, indeed, were quite devoid of superstition, and in this
respect very unlike the northern Highlanders.  However, the fallen
cottage had nothing to do with my own little adventure in Glen Aline, and
I mention it merely as the most notable of the tiny ruins which attest
the presence, in the past, of a larger population.  One cannot marvel
that the people "flitted" from the moors and morasses of Glen Aline into
less melancholy neighbourhoods.  The very sheep seemed scarcer here than
elsewhere; grouse-disease had devastated the moors, sportsmen
consequently did not visit them; and only a few barren pairs, with crow-
picked skeletons of dead birds in the heather now and then, showed that
the shootings had once perhaps been marketable.  My shepherd's cottage
was four miles from the little-travelled road to Dalmellington; long bad
miles they were, across bog and heather.  Consequently I seldom saw any
face of man, except in or about the cottage.  My work went on rapidly
enough in such an undisturbed life.  Empires might fall, parties might
break like bursting shells, and banks might break also: I plodded on with
my labour, and went a-fishing when the day promised well.  There was a
hill loch (Loch Nan) about five miles away, which I favoured a good deal.
The trout were large and fair of flesh, and in proper weather they rose
pretty freely, and could be taken by an angler wading from the shore.
There was no boat.  The wading, however, was difficult and dangerous,
owing to the boggy nature of the bottom, which quaked like a quicksand in
some places.  The black water, never stirred by duck or moorhen, the dry
rustling reeds, the noisome smell of decaying vegetable-matter when you
stirred it up in wading, the occasional presence of a dead sheep by the
sullen margin of the tarn, were all opposed to cheerfulness.  Still, the
fish were there, and the "lane," which sulkily glided from the loch
towards the distant river, contained some monsters, which took worm after
a flood.  One misty morning, as I had just topped the low ridge from
which the loch became visible, I saw a man fishing from my favourite
bench.  Never had I noticed a human being there before, and I was not
well pleased to think that some emissary of Mr. Watson Lyall was making
experiments in Loch Nan, and would describe it in "The Sportsman's
Guide."  The mist blew white and thick for a minute or two over the loch-
side, as it often does at Loch Skene; so white and thick and sudden that
the bewildered angler there is apt to lose his way, and fall over the
precipice of the Grey Mare's Tail.  When the curtain of cloud rose again,
the loch was lonely: the angler had disappeared.  I went on rejoicing,
and made a pretty good basket, as the weather improved and grew warmer--a
change which gives an appetite to trout in some hill lochs.  Among the
sands between the stones on the farther bank I found traces of the
angler's footsteps; he was not a phantom, at all events, for phantoms do
not wear heavily nailed boots, as he evidently did.  The traces, which
were soon lost, of course, inclined me to think that he had retreated up
a narrow green burnside, with rather high banks, through which, in rainy
weather, a small feeder fell into the loch.  I guessed that he had been
frightened away by the descent of the mist, which usually "puts down" the
trout and prevents them from feeding.  In that case his alarm was
premature.  I marched homewards, happy with the unaccustomed weight of my
basket, the contents of which were a welcome change from the usual
porridge and potatoes, tea (without milk), jam, and scones of the
shepherd's table.  But, as I reached the height above the loch on my
westward path, and looked back to see if rising fish were dimpling the
still waters, all flushed as they were with sunset, behold, there was the
Other Man at work again!

I should have thought no more about him had I not twice afterwards seen
him at a distance, fishing up a "lane" ahead of me, in the loneliest
regions, and thereby, of course, spoiling my sport.  I knew him by his
peculiar stoop, which seemed not unfamiliar to me, and by his hat, which
was of the clerical pattern once known, perhaps still known, as "a Bible-
reader's"--a low, soft, slouched black felt.  The second time that I
found him thus anticipating me, I left off fishing and walked rather
briskly towards him, to satisfy my curiosity, and ask the usual
questions, "What sport?" and "What flies?"  But as soon as he observed me
coming he strode off across the heather.  Uncourteous as it seems, I felt
so inquisitive that I followed him.  But he walked so rapidly, and was so
manifestly anxious to shake me off, that I gave up the pursuit.  Even if
he were a poacher whose conscience smote him for using salmon-roe, I was
not "my brother's keeper," nor anybody's keeper.  He might "otter" the
loch, but how could I prevent him?

It was no affair of mine, and yet--where had I seen him before?  His
gait, his stoop, the carriage of his head, all seemed familiar--but a
short-sighted man is accustomed to this kind of puzzle: he is always
recognising the wrong person, when he does not fail to recognise the
right one.

I am rather short-sighted, but science has its resources.  Two or three
days after my encounter with this very shy sportsman, I went again to
Loch Nan.  But this time I took with me a strong field-glass.  As I
neared the crest of the low heathery slope immediately above the loch,
whence the water first comes into view, I lay down on the ground and
crawled like a deer-stalker to the skyline.

Then I got out the glass and reconnoitred.  There was my friend, sure
enough; moreover, he was playing a very respectable trout.  But he was
fishing on the near side of the loch, and though I had quite a distinct
view of his back, and indeed of all his attenuated form, I was as far as
ever from recognising him, or guessing where, if anywhere, I had seen him
before.  I now determined to stalk him; but this was not too easy, as
there is literally no cover on the hillside except a long march dyke of
the usual loose stones, which ran down to the loch-side, and indeed three
or four feet into the loch, reaching it at a short distance to the right
of the angler.  Behind this I skulked, in an eagerly undignified manner,
and was just about to climb the wall unobserved, when two grouse got up,
with their wild "cluck cluck" of alarm, and flew down past the angler and
over the loch.  He did not even look round, but jerked his line out of
the water, reeled it up, and set off walking along the loch-side.  He was
making, no doubt, for the little glen up which I fancied that he must
have retreated on the first occasion when saw him.  I set off walking
round the tarn on my own side--the left side--expecting to anticipate
him, and that he must pass me on his way up the little burnside.  But I
had miscalculated the distance, or the pace.  He was first at the
burnside; and now I cast courtesy and everything but curiosity to the
winds, and deliberately followed him.  He was a few score of yards ahead
of me, walking rapidly, when he suddenly climbed the burnside to the
left, and was lost to my eyes for a few moments.  I reached the place,
ascended the steep green declivity and found myself on the open
undulating moor, with no human being in sight!

The grass and heather were short.  I saw no bush, no hollow, where he
could by any possibility have hidden himself.  Had he met a Boojum he
could not have more "softly and suddenly vanished away."

I make no pretence of being more courageous than my neighbours, and, in
this juncture, perhaps I was less so.  The long days of loneliness in
waste Glen Aline, and too many solitary cigarettes, had probably injured
my nerve.  So, when I suddenly heard a sigh and the half-smothered sound
of a convulsive cough-hollow, if ever a cough was hollow--hard by me, at
my side as it were, and yet could behold no man, nor any place where a
man might conceal himself--nothing but moor and sky and tufts of
rushes--then I turned away, and walked down the glen: not slowly.  I
shall not deny that I often looked over my shoulder as I went, and that,
when I reached the loch, I did not angle without many a backward glance.
Such an appearance and disappearance as this, I remembered, were in the
experience of Sir Walter Scott.  Lockhart does not tell the anecdote,
which is in a little anonymous volume, "Recollections of Sir Walter
Scott," published before Lockhart's book.  Sir Walter reports that he was
once riding across the moor to Ashiesteil, in the clear brown summer
twilight, after sunset.  He saw a man a little way ahead of him, but,
just before he reached the spot, the man disappeared.  Scott rode about
and about, searching the low heather as I had done, but to no purpose.  He
rode on, and, glancing back, saw the same man at the same place.  He
turned his horse, galloped to the spot, and again--nothing!  "Then," says
Sir Walter, "neither the mare nor I cared to wait any longer."  Neither
had I cared to wait, and if there is any shame in the confession, on my
head be it!

There came a week of blazing summer weather; tramping over moors to lochs
like sheets of burnished steel was out of the question, and I worked at
my book, which now was all but finished.  At length I wrote THE END, and
"o le bon ouff! que je poussais," as Flaubert says about one of his own
laborious conclusions.  The weather broke, we had a deluge, and then came
a soft cloudy day, with a warm southern wind suggesting a final march on
Loch Nan.  I packed some scones and marmalade into my creel, filled my
flask with whiskey, my cigarette-case with cigarettes, and started on the
familiar track with the happiest anticipations.  The Lone Fisher was
quite out of my mind; the day was exhilarating--one of those true fishing-
days when you feel the presence of the sun without seeing him.  Still, I
looked rather cautiously over the edge of the slope above the loch, and,
by Jove! there he was, fishing the near side, and wading deep among the
reeds!  I did not stalk him this time, but set off running down the
hillside behind him, as quickly as my basket, with its load of waders and
boots, would permit.  I was within forty yards of him, when he gave a
wild stagger, tried to recover himself, failed, and, this time,
disappeared in a perfectly legitimate and accountable manner.  The
treacherous peaty bottom had given way, and his floating hat, with a
splash on the surface, and a few black bubbles, were all that testified
to his existence.  There was a broken old paling hard by; I tore off a
long plank, waded in as near as I dared, and, by help of the plank, after
a good deal of slipping, which involved an exemplary drenching, I
succeeded in getting him on to dry land.  He was a distressing
spectacle--his body and face all blackened with the slimy peat-mud; and
he fell half-fainting on the grass, convulsed by a terrible cough.  My
first care was to give him whiskey, by perhaps a mistaken impulse of
humanity; my next, as he lay, exhausted, was to bring water in my hat,
and remove the black mud from his face.

Then I saw Percy Allen--Allen of St. Jude's!  His face was wasted, his
thin long beard (he had not worn a beard of old), clogged as it was with
peat-stains, showed flecks of grey.

"Allen--Percy!" I said; "what wind blew _you_ here?"

But he did not answer; and, as he coughed, it was too plain that the
shock of his accident had broken some vessel in the lungs.  I tended him
as well as I knew how to do it.  I sat beside him, giving him what
comfort I might, and all the time my memory flew back to college days,
and to our strange and most unhappy last meeting, and his subsequent
inevitable disgrace.  Far away from here--Loch Nan and the vacant
moors--my memory wandered.

It was at Blocksby's auction-room, in a street near the Strand, on the
eve of a great book-sale three years before, that we had met, for almost
the last time, as I believed, though it is true that we had not spoken on
that occasion.  It is necessary that I should explain what occurred, or
what I and three other credible witnesses believed to have occurred; for,
upon my word, the more I see and hear of human evidence of any event, the
less do I regard it as establishing anything better than an excessively
probable hypothesis.

To make a long story as short as may be, I should say that Allen and I
had been acquainted when we were undergraduates; that, when fellows of
our respective colleges, our acquaintance had become intimate; that we
had once shared a little bit of fishing on the Test; and that we were
both book-collectors.  I was a comparatively sane bibliomaniac, but to
Allen the time came when he grudged every penny that he did not spend on
rare books, and when he actually gave up his share of the water we used
to take together, that his contribution to the rent might go for rare
editions and bindings.  After this deplorable change of character we
naturally saw each other less, but we were still friendly.  I went up to
town to scribble; Allen stayed on at Oxford.  One day I chanced to go
into Blocksby's rooms; it was a Friday, I remember--there was to be a
great sale on the Monday.  There I met Allen in ecstasies over one of the
books displayed in the little side room on the right hand of the sale-
room.  He had taken out of a glass case and was gloating over a book
which, it seems, had long been the Blue Rose of his fancy as a collector.
He was crazed about Longepierre, the old French amateur, whose volumes,
you may remember, were always bound in blue morocco, and tooled, on the
centre and at the corners, with his badge, the Golden Fleece.  Now the
tome which so fascinated Allen was a Theocritus, published at Rome by
Caliergus--a Theocritus on blue paper, if you please, bound in
Longepierre's morocco livery, _double_ with red morocco, and, oh ecstasy!
with a copy of Longepierre's version of one Idyll on the flyleaf, signed
with the translator's initials, and headed "_a Mon Roy_."  It is known to
the curious that Louis XIV. particularly admired and praised this little
poem, calling it "a model of honourable gallantry."  Clearly the grateful
author had presented his own copy to the king; and here it was, when king
and crown had gone down into dust.

Allen showed me the book; he could hardly let it leave his hands.

"Here is a pearl," he had said, "a gem beyond price!"

"I'm afraid you'll find it so," I said; "that is for a Paillet or
Rothschild, not for you, my boy."

"I fear so," he had answered; "if I were to sell my whole library
to-morrow, I could hardly raise the money;" for he was poor, and it was
rumoured that his mania had already made him acquainted with the Jews.

We parted.  I went home to chambers; Allen stayed adoring the unexampled
Longepierre.  That night I dined out, and happened to sit next a young
lady who possessed a great deal of taste, though that was the least of
her charms.  The fashion for book-collecting was among her innocent
pleasures; she had seen Allen's books at Oxford, and I told her of his
longings for the Theocritus.  Miss Breton at once was eager to see the
book, and the other books, and I obtained leave to go with her and Mrs.
Breton to the auction-rooms next day.  The little side-room where the
treasures were displayed was empty, except for an attendant, when we went
in; we looked at the things and made learned remarks, but I admit that I
was more concerned to look at Miss Breton than at any work in leather by
Derome or Bauzonnet.  We were thus a good deal occupied, perhaps, with
each other; people came and went, while our heads were bent over a case
of volumes under the window.  When we _did_ leave, on the appeal of Mrs.
Breton, we both--both I and Kate--Miss Breton, I mean--saw Allen--at
least I saw him, and believed _she_ did--absorbed in gazing at the
Longepierre Theocritus.  He held it rather near his face; the gas, which
had been lit, fell on the shining Golden Fleeces of the cover, on his
long thin hands and eager studious features.  It would have been a pity
to disturb him in his ecstasy.  I looked at Miss Breton; we both smiled,
and, of course, I presumed we smiled for the same reason.

I happen to know, and unluckily did it happen, the very minute of the
hour when we left Blocksby's.  It was a quarter to four o'clock--a church-
tower was chiming the three-quarters in the Strand, and I looked half
mechanically at my own watch, which was five minutes fast.  On Sunday I
went down to Oxford, and happened to walk into Allen's rooms.  He was
lying on a sofa reading the "Spectator."  After chatting a little, I
said, "You took no notice of me, nor of the Bretons yesterday, Allen, at
Blocksby's."

"I didn't see you," he said; and as he was speaking there came a knock at
the door.

"Come in!" cried Allen, and a man entered who was a stranger to me.  You
would not have called him a gentleman perhaps.  However, I admit that I
am possibly no great judge of a gentleman.

Allen looked up.

"Hullo, Mr. Thomas," he said, "have you come up to see Mr. Mortby?"
mentioning a well-known Oxford bibliophile.  "Wharton," he went on,
addressing me, "this is Mr. Thomas from Blocksby's."  I bowed.  Mr.
Thomas seemed embarrassed.  "Can I have a word alone with you, sir?" he
murmured to Allen.

"Certainly," answered Allen, looking rather surprised.  "You'll excuse me
a moment, Wharton," he said to me.  "Stop and lunch, won't you?  There's
the old 'Spectator' for you;" and he led Mr. Thomas into a small den
where he used to hear his pupils read their essays, and so forth.

In a few minutes he came out, looking rather pale, and took an
embarrassed farewell of Mr. Thomas.

"Look here, Wharton," he said to me, "here is a curious business.  That
fellow from Blocksby's tells me that the Longepierre Theocritus
disappeared yesterday afternoon; that I was the last person in whose hand
it was seen, and that not only the man who always attends in the room but
Lord Tarras and Mr. Wentworth, saw it in _my_ hands just before it was
missed."

"What a nuisance!" I answered.  "You were looking at it when Miss Breton
and I saw you, and you didn't notice us; Does Thomas know _when_--I mean
about what o'clock--the book was first missed?"

"That's the lucky part of the whole worry," said Allen.  "I left the
rooms at three exactly, and it was missed about ten minutes to four;
dozens of people must have handled it in that interval of time.  So
interesting a book!"

"But," I said, and paused--"are you sure your watch was right?"

"Quite certain; besides, I looked at a church clock.  Why on earth do you
ask?"

"Because--I am awfully sorry--there is some unlucky muddle; but it was
exactly a quarter, or perhaps seventeen minutes, to four when both Miss
Breton and I saw you absorbed in the Longepierre."

"Oh, it's quite _impossible_," Allen answered; "I was far enough away
from Blocksby's at a quarter to four."

"That's all right," I said.  "Of course you can prove that; if it is
necessary; though I dare say the book has fallen behind a row of others,
and has been found by this time.  Where were you at a quarter to four?"

"I really don't feel obliged to stand a cross-examination before my
time," answered Allen, flushing a little.  Then I remembered that I was
engaged to lunch at All Souls', which was true enough; convenient too,
for I do not quite see how the conversation could have been carried on
pleasantly much further.  For I _had_ seen him--not a doubt about it.  But
there was one curious thing.  Next time I met Miss Breton I told her the
story, and said, "You remember how we saw Allen, at Blocksby's, just as
we were going away?"

"No," she said, "I did not see him; where was he?"

"Then why did you smile--don't you remember?  I looked at him and at you,
and I thought you smiled!"

"Because--well, I suppose because _you_ smiled," she said.  And the
subject of the conversation was changed.

It was an excessively awkward affair.  It did not come "before the
public," except, of course, in the agreeably mythical gossip of an
evening paper.  There was no more public scandal than that.  Allen was
merely ruined.  The matter was introduced to the notice of the Wardens
and the other Fellows of St. Jude's.  What Lord Tarras saw, what Mr.
Wentworth saw, what I saw, clearly proved that Allen was in the auction-
rooms, and had the confounded book in his hand, at an hour when, as _he_
asserted, he had left the place for some time.  It was admitted by one of
the people employed at the sale-rooms that Allen had been noticed (he was
well known there) leaving the house at three.  But he must have come back
again, of course, as at least four people could have sworn to his
presence in the show-room at a quarter to four o'clock.  When he was
asked in a private interview, by the Head of his College, to say where he
went after leaving Blocksby's Allen refused to answer.  He merely said
that he could not prove the facts; that his own word would not be taken
against that of so many unprejudiced and even friendly witnesses.  He
simply threw up the game.  He resigned his fellowship; he took his name
off the books; he disappeared.

There was a good deal of talk; people spoke about the unscrupulousness of
collectors, and repeated old anecdotes on that subject.  Then the
business was forgotten.  Next, in a year's time or so, the book--the
confounded Longepierre's Theocritus--was found in a pawnbroker's shop.
The history of its adventures was traced beyond a shadow of doubt.  It
had been very adroitly stolen, and disposed of, by a notorious
book-thief, a gentleman by birth--now dead, but well remembered.  Ask Mr.
Quaritch!

Allen's absolute innocence was thus demonstrated beyond cavil, though
nobody paid any particular attention to the demonstration.  As for Allen,
he had vanished; he was heard of no more.

He was _here_; dying here, beside the black wave of lone Loch Nan.

All this, so long in the telling, I had time enough to think over, as I
sat and watched him, and wiped his lips with water from the burn, clearer
and sweeter than the water of the loch.

At last his fit of coughing ceased, and a kind of peace came into his
face.

"Allen, my dear old boy," I said--I don't often use the language of
affection--"did you never hear that all that stupid story was cleared up;
that everyone knows you are innocent?"

He only shook his head; he did not dare to speak, but he looked happier,
and he put his hand in mine.

I sat holding his hand, stroking it.  I don't know how long I sat there;
I had put my coat and waterproof under him.  He was "wet through," of
course; there was little use in what I did.  What could I do with him?
how bring him to a warm and dry place?

The idea seemed to strike him, for he half rose and pointed to the little
burnside, across the loch.  A plan occurred to me; I tore a leaf from my
sketch-book, put the paper with pencil in his hand, and said, "Where do
you live?  Don't speak.  Write."

He wrote in a faint scrawl, "Help me to that burnside.  Then I can guide
you."

I hardly know how I got him there, for, light as he was, I am no
Hercules.  However, with many a rest, we reached the little dell; and
then I carried him up its green side, and laid him on the heather of the
moor.

He wrote again:

"Go to that clump of rushes--the third from the little hillock.  Then
look, but be careful.  Then lift the big grass tussock."

The spot which Allen indicated was on the side of a rather steep grassy
slope.  I approached it, dragged at the tussock of grass, which came away
easily enough, and revealed the entrance to no more romantic hiding-place
than an old secret whiskey "still."  Private stills, not uncommon in
Sutherland and some other northern shires, are extinct in Galloway.  Allen
had probably found this one by accident in his wanderings, and in his
half-insane bitterness against mankind had made it, for some time at
least, his home.  The smoke-blackened walls, the recesses where the worm-
tub and the still now stood, all plainly enough betrayed the original
user of the hiding-place.  There was a low bedstead, a shelf or two,
whereon lay a few books--a Shakespeare, a Homer, a Walton, Plutarch's
"Lives"; very little else out of a library once so rich.  There was a tub
of oatmeal, a heap of dry peat, two or three eggs in a plate, some
bottles, a keg of whiskey, some sardine-tins, a box with clothes--that
was nearly all the "plenishing" of this hermitage.  It was never likely
to be discovered, except by the smoke, when the inmate lit a fire.  The
local shepherd knew it, of course, but Allen had bought his silence, not
that there were many neighbours for the shepherd to tattle with.

Allen had recovered strength enough by this time to reach his den with
little assistance.  He made me beat up the white of one of the eggs with
a little turpentine, which was probably, under the circumstances, the
best styptic for his malady within his reach.  I lit his fire of peats,
undressed him, put him to bed, and made him as comfortable as might be in
the den which he had chosen.  Then I went back to the shepherd's, sent a
messenger to the nearest doctor, and procured a kind of sledge, generally
used for dragging peat home, wherein, with abundance of blankets for
covering, I hoped to bring Allen back to the shepherd's cottage.

Not to delay over details, this was managed at last, and the unhappy
fellow was under a substantial roof.  But he was very ill; he became
delirious and raved of many things--talked of old college adventures, bid
recklessly for imaginary books, and practised other eccentricities of
fever.

When his fever left him he was able to converse in a way--I talking, and
he scrawling faintly with a pencil on paper.  I told him how his
character had been cleared, how he had been hunted for, advertised for,
vainly enough.  To the shepherds' cottages where he had lived till the
beginning of that summer, newspapers rarely came; to his den in the old
secret still, of course they never came at all.

His own story of what he had been doing at the fatal hour when so many
people saw him at the auction-rooms was brief.  He had left the rooms, as
he said, at three o'clock, pondering how he might raise money for the
book on which his heart was set.  His feet had taken him, half
unconsciously, to

   a dismal court,
   Place of Israelite resort,

where dwelt and dealt one Isaacs, from whom he had, at various times,
borrowed money on usury.  The name of Isaacs was over a bell, one of many
at the door, and, when the bell was rung, the street door "opened of his
own accord," like that of the little tobacco-and-talk club which used to
exist in an alley off Pall Mall.  Allen rang the bell, the outer door
opened, and, as he was standing at the door of Isaacs' chambers, before
he had knocked, _that_ portal also opened, and the office-boy, a young
Jew, slunk cautiously out.  On seeing Allen, he had seemed at once
surprised and alarmed.  Allen asked if his master was in; the lad
answered "No" in a hesitating way; but on second thoughts, averred that
Isaacs "would be back immediately," and requested Allen to go in and
wait.  He did so, but Isaacs never came, and Allen fell asleep.  He had a
very distinct and singular dream, he said, of being in Messrs. Blocksy's
rooms, of handling the Longepierre, and of seeing Wentworth there, and
Lord Tarras.  When he wakened he was very cold, and, of course, it was
pitch dark.  He did not remember where he was; he lit a match and a
candle on the chimney-piece.  Then slowly his memory came back to him,
and not only his memory, but his consciousness of what he had wholly
forgotten--namely, that this was Saturday, the Sabbath of the Jews, and
that there was not the faintest chance of Isaacs' arrival at his place of
business.  In the same moment the embarrassment and confusion of the
young Israelite flashed vividly across his mind, and he saw that he was
in a very awkward position.  If that fair Hebrew boy had been robbing, or
trying to rob, the till, then Allen's position was serious indeed, as
here he was, alone, at an untimely hour, in the office.  So he blew the
candle out, and went down the dingy stairs as quietly as possible, took
the first cab he met, drove to Paddington, and went up to Oxford.

It is probable that the young child of Israel, if he had been attempting
any mischief, did not succeed in it.  Had there been any trouble, it is
likely enough that he would have involved Allen in the grief.  Then Allen
would have been in a, perhaps, unprecedented position.  He could have
established an alibi, as far as the Jew's affairs went, by proving that
he had been at Blocksby's at the hour when the boy would truthfully have
sworn that he had let him into Isaacs' chambers.  And, as far as the
charge against him at Blocksby's went, the evidence of the young Jew
would have gone to prove that he was at Isaacs', where he had no business
to be, when we saw him at Blocksby's.  But, unhappily, each alibi would
have been almost equally compromising.  The difficulty never arose, but
the reason why Allen refused to give any account of what he had been
doing, and where he had been, at four o'clock on that Saturday
afternoon--a refusal that told so heavily against him--is now
sufficiently clear.  His statement would, we may believe, never have been
corroborated by the youthful Hebrew, who certainly had his own excellent
reasons for silence, and who probably had carefully established an
_alibi_ of his own elsewhere.

The true account of Allen's appearance, or apparition, at Blocksby's,
when I and Tarras, Wentworth and the attendant recognised him, and Miss
Breton did _not_, is thus part of the History of the Unexplained.  Allen
might have appealed to precedents in the annals of the Psychical Society,
where they exist in scores, and are technically styled "collective
hallucinations."  But neither a jury, nor a judge, perhaps, would accept
the testimony of experts in Psychical Research if offered in a criminal
trial, nor acquit a wraith.

Possibly this scepticism has never yet injured the cause of an innocent
man.  Yet I know, in my own personal experience, and have heard from
others, from men of age, sagacity, and acquaintance with the greatest
affairs, instances in which people have been distinctly seen by sane,
healthy, and honourable witnesses, in places and circumstances where it
was (as we say) "physically impossible" that they should have been, and
where they certainly were not themselves aware of having been.  That is
why human testimony seems to me to establish no more, in certain
circumstances, than a highly probable working hypothesis--a hypothesis on
which, of course, we are bound to act.

There is little more to tell.  By dint of careful nursing, poor Allen was
enabled to travel; he reached Mentone, and there the mistral ended him.
He was a lonely man, with no kinsfolk; his character was cleared among
the people who knew him best; the others have forgotten him.  Nobody can
be injured by this explanation of his silence when called on to prove his
innocence, and of his unusually successful vanishing from a society which
had never tried very hard to discover him in his retreat.  He has lived
and suffered and died, and left behind him little but an incident in the
History of the Unexplained.




THE COMPLETE BUNGLER


SCENE I.--HAMPSHIRE


PISCATOR ANGLUS.  PISCATOR SCOTUS

Scotus.--Well, now let's go to your sport of angling.  Where, Master, is
your river?

Anglus.--Marry, 'tis here; mark you, this is the famous Test.

Scotus.--What, Master, this dry ditch?  There be scarce three inches of
water in it.

Anglus.--Patience, Scholar, the water is in the meadows, or Master
Oakley, the miller, is holding it up.  Nay, let us wait here some hour or
so till the water is turned on.  Or perchance, Scholar, for the matter of
five shillings, Master Oakley will even raise his hatches, an you have a
crown about you.

Scotus.--I like not to part with my substance, but, as needs must, here,
Master, is the coin.

[Exit ANGLUS to the Mill.  He returns.

Anglus.--Now, Scholar, said I not so?  The water is turned on again, and,
lo you, at the tail of yonder stream, a fair trout is rising.  You shall
see a touch of our craft.

[ANGLUS crawls on his belly into a tuft of nettles, where he kneels and
flicks his fly for about ten minutes.

Anglus.--Alas, he has ceased rising, and I am grievously entangled in
these nettles.  Come, Scholar, but warily, lest ye fright my fish, and
now, disentangle my hook.

Scotus.--Here is your hook, but, marry, my fingers tingle shrewdly with
the nettles; also I marked the fish hasting up stream.

Anglus.--Nay, come, we shall even look for another.

Scotus.--Oh, Master, what is this?  That which but now was dry ditch is
presently salad bowl!  Mark you how the green vegetables cover the
waters!  We shall have no sport.

Anglus.--Patience, Scholar; 'tis but Master Hedgely's men, cutting the
weeds above.  We may rest us some hour or two, till they go by.  Or,
perchance, for a matter of five shillings--

Scotus.--Nay, Master, this English angling is over costly.  The rent of
your ditch is high, the expenses of travel are burdensome.  In crawling
through your nettles and thistles I have scratched my face, and torn my
raiment, and I will not pay the labourer to cease labouring in his
industry.

Anglus.--Why then, _pazienza_, Scholar, or listen while I sing that sweet
ditty of country contentment and an angler's life, writ by worthy Master
Hackle long ago.

SONG

The Angler hath a jolly life
Who by the rail runs down,
And leaves his business and his wife,
And all the din of town.
The wind down stream is blowing straight,
And nowhere cast can he;
Then lo, he doth but sit and wait
In kindly company.

Or else men turn the water off,
Or folk be cutting weed,
While he doth at misfortune scoff,
From every trouble freed.
Or else he waiteth for a rise,
And ne'er a rise may see;
For why, there are not any flies
To bear him company.

Or, if he mark a rising trout,
He straightway is caught up,
And then he takes his flasket out,
And drinks a rousing cup.
Or if a trout he chance to hook,
Weeded and broke is he,
And then he finds a goodly book
Instructive company.

What think you of my song, Scholar?  'Tis choicely musical.  What, he is
gone!  A pest on those Northerners; they have no manners.  Now, methinks
I do remember a trout called George, a heavy fellow that lies ever under
the arch of yonder bridge, where there is shelter from the wind.  Ho for
George!

[Exit singing.



SCENE II.--A BRIDGE


Enter ANGLUS

Anglus.--Now to creep like your Indian of Virginia on the prey, and angle
for George.  I'faith, he is a lusty trout; many a good Wickham have I
lost in George.

[He ensconces himself in the middle of a thorn bush.

Anglus.--There he is, I mark his big back fin.  Now speed me, St. Peter,
patron of all honest anglers!  But first to dry my fly!

[He flicks his fly for ten minutes.  Enter BOY on Bridge.  ANGLUS makes
his cast, too short.  BOY heaves a great stone from the Bridge.  Exit
GEORGE.  Exit BOY.

Anglus.--Oh, Mass! verily the angler had need of patience!  Yonder boy
hath spoiled my sport, and were it not that swearing frights the fish, I
could find it in my heart to say an oath or twain.  But, ha, here come
the swallows, hawking low on the stream.  Now, were but my Scholar here,
I could impart to him much honest lore concerning the swallow, and other
birds.  But where she hawks, there fly must be, and fish will rise, and,
look you, I do mark the trout feeding in yonder ford below the plank
bridge.

[ANGLUS steals off, and gingerly takes up his position.

Anglus.--Marry, that is a good trout under the burdock!

[He is caught up in the burdock, and breaks his tackle.

Anglus.--Now to knot a fresh cast.  Marry, but they are feeding gaily!
How kindly is the angler's life; he harmeth no fish that swims, yet the
Spectator deemeth ours a cruel sport.  Ah, good Master Townsend and
learned Master Hutton, little ye wot of our country contents.  So, I am
ready again, and this Whitchurch dun will beguile yonder fish, I doubt
not.  Marry, how thick the flies come, and how the fish do revel in this
merciful provender that Heaven sendeth!  Verily I know not at which of
these great fellows to make my essay.

[Enter twenty-four callow young ducks, swimming up stream.  The ducks
chevy the flies, taking them out of the very mouths of the trout.

Anglus.--Oh, mercy.  I have hooked a young duck!  Where is my landing-
net?  Nay, I have left it under yonder elm!

[He struggles with the young duck.  By the conclusion of the fray the
Rise is over.

Anglus.--I have saved my fly, but lo, the trout have ceased to feed, and
will rise no more till after sunset.  Well, "a merry heart goes all the
way!"  And lo, here comes my Scholar.  Ho, runaway, how have you sped?

Scotus.--Not ill.  Here be my spoils, great ones; but how faint-hearted
are your southern trout!

Anglus.--That fat fellow is a good three pounds by the scales.  But,
Scholar, with what fly caught ye these, and where?

Scotus.--Marry, Master, in a Mill-tail, where the water lagged not, but
ran free as it doth in bonny Scotland; nor with no fly did I grip him,
but with an artificial penk, or minnow.  It was made by a handsome woman
that had a fine hand, and wrought for Master Brown, of Aberdeen.  The
mould, or body of the minnow, is of parchment, methinks, and he hath fins
of copper, all so curiously dissembled that it will beguile any sharp-
sighted trout in a swift stream.  Men call it a Phantom, Master; wilt
thou not try my Phantom?

Anglus.--Begone, sirrah.  I took thee for an angler, and thou art but a
poaching knave!

Scotus.--Knave thyself!  I will break thy head!

Anglus.--Softly, Scholar.  Here comes good Master Hedgely, who will see
fair play.  Now lie there, my coat, and have at you!

[They fight, SCOTUS is knocked down.

Anglus.--Half-minute time!  Time is up!  Master Hedgely, in my dry fly
box thou wilt find a little sponge for moistening of my casting lines.
Wilt thou, of thy courtesy, throw it up for my Scholar?  And now,
Scholar, trust me, thy guard is too low.  I hope thou bearest no malice.

Scotus.--None, Master.  But, lo!  I am an hungered; wilt thou taste my
cates?  Here I have bread slices and marmalade of Dundee.  This fishing
is marvellous hungry work.

Anglus.--Gladly will I fall to, but first say me a grace--Benedictus
benedicat!  Where is thine usquebaugh?  Marry, 'tis the right Talisker!

Scotus.--And now, Master, wherefore wert thou wroth with me?  Came we not
forth to catch fish?

Anglus.--Nay, marry, Scholar, by no means to catch fish, but to fish with
the dry fly.  Now this, humanly speaking, is impossible; natheless it is
rare sport.  But for your fish, as they were ill come by, let us even
give them to good Master Hedgely here, and so be merry till the sedges
come on in the late twilight.  And, trust me, this is the rarest fishing,
and the peacefulest; only see that thou fish not with the wet fly, for
that is Anathema.  So shall we have light consciences.

Scotus.--And light baskets!

Anglus.--Ay, it may be so.




FOOTNOTES


{1}  Too true, alas!

{2}  It should be added that large trout, up to six pounds, are sometimes
taken.  One boatman assured me that he had caught two three-pounders at
one cast.

{3}  From motives of delicacy I suppress the true name of the river.

{4}  After this paper was in print, an angler was actually drowned while
engaged in playing a salmon.  This unfortunate circumstance followed, and
did not suggest the composition of the story.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1912 Longmans, Green and Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





ADVENTURES AMONG BOOKS
by Andrew Lang


Contents:

Preface
Adventures Among Books
Recollections of Robert Louis Stevenson
Rab's Friend
Oliver Wendell Holmes
Mr. Morris's Poems
Mrs. Radcliffe's Novels
A Scottish Romanticist of 1830
The Confessions of Saint Augustine
Smollett
Nathaniel Hawthorne
The Paradise of Poets
Paris and Helen
Enchanted Cigarettes
Stories and Story-telling
The Supernatural in Fiction
An Old Scottish Psychical Researcher
The Boy




PREFACE


Of the Essays in this volume "Adventures among Books," and "Rab's
Friend," appeared in _Scribner's Magazine_; and "Recollections of Robert
Louis Stevenson" (to the best of the author's memory) in _The North
American Review_.  The Essay on "Smollett" was in the _Anglo-Saxon_,
which has ceased to appear; and the shorter papers, such as "The
Confessions of Saint Augustine," in a periodical styled _Wit and Wisdom_.
For "The Poems of William Morris" the author has to thank the Editor of
_Longman's Magazine_; for "The Boy," and "Mrs. Radcliffe's Novels," the
Proprietors of _The Cornhill Magazine_; for "Enchanted Cigarettes," and
possibly for "The Supernatural in Fiction," the Proprietors of _The
Idler_.  The portrait, after Sir William Richmond, R.A., was done about
the time when most of the Essays were written--and that was not
yesterday.




CHAPTER I: ADVENTURES AMONG BOOKS


I


In an age of reminiscences, is there room for the confessions of a
veteran, who remembers a great deal about books and very little about
people?  I have often wondered that a _Biographia Literaria_ has so
seldom been attempted--a biography or autobiography of a man in his
relations with other minds.  Coleridge, to be sure, gave this name to a
work of his, but he wandered from his apparent purpose into a world of
alien disquisitions.  The following pages are frankly bookish, and to the
bookish only do they appeal.  The habit of reading has been praised as a
virtue, and has been denounced as a vice.  In no case, if we except the
perpetual study of newspapers (which cannot fairly be called reading), is
the vice, or the virtue, common.  It is more innocent than opium-eating,
though, like opium-eating, it unlocks to us artificial paradises.  I try
to say what I have found in books, what distractions from the world, what
teaching (not much), and what consolations.

In beginning an _autobiographia literaria_, an account of how, and in
what order, books have appealed to a mind, which books have ever above
all things delighted, the author must pray to be pardoned for the sin of
egotism.  There is no other mind, naturally, of which the author knows so
much as of his own.  _On n'a que soi_, as the poor girl says in one of M.
Paul Bourget's novels.  In literature, as in love, one can only speak for
himself.  This author did not, like Fulke Greville, retire into the
convent of literature from the strife of the world, rather he was born to
be, from the first, a dweller in the cloister of a library.  Among the
poems which I remember best out of early boyhood is Lucy Ashton's song,
in the "Bride of Lammermoor":--

   "Look not thou on beauty's charming,
   Sit thou still when kings are arming,
   Taste not when the wine-cup glistens,
   Speak not when the people listens,
   Stop thine ear against the singer,
   From the red gold keep thy finger,
   Vacant heart, and hand, and eye,
   Easy live and quiet die."

The rhymes, unlearned, clung to my memory; they would sing themselves to
me on the way to school, or cricket-field, and, about the age of ten,
probably without quite understanding them, I had chosen them for a kind
of motto in life, a tune to murmur along the _fallentis semita vitae_.
This seems a queer idea for a small boy, but it must be confessed.

"It takes all sorts to make a world," some are soldiers from the cradle,
some merchants, some orators; nothing but a love of books was the gift
given to me by the fairies.  It was probably derived from forebears on
both sides of my family, one a great reader, the other a considerable
collector of books which remained with us and were all tried, persevered
with, or abandoned in turn, by a student who has not blanched before the
_Epigoniad_.

About the age of four I learned to read by a simple process.  I had heard
the elegy of Cock Robin till I knew it by rote, and I picked out the
letters and words which compose that classic till I could read it for
myself.  Earlier than that, "Robinson Crusoe" had been read aloud to me,
in an abbreviated form, no doubt.  I remember the pictures of Robinson
finding the footstep in the sand, and a dance of cannibals, and the
parrot.  But, somehow, I have never read "Robinson" since: it is a
pleasure to come.

The first books which vividly impressed me were, naturally, fairy tales,
and chap-books about Robert Bruce, William Wallace, and Rob Roy.  At that
time these little tracts could be bought for a penny apiece.  I can still
see Bruce in full armour, and Wallace in a kilt, discoursing across a
burn, and Rob Roy slipping from the soldier's horse into the stream.  They
did not then awaken a precocious patriotism; a boy of five is more at
home in Fairyland than in his own country.  The sudden appearance of the
White Cat as a queen after her head was cut off, the fiendish malice of
the Yellow Dwarf, the strange cake of crocodile eggs and millet seed
which the mother of the Princess Frutilla made for the Fairy of the
Desert--these things, all fresh and astonishing, but certainly to be
credited, are my first memories of romance.  One story of a White
Serpent, with a woodcut of that mysterious reptile, I neglected to
secure, probably for want of a penny, and I have regretted it ever since.
One never sees those chap books now.  "The White Serpent," in spite of
all research, remains _introuvable_.  It was a lost chance, and Fortune
does not forgive.  Nobody ever interfered with these, or indeed with any
other studies of ours at that time, as long as they were not prosecuted
on Sundays.  "The fightingest parts of the Bible," and the Apocrypha, and
stories like that of the Witch of Endor, were sabbatical literature, read
in a huge old illustrated Bible.  How I advanced from the fairy tales to
Shakespeare, what stages there were on the way--for there must have been
stages--is a thing that memory cannot recover.  A nursery legend tells
that I was wont to arrange six open books on six chairs, and go from one
to the others, perusing them by turns.  No doubt this was what people
call "desultory reading," but I did not hear the criticism till later,
and then too often for my comfort.  Memory holds a picture, more vivid
than most, of a small boy reading the "Midsummer Night's Dream" by
firelight, in a room where candles were lit, and some one touched the
piano, and a young man and a girl were playing chess.  The Shakespeare
was a volume of Kenny Meadows' edition; there are fairies in it, and the
fairies seemed to come out of Shakespeare's dream into the music and the
firelight.  At that moment I think that I was happy; it seemed an
enchanted glimpse of eternity in Paradise; nothing resembling it remains
with me, out of all the years.

We went from the border to the south of England, when the number of my
years was six, and in England we found another paradise, a circulating
library with brown, greasy, ill-printed, odd volumes of Shakespeare and
of the "Arabian Nights."  How their stained pages come before the eyes
again--the pleasure and the puzzle of them!  What did the lady in the
Geni's glass box want with the Merchants? what meant all these
conversations between the Fat Knight and _Ford_, in the "Merry Wives"?  It
was delightful, but in parts it was difficult.  Fragments of "The
Tempest," and of other plays, remain stranded in my memory from these
readings: _Ferdinand_ and _Miranda_ at chess, _Cleopatra_ cuffing the
messenger, the asp in the basket of figs, the _Friar_ and the
_Apothecary_, _Troilus_ on the Ilian walls, a vision of _Cassandra_ in
white muslin with her hair down.  People forbid children to read this or
that.  I am sure they need not, and that even in our infancy the
magician, Shakespeare, brings us nothing worse than a world of beautiful
visions, half realised.  In the Egyptian wizard's little pool of ink,
only the pure can see the visions, and in Shakespeare's magic mirror
children see only what is pure.  Among other books of that time I only
recall a kind of Sunday novel, "Naomi; or, The Last Days of Jerusalem."
Who, indeed, could forget the battering-rams, and the man who cried on
the battlements, "Woe, woe to myself and to Jerusalem!"  I seem to hear
him again when boys break the hum of London with yells of the latest
"disaster."

We left England in a year, went back to Scotland, and awoke, as it were,
to know the glories of our birth.  We lived in Scott's country, within
four miles of Abbotsford, and, so far, we had heard nothing of it.  I
remember going with one of the maids into the cottage of a kinsman of
hers, a carpenter; a delightful place, where there was sawdust, where our
first fishing-rods were fashioned.  Rummaging among the books, of course,
I found some cheap periodical with verses in it.  The lines began--

   "The Baron of Smaylhome rose with day,
      He spurred his courser on,
   Without stop or stay, down the rocky way
      That leads to Brotherstone."

A rustic tea-table was spread for us, with scones and honey, not to be
neglected.  But they _were_ neglected till we had learned how--

   "The sable score of fingers four
      Remains on that board impressed,
   And for evermore that lady wore
      A covering on her wrist."

We did not know nor ask the poet's name.  Children, probably, say very
little about what is in their minds; but that unhappy knight, Sir Richard
of Coldinghame, and the Priest, with his chamber in the east, and the
moody Baron, and the Lady, have dwelt in our mind ever since, and hardly
need to be revived by looking at "The Eve of St. John."

Soon after that we were told about Sir Walter, how great he was, how
good, how, like Napoleon, his evil destiny found him at last, and he wore
his heart away for honour's sake.  And we were given the "Lay," and "The
Lady of the Lake."  It was my father who first read "Tam o' Shanter" to
me, for which I confess I did not care at that time, preferring to take
witches and bogies with great seriousness.  It seemed as if Burns were
trifling with a noble subject.  But it was in a summer sunset, beside a
window looking out on Ettrick and the hill of the Three Brethren's Cairn,
that I first read, with the dearest of all friends, how--

   "The stag at eve had drunk his fill
   Where danced the moon on Monan's rill,
   And deep his midnight lair had made
   In lone Glenartney's hazel shade."

Then opened the gates of romance, and with Fitz-James we drove the chase,
till--

   "Few were the stragglers, following far,
   That reached the lake of Vennachar,
   And when the Brig of Turk was won,
   The foremost horseman rode alone."

From that time, for months, there was usually a little volume of Scott in
one's pocket, in company with the miscellaneous collection of a boy's
treasures.  Scott certainly took his fairy folk seriously, and the Mauth
Dog was rather a disagreeable companion to a small boy in wakeful hours.
{1}  After this kind of introduction to Sir Walter, after learning one's
first lessons in history from the "Tales of a Grandfather," nobody, one
hopes, can criticise him in cold blood, or after the manner of Mr. Leslie
Stephen, who is not sentimental.  Scott is not an author like another,
but our earliest known friend in letters; for, of course, we did not ask
who Shakespeare was, nor inquire about the private history of Madame
d'Aulnoy.  Scott peopled for us the rivers and burnsides with his
reivers; the Fairy Queen came out of Eildon Hill and haunted Carterhaugh;
at Newark Tower we saw "the embattled portal arch"--

   "Whose ponderous grate and massy bar
   Had oft rolled back the tide of war,"--

just as, at Foulshiels, on Yarrow, we beheld the very roofless cottage
whence Mungo Park went forth to trace the waters of the Niger, and at
Oakwood the tower of the Wizard Michael Scott.

Probably the first novel I ever read was read at Elgin, and the story was
"Jane Eyre."  This tale was a creepy one for a boy of nine, and Rochester
was a mystery, St. John a bore.  But the lonely little girl in her
despair, when something came into the room, and her days of starvation at
school, and the terrible first Mrs. Rochester, were not to be forgotten.
They abide in one's recollection with a Red Indian's ghost, who carried a
rusty ruined gun, and whose acquaintance was made at the same time.

I fancy I was rather an industrious little boy, and that I had minded my
lessons, and satisfied my teachers--I know I was reading Pinnock's
"History of Rome" for pleasure--till "the wicked day of destiny" came,
and I felt a "call," and underwent a process which may be described as
the opposite of "conversion."  The "call" came from Dickens.  "Pickwick"
was brought into the house.  From that hour it was all over, for five or
six years, with anything like industry and lesson-books.  I read
"Pickwick" in convulsions of mirth.  I dropped Pinnock's "Rome" for good.
I neglected everything printed in Latin, in fact everything that one was
understood to prepare for one's classes in the school whither I was now
sent, in Edinburgh.  For there, living a rather lonely small boy in the
house of an aged relation, I found the Waverley Novels.  The rest is
transport.  A conscientious tutor dragged me through the Latin grammar,
and a constitutional dislike to being beaten on the hands with a leather
strap urged me to acquire a certain amount of elementary erudition.  But,
for a year, I was a young hermit, living with Scott in the "Waverleys"
and the "Border Minstrelsy," with Pope, and Prior, and a translation of
Ariosto, with Lever and Dickens, David Copperfield and Charles O'Malley,
Longfellow and Mayne Reid, Dumas, and in brief, with every kind of light
literature that I could lay my hands upon.  Carlyle did not escape me; I
vividly remember the helpless rage with which I read of the Flight to
Varennes.  In his work on French novelists, Mr. Saintsbury speaks of a
disagreeable little boy, in a French romance, who found Scott
_assommant_, stunningly stupid.  This was a very odious little boy, it
seems (I have not read his adventures), and he came, as he deserved, to a
bad end.  Other and better boys, I learn, find Scott "slow."
Extraordinary boys!  Perhaps "Ivanhoe" was first favourite of yore; you
cannot beat Front de Boeuf, the assault on his castle, the tournament.  No
other tournament need apply.  Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, greatly daring, has
attempted to enter the lists, but he is a mere Ralph the Hospitaller.
Next, I think, in order of delight, came "Quentin Durward," especially
the hero of the scar, whose name Thackeray could not remember, Quentin's
uncle.  Then "The Black Dwarf," and Dugald, our dear Rittmeister.  I
could not read "Rob Roy" then, nor later; nay, not till I was forty.  Now
Di Vernon is the lady for me; the queen of fiction, the peerless, the
brave, the tender, and true.

The wisdom of the authorities decided that I was to read no more novels,
but, as an observer remarked, "I don't see what is the use of preventing
the boy from reading novels, for he's just reading 'Don Juan' instead."
This was so manifestly no improvement, that the ban on novels was tacitly
withdrawn, or was permitted to become a dead letter.  They were far more
enjoyable than Byron.  The worst that came of this was the suggestion of
a young friend, whose life had been adventurous--indeed he had served in
the Crimea with the Bashi Bazouks--that I should master the writings of
Edgar Poe.  I do not think that the "Black Cat," and the "Fall of the
House of Usher," and the "Murders in the Rue Morgue," are very good
reading for a boy who is not peculiarly intrepid.  Many a bad hour they
gave me, haunting me, especially, with a fear of being prematurely
buried, and of waking up before breakfast to find myself in a coffin.  Of
all the books I devoured in that year, Poe is the only author whom I wish
I had reserved for later consideration, and whom I cannot conscientiously
recommend to children.

I had already enjoyed a sip of Thackeray, reading at a venture, in
"Vanity Fair," about the Battle of Waterloo.  It was not like Lever's
accounts of battles, but it was enchanting.  However, "Vanity Fair" was
under a taboo.  It is not easy to say why; but Mr. Thackeray himself
informed a small boy, whom he found reading "Vanity Fair" under the
table, that he had better read something else.  What harm can the story
do to a child?  He reads about Waterloo, about fat Jos, about little
George and the pony, about little Rawdon and the rat-hunt, and is happy
and unharmed.

Leaving my hermitage, and going into the very different and very
disagreeable world of a master's house, I was lucky enough to find a
charming library there.  Most of Thackeray was on the shelves, and
Thackeray became the chief enchanter.  As Henry Kingsley says, a boy
reads him and thinks he knows all about life.  I do not think that the
mundane parts, about Lady Kew and her wiles, about Ethel and the Marquis
of Farintosh, appealed to one or enlightened one.  Ethel was a mystery,
and not an interesting mystery, though one used to copy Doyle's pictures
of her, with the straight nose, the impossible eyes, the impossible
waist.  It was not Ethel who captivated us; it was Clive's youth and art,
it was J. J., the painter, it was jolly F. B. and his address to the maid
about the lobster.  "A finer fish, Mary, my dear, I have never seen.  Does
not this solve the vexed question whether lobsters are fish, in the
French sense?"  Then "The Rose and the Ring" came out.  It was worth
while to be twelve years old, when the Christmas books were written by
Dickens and Thackeray.  I got hold of "The Rose and the Ring," I know,
and of the "Christmas Carol," when they were damp from the press.  King
Valoroso, and Bulbo, and Angelica were even more delightful than Scrooge,
and Tiny Tim, and Trotty Veck.  One remembers the fairy monarch more
vividly, and the wondrous array of egg-cups from which he sipped
brandy--or was it right Nantes?--still "going on sipping, I am sorry to
say," even after "Valoroso was himself again."

But, of all Thackeray's books, I suppose "Pendennis" was the favourite.
The delightful Marryat had entertained us with Peter Simple and O'Brien
(how good their flight through France is!) with Mesty and Mr. Midshipman
Easy, with Jacob Faithful (Mr. Thackeray's favourite), and with
Snarleyyow; but Marryat never made us wish to run away to sea.  That did
not seem to be one's vocation.  But the story of Pen made one wish to run
away to literature, to the Temple, to streets where Brown, the famous
reviewer, might be seen walking with his wife and umbrella.  The writing
of poems "up to" pictures, the beer with Warrington in the mornings, the
suppers in the back-kitchen, these were the alluring things, not society,
and Lady Rockminster, and Lord Steyne.  Well, one has run away to
literature since, but where is the matutinal beer?  Where is the back-
kitchen?  Where are Warrington, and Foker, and F. B.?  I have never met
them in this living world, though Brown, the celebrated reviewer, is
familiar to me, and also Mr. Sydney Scraper, of the Oxford and Cambridge
Club.  Perhaps back-kitchens exist, perhaps there are cakes and ale in
the life literary, and F. B. may take his walks by the Round Pond.  But
one never encounters these rarities, and Bungay and Bacon are no longer
the innocent and ignorant rivals whom Thackeray drew.  They do not give
those wonderful parties; Miss Bunnion has become quite conventional;
Percy Popjoy has abandoned letters; Mr. Wenham does not toady; Mr. Wagg
does not joke any more.  The literary life is very like any other, in
London, or is it that we do not see it aright, not having the eyes of
genius?  Well, a life on the ocean wave, too, may not be so desirable as
it seems in Marryat's novels: so many a lad whom he tempted into the navy
has discovered.  The best part of the existence of a man of letters is
his looking forward to it through the spectacles of Titmarsh.

One can never say how much one owes to a school-master who was a friend
of literature, who kept a houseful of books, and who was himself a
graceful scholar, and an author, while he chose to write, of poetic and
humorous genius.  Such was the master who wrote the "Day Dreams of a
Schoolmaster," Mr. D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson, to whom, in this place, I
am glad to confess my gratitude after all these many years.  While we
were deep in the history of Pendennis we were also being dragged through
the Commentaries of Caius Julius Caesar, through the Latin and Greek
grammars, through Xenophon, and the Eclogues of Virgil, and a depressing
play of Euripides, the "Phoenissae."  I can never say how much I detested
these authors, who, taken in small doses, are far, indeed, from being
attractive.  Horace, to a lazy boy, appears in his Odes to have nothing
to say, and to say it in the most frivolous and vexatious manner.  Then
Cowper's "Task," or "Paradise Lost," as school-books, with notes, seems
arid enough to a school-boy.  I remember reading ahead, in Cowper,
instead of attending to the lesson and the class-work.  His observations
on public schools were not uninteresting, but the whole English school-
work of those days was repugnant.  One's English education was all got
out of school.

As to Greek, for years it seemed a mere vacuous terror; one invented for
one's self all the current arguments against "compulsory Greek."  What
was the use of it, who ever spoke in it, who could find any sense in it,
or any interest?  A language with such cruel superfluities as a middle
voice and a dual; a language whose verbs were so fantastically irregular,
looked like a barbaric survival, a mere plague and torment.  So one
thought till Homer was opened before us.  Elsewhere I have tried to
describe the vivid delight of first reading Homer, delight, by the way,
which St. Augustine failed to appreciate.  Most boys not wholly immersed
in dulness felt it, I think; to myself, for one, Homer was the real
beginning of study.  One had tried him, when one was very young, in Pope,
and had been baffled by Pope, and his artificial manner, his "fairs," and
"swains."  Homer seemed better reading in the absurd "crib" which Mr.
Buckley wrote for Bohn's series.  Hector and Ajax, in that disguise, were
as great favourites as Horatius on the Bridge, or the younger Tarquin.
Scott, by the way, must have made one a furious and consistent
Legitimist.  In reading the "Lays of Ancient Rome," my sympathies were
with the expelled kings, at least with him who fought so well at Lake
Regillus:--

   "Titus, the youngest Tarquin,
      Too good for such a breed."

Where--

   "Valerius struck at Titus,
      And lopped off half his crest;
   But Titus stabbed Valerius
      A span deep in the breast,"--

I find, on the margin of my old copy, in a schoolboy's hand, the words
"Well done, the Jacobites!"  Perhaps my politics have never gone much
beyond this sentiment.  But this is a digression from Homer.  The very
sound of the hexameter, that long, inimitable roll of the most various
music, was enough to win the heart, even if the words were not
understood.  But the words proved unexpectedly easy to understand, full
as they are of all nobility, all tenderness, all courage, courtesy, and
romance.  The "Morte d'Arthur" itself, which about this time fell into
our hands, was not so dear as the "Odyssey," though for a boy to read Sir
Thomas Malory is to ride at adventure in enchanted forests, to enter
haunted chapels where a light shines from the Graal, to find by lonely
mountain meres the magic boat of Sir Galahad.

After once being initiated into the mysteries of Greece by Homer, the
work at Greek was no longer tedious.  Herodotus was a charming and
humorous story-teller, and, as for Thucydides, his account of the
Sicilian Expedition and its ending was one of the very rare things in
literature which almost, if not quite, brought tears into one's eyes.  Few
passages, indeed, have done that, and they are curiously discrepant.  The
first book that ever made me cry, of which feat I was horribly ashamed,
was "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with the death of Eva, Topsy's friend.  Then it
was trying when Colonel Newcome said _Adsum_, and the end of Socrates in
the _Phaedo_ moved one more than seemed becoming--these, and a passage in
the history of Skalagrim Lamb's Tail, and, as I said, the ruin of the
Athenians in the Syracusan Bay.  I have read these chapters in an old
French version derived through the Italian from a Latin translation of
Thucydides.  Even in this far-descended form, the tale keeps its pathos;
the calm, grave stamp of that tragic telling cannot be worn away by much
handling, by long time, by the many changes of human speech.  "Others
too," says Nicias, in that fatal speech, when--

   "_All was done that men may do_,
   _And all was done in vain_,"--

"having achieved what men may, have borne what men must."  This is the
very burden of life, and the last word of tragedy.  For now all is vain:
courage, wisdom, piety, the bravery of Lamachus, the goodness of Nicias,
the brilliance of Alcibiades, all are expended, all wasted, nothing of
that brave venture abides, except torture, defeat, and death.  No play
not poem of individual fortunes is so moving as this ruin of a people; no
modern story can stir us, with all its eloquence, like the brief gravity
of this ancient history.  Nor can we find, at the last, any wisdom more
wise than that which bids us do what men may, and bear what men must.
Such are the lessons of the Greek, of the people who tried all things, in
the morning of the world, and who still speak to us of what they tried in
words which are the sum of human gaiety and gloom, of grief and triumph,
hope and despair.  The world, since their day, has but followed in the
same round, which only seems new: has only made the same experiments, and
failed with the same failure, but less gallantly and less gloriously.

One's school-boy adventures among books ended not long after winning the
friendship of Homer and Thucydides, of Lucretius and Catullus.  One's
application was far too desultory to make a serious and accurate scholar.

I confess to having learned the classical languages, as it were by
accident, for the sake of what is in them, and with a provokingly
imperfect accuracy.  Cricket and trout occupied far too much of my mind
and my time: Christopher North, and Walton, and Thomas Tod Stoddart, and
"The Moor and the Loch," were my holiday reading, and I do not regret it.
Philologists and Ireland scholars are not made so, but you can, in no
way, fashion a scholar out of a casual and inaccurate intelligence.  The
true scholar is one whom I envy, almost as much as I respect him; but
there is a kind of mental short-sightedness, where accents and verbal
niceties are concerned, which cannot be sharpened into true scholarship.
Yet, even for those afflicted in this way, and with the malady of being
"idle, careless little boys," the ancient classics have a value for which
there is no substitute.  There is a charm in finding ourselves--our
common humanity, our puzzles, our cares, our joys, in the writings of men
severed from us by race, religion, speech, and half the gulf of
historical time--which no other literary pleasure can equal.  Then there
is to be added, as the university preacher observed, "the pleasure of
despising our fellow-creatures who do not know Greek."  Doubtless in that
there is great consolation.

It would be interesting, were it possible, to know what proportion of
people really care for poetry, and how the love of poetry came to them,
and grew in them, and where and when it stopped.  Modern poets whom one
meets are apt to say that poetry is not read at all.  Byron's Murray
ceased to publish poetry in 1830, just when Tennyson and Browning were
striking their preludes.  Probably Mr. Murray was wise in his generation.
But it is also likely that many persons, even now, are attached to
poetry, though they certainly do not buy contemporary verse.  How did the
passion come to them?  How long did it stay?  When did the Muse say good-
bye?  To myself, as I have remarked, poetry came with Sir Walter Scott,
for one read Shakespeare as a child, rather in a kind of dream of
fairyland and enchanted isles, than with any distinct consciousness that
one was occupied with poetry.  Next to Scott, with me, came Longfellow,
who pleased one as more reflective and tenderly sentimental, while the
reflections were not so deep as to be puzzling.  I remember how
"Hiawatha" came out, when one was a boy, and how delightful was the free
forest life, and Minnehaha, and Paupukkeewis, and Nokomis.  One did not
then know that the same charm, with a yet fresher dew upon it, was to
meet one later, in the "Kalewala."  But, at that time, one had no
conscious pleasure in poetic style, except in such ringing verse as
Scott's, and Campbell's in his patriotic pieces.  The pleasure and
enchantment of style first appealed to me, at about the age of fifteen,
when one read for the first time--

   "So all day long the noise of battle rolled
   Among the mountains by the winter sea;
   Until King Arthur's Table, man by man,
   Had fallen in Lyonnesse about their Lord."

Previously one had only heard of Mr. Tennyson as a name.  When a child I
was told that a poet was coming to a house in the Highlands where we
chanced to be, a poet named Tennyson.  "Is he a poet like Sir Walter
Scott?" I remember asking, and was told, "No, he was not like Sir Walter
Scott."  Hearing no more of him, I was prowling among the books in an
ancient house, a rambling old place with a ghost-room, where I found
Tupper, and could not get on with "Proverbial Philosophy."  Next I tried
Tennyson, and instantly a new light of poetry dawned, a new music was
audible, a new god came into my medley of a Pantheon, a god never to be
dethroned.  "Men scarcely know how beautiful fire is," Shelley says.  I
am convinced that we scarcely know how great a poet Lord Tennyson is; use
has made him too familiar.  The same hand has "raised the Table Round
again," that has written the sacred book of friendship, that has lulled
us with the magic of the "Lotus Eaters," and the melody of "Tithonus."  He
has made us move, like his own Prince--

      "Among a world of ghosts,
   And feel ourselves the shadows of a dream."

He has enriched our world with conquests of romance; he has recut and
reset a thousand ancient gems of Greece and Rome; he has roused our
patriotism; he has stirred our pity; there is hardly a human passion but
he has purged it and ennobled it, including "this of love."  Truly, the
Laureate remains the most various, the sweetest, the most exquisite, the
most learned, the most Virgilian of all English poets, and we may pity
the lovers of poetry who died before Tennyson came.

Here may end the desultory tale of a desultory bookish boyhood.  It was
not in nature that one should not begin to rhyme for one's self.  But
those exercises were seldom even written down; they lived a little while
in a memory which has lost them long ago.  I do remember me that I tried
some of my attempts on my dear mother, who said much what Dryden said to
"Cousin Swift," "You will never be a poet," a decision in which I
straightway acquiesced.  For to rhyme is one thing, to be a poet quite
another.  A good deal of mortification would be avoided if young men and
maidens only kept this obvious fact well posed in front of their vanity
and their ambition.

In these bookish memories I have said nothing about religion and
religious books, for various reasons.  But, unlike other Scots of the
pen, I got no harm from "The Shorter Catechism," of which I remember
little, and neither then nor now was or am able to understand a single
sentence.  Some precocious metaphysicians comprehended and stood aghast
at justification, sanctification, adoption, and effectual calling.  These,
apparently, were necessary processes in the Scottish spiritual life.  But
we were not told what they meant, nor were we distressed by a sense that
we had not passed through them.  From most children, one trusts,
Calvinism ran like water off a duck's back; unlucky were they who first
absorbed, and later were compelled to get rid of, "The Shorter
Catechism!"

One good thing, if no more, these memories may accomplish.  Young men,
especially in America, write to me and ask me to recommend "a course of
reading."  Distrust a course of reading!  People who really care for
books _read all of them_.  There is no other course.  Let this be a
reply.  No other answer shall they get from me, the inquiring young men.



II


People talk, in novels, about the delights of a first love.  One may
venture to doubt whether everybody exactly knows which was his, or her,
first love, of men or women, but about our first loves in books there can
be no mistake.  They were, and remain, the dearest of all; after boyhood
the bloom is off the literary rye.  The first parcel of these garrulities
ended when the author left school, at about the age of seventeen.  One's
literary equipment seems to have been then almost as complete as it ever
will be, one's tastes definitely formed, one's favourites already chosen.
As long as we live we hope to read, but we never can "recapture the first
fine careless rapture."  Besides, one begins to write, and that is fatal.
My own first essays were composed at school--for other boys.  Not long
ago the gentleman who was then our English master wrote to me, informing
me he was my earliest public, and that he had never credited my younger
brother with the essays which that unscrupulous lad ("I speak of him but
brotherly") was accustomed to present for his consideration.

On leaving school at seventeen I went to St. Leonard's Hall, in the
University of St. Andrews.  That is the oldest of Scotch universities,
and was founded by a papal bull.  St. Leonard's Hall, after having been a
_hospitium_ for pilgrims, a home for old ladies (about 1500), and a
college in the University, was now a kind of cross between a master's
house at school, and, as before 1750, a college.  We had more liberty
than schoolboys, less than English undergraduates.  In the Scotch
universities the men live scattered, in lodgings, and only recently, at
St. Andrews, have they begun to dine together in hall.  We had a common
roof, common dinners, wore scarlet gowns, possessed football and cricket
clubs, and started, of course, a kind of weekly magazine.  It was only a
manuscript affair, and was profusely illustrated.  For the only time in
my life, I was now an editor, under a sub-editor, who kept me up to my
work, and cut out my fine passages.  The editor's duty was to write most
of the magazine--to write essays, reviews (of books by the professors,
very severe), novels, short stories, poems, translations, also to
illustrate these, and to "fag" his friends for "copy" and drawings.  A
deplorable flippancy seems, as far as one remembers, to have been the
chief characteristic of the periodical--flippancy and an abundant use of
the supernatural.  These were the days of Lord' Lytton's "Strange Story,"
which I continue to think a most satisfactory romance.  Inspired by Lord
Lytton, and aided by the University library, I read Cornelius Agrippa,
Trithemius, Petrus de Abano, Michael Scott, and struggled with Iamblichus
and Plotinus.

These are really but disappointing writers.  It soon became evident
enough that the devil was not to be raised by their prescriptions, that
the philosopher's stone was beyond the reach of the amateur.  Iamblichus
is particularly obscure and tedious.  To any young beginner I would
recommend Petrus de Abano, as the most adequate and gruesome of the
school, for "real deevilry and pleesure," while in the wilderness of
Plotinus there are many beautiful passages and lofty speculations.  Two
winters in the Northern University, with the seamy side of school life
left behind, among the kindest of professors--Mr. Sellar, Mr. Ferrier,
Mr. Shairp--in the society of the warden, Mr. Rhoades, and of many dear
old friends, are the happiest time in my life.  This was true literary
leisure, even if it was not too well employed, and the _religio loci_
should be a liberal education in itself.  We had debating societies--I
hope I am now forgiven for an attack on the character of Sir William
Wallace, _latro quidam_, as the chronicler calls him, "a certain
brigand."  But I am for ever writing about St. Andrews--writing
inaccurately, too, the Scotch critics declare.  "Farewell," we cried,
"dear city of youth and dream," eternally dear and sacred.

Here we first made acquaintance with Mr. Browning, guided to his works by
a parody which a lady wrote in our little magazine.  Mr. Browning was not
a popular poet in 1861.  His admirers were few, a little people, but they
were not then in the later mood of reverence, they did not awfully
question the oracles, as in after years.  They read, they admired, they
applauded, on occasion they mocked, good-humouredly.  The book by which
Mr. Browning was best known was the two green volumes of "Men and Women."
In these, I still think, is the heart of his genius beating most
strenuously and with an immortal vitality.  Perhaps this, for its
compass, is the collection of poetry the most various and rich of modern
English times, almost of any English times.  But just as Mr. Fitzgerald
cared little for what Lord Tennyson wrote after 1842, so I have never
been able to feel quite the same enthusiasm for Mr. Browning's work after
"Men and Women."  He seems to have more influence, though that influence
is vague, on persons who chiefly care for thought, than on those who
chiefly care for poetry.  I have met a lady who had read "The Ring and
the Book" often, the "Lotus Eaters" not once.  Among such students are
Mr. Browning's disciples of the Inner Court: I dwell but in the Court of
the Gentiles.  While we all--all who attempt rhyme--have more or less
consciously imitated the manner of Lord Tennyson, Mr. Swinburne, Mr.
Rossetti, such imitations of Mr. Browning are uncommonly scarce.  He is
lucky enough not to have had the seed of his flower stolen and sown
everywhere till--

   "Once again the people
   Called it but a weed."

The other new poet of these days was Mr. Clough, who has many
undergraduate qualities.  But his peculiar wistful scepticism in religion
had then no influence on such of us as were still happily in the ages of
faith.  Anything like doubt comes less of reading, perhaps, than of the
sudden necessity which, in almost every life, puts belief on her trial,
and cries for an examination of the creeds hitherto held upon authority,
and by dint of use and wont.  In a different way one can hardly care for
Mr. Matthew Arnold, as a boy, till one has come under the influence of
Oxford.  So Mr. Browning was the only poet added to my pantheon at St.
Andrews, though Macaulay then was admitted and appeared to be more the
true model of a prose writer than he seems in the light of later
reflection.  Probably we all have a period of admiring Carlyle almost
exclusively.  College essays, when the essayist cares for his work, are
generally based on one or the other.  Then they recede into the
background.  As for their thought, we cannot for ever remain disciples.
We begin to see how much that looks like thought is really the expression
of temperament, and how individual a thing temperament is, how each of us
must construct his world for himself, or be content to wait for an answer
and a synthesis "in that far-off divine event to which the whole creation
moves."  So, for one, in these high matters, I must be content as a
"masterless man" swearing by no philosopher, unless he be the imperial
Stoic of the hardy heart, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.

Perhaps nothing in education encourages this incredulity about "masters"
of thought like the history of philosophy.  The professor of moral
philosophy, Mr. Ferrier, was a famous metaphysician and scholar.  His
lectures on "The History of Greek Philosophy" were an admirable
introduction to the subject, afterwards pursued, in the original
authorities, at Oxford.  Mr. Ferrier was an exponent of other men's ideas
so fair and persuasive that, in each new school, we thought we had
discovered the secret.  We were physicists with Thales and that
pre-Socratic "company of gallant gentlemen" for whom Sydney Smith
confessed his lack of admiration.  We were now Empedocleans, now
believers in Heraclitus, now in Socrates, now in Plato, now in Aristotle.
In each lecture our professor set up a new master and gently
disintegrated him in the next.  "Amurath to Amurath succeeds," as Mr. T.
H. Green used to say at Oxford.  He himself became an Amurath, a sultan
of thought, even before his apotheosis as the guide of that bewildered
clergyman, Mr. Robert Elsmere.  At Oxford, when one went there, one found
Mr. Green already in the position of a leader of thought, and of young
men.  He was a tutor of Balliol, and lectured on Aristotle, and of him
eager youth said, in the words of Omar Khayyam, "_He knows_! _he knows_!"
What was it that Mr. Green knew?  Where was the secret?  To a mind
already sceptical about masters, it seemed that the secret (apart from
the tutor's noble simplicity and rare elevation of character) was a knack
of translating St. John and Aristotle alike into a terminology which we
then believed to be Hegelian.  Hegel we knew, not in the original German,
but in lectures and in translations.  Reasoning from these inadequate
premises, it seemed to me that Hegel had invented evolution before Mr.
Darwin, that his system showed, so to speak, the spirit at work in
evolution, the something within the wheels.  But this was only a personal
impression made on a mind which knew Darwin, and physical speculations in
general, merely in the vague popular way.  Mr. Green's pupils could
generally write in his own language, more or less, and could "envisage"
things, as we said then, from his point of view.  To do this was
believed, probably without cause, to be useful in examinations.  For one,
I could never take it much more seriously, never believed that "the
Absolute," as the _Oxford Spectator_ said, had really been "got into a
corner."  The Absolute has too often been apparently cornered, too often
has escaped from that situation.  Somewhere in an old notebook I believe
I have a portrait in pencil of Mr. Green as he wrestled at lecture with
Aristotle, with the Notion, with his chair and table.  Perhaps he was the
last of that remarkable series of men, who may have begun with Wycliffe,
among whom Newman's is a famous name, that were successively accepted at
Oxford as knowing something esoteric, as possessing a shrewd guess at the
secret.

      "None the less
   I still came out no wiser than I went."

All of these masters and teachers made their mark, probably won their
hold, in the first place, by dint of character, not of some peculiar
views of theology and philosophy.  Doubtless it was the same with
Socrates, with Buddha.  To be like them, not to believe with them, is the
thing needful.  But the younger we are, the less, perhaps, we see this
clearly, and we persuade ourselves that there is some mystery in these
men's possession, some piece of knowledge, some method of thinking which
will lead us to certainty and to peace.  Alas, their secret is
incommunicable, and there is no more a philosophic than there is a royal
road to the City.

This may seem a digression from Adventures among Books into the Book of
Human Life.  But while much of education is still orally communicated by
lectures and conversations, many thoughts which are to be found in books,
Greek or German, reach us through the hearing.  There are many pupils who
can best be taught in this way; but, for one, if there be aught that is
desirable in a book, I then, as now, preferred, if I could, to go to the
book for it.

Yet it is odd that one remembers so little of one's undergraduate
readings, apart from the constant study of the ancient classics, which
might not be escaped.  Of these the calm wisdom of Aristotle, in moral
thought and in politics, made perhaps the deepest impression.  Probably
politicians are the last people who read Aristotle's "Politics."  The
work is, indeed, apt to disenchant one with political life.  It is
melancholy to see the little Greek states running the regular
round--monarchy, oligarchy, tyranny, democracy in all its degrees, the
"ultimate democracy" of plunder, lawlessness, license of women, children,
and slaves, and then tyranny again, or subjection to some foreign power.
In politics, too, there is no secret of success, of the happy life for
all.  There is no such road to the City, either democratic or royal.  This
is the lesson which Aristotle's "Polities" impresses on us, this and the
impossibility of imposing ideal constitutions on mankind.

"Whate'er is best administered is best."  These are some of the
impressions made at Oxford by the studies of the schools, the more or
less inevitable "curricoolum," as the Scotch gentleman pronounced the
word.  But at Oxford, for most men, the regular work of the schools is
only a small part of the literary education.  People read, in different
degrees, according to their private tastes.  There are always a few men,
at least, who love literary studies for their own sake, regardless of
lectures and of "classes."  In my own time I really believe you could
know nothing which might not "pay" in the schools and prove serviceable
in examinations.  But a good deal depended on being able to use your
knowledge by way of literary illustration.  Perhaps the cleverest of my
own juniors, since very well known in letters, did not use his own
special vein, even when he had the chance, in writing answers to
questions in examinations.  Hence his academic success was much below his
deserts.  For my own part, I remember my tutor saying, "Don't write as if
you were writing for a penny paper."  Alas, it was "a prediction, cruel,
smart."  But, "as yet no sin was dreamed."

At my own college we had to write weekly essays, alternately in English
and Latin.  This might have been good literary training, but I fear the
essays were not taken very seriously.  The chief object was to make the
late learned Dr. Scott bound on his chair by paradoxes.  But nobody ever
succeeded.  He was experienced in trash.  As for what may be called
unacademic literature, there were not many essays in that art.  There
have been very literary generations, as when Corydon and Thyrsis "lived
in Oxford as if it had been a great country house;" so Corydon confessed.
Probably many of the poems by Mr. Matthew Arnold and many of Mr.
Swinburne's early works were undergraduate poems.  A later generation
produced "Love in Idleness," a very pleasing volume.  But the gods had
not made us poetical.  In those days I remember picking up, in the Union
Reading-room, a pretty white quarto, "Atalanta in Calydon," by A. C.
Swinburne.  Only once had I seen Mr. Swinburne's name before, signing a
brief tale in _Once a Week_.  "Atalanta" was a revelation; there was a
new and original poet here, a Balliol man, too.  In my own mind
"Atalanta" remains the best, the most beautiful, the most musical of Mr.
Swinburne's many poems.  He instantly became the easily parodied model of
undergraduate versifiers.

Swinburnian prize poems, even, were attempted, without success.  As yet
we had not seen Mr. Matthew Arnold's verses.  I fell in love with them,
one long vacation, and never fell out of love.  He is not, and cannot be,
the poet of the wide world, but his charm is all the more powerful over
those whom he attracts and subdues.  He is the one Oxford poet of Oxford,
and his "Scholar Gypsy" is our "Lycidas."  At this time he was Professor
of Poetry; but, alas, he lectured just at the hour when wickets were
pitched on Cowley Marsh, and I never was present at his discourses, at
his humorous prophecies of England's fate, which are coming all too true.
So many weary lectures had to be attended, could not be "cut," that we
abstained from lectures of supererogation, so to speak.  For the rest
there was no "literary movement" among contemporary undergraduates.  They
read for the schools, and they rowed and played cricket.  We had no
poets, except the stroke of the Corpus boat, Mr. Bridges, and he
concealed his courtship of the Muse.  Corpus is a small college, but Mr.
Bridges pulled its boat to the proud place of second on the river.  B. N.
C. was the head boat, and even B. N. C. did Corpus bump.  But the triumph
was brief.  B. N. C. made changes in its crew, got a new ship, drank the
foaming grape, and bumped Corpus back.  I think they went head next year,
but not that year.  Thus Mr. Bridges, as Kingsley advises, was doing
noble deeds, not dreaming them, at that moment.

There existed a periodical entirely devoted to verse, but nobody knew
anybody who wrote in it.  A comic journal was started; I remember the
pride with which when a freshman, I received an invitation to join its
councils as an artist.  I was to do the caricatures of all things.  Now,
methought, I shall meet the Oxford wits of whom I have read.  But the
wits were unutterably disappointing, and the whole thing died early and
not lamented.  Only one piece of academic literature obtained and
deserved success.  This was _The Oxford Spectator_, a most humorous
little periodical, in shape and size like Addison's famous journal.  The
authors were Mr. Reginald Copleston, now Bishop of Colombo, Mr. Humphry
Ward, and Mr. Nolan, a great athlete, who died early.  There have been
good periodicals since; many amusing things occur in the _Echoes from the
Oxford Magazine_, but the _Spectator_ was the flower of academic
journals.  "When I look back to my own experience," says the _Spectator_,
"I find one scene, of all Oxford, most deeply engraved upon 'the mindful
tablets of my soul.'  And yet not a scene, but a fairy compound of smell
and sound, and sight and thought.  The wonderful scent of the meadow air
just above Iffley, on a hot May evening, and the gay colours of twenty
boats along the shore, the poles all stretched out from the bank to set
the boats clear, and the sonorous cries of 'ten seconds more,' all down
from the green barge to the lasher.  And yet that unrivalled moment is
only typical of all the term; the various elements of beauty and pleasure
are concentrated there."

Unfortunately, life at Oxford is not all beauty and pleasure.  Things go
wrong somehow.  Life drops her happy mask.  But this has nothing to do
with books.

About books, however, I have not many more confessions that I care to
make.  A man's old self is so far away that he can speak about it and its
adventures almost as if he were speaking about another who is dead.  After
taking one's degree, and beginning to write a little for publication, the
topic has a tendency to become much more personal.  My last undergraduate
literary discoveries were of France and the Renaissance.  Accidentally
finding out that I could read French, I naturally betook myself to
Balzac.  If you read him straight on, without a dictionary, you begin to
learn a good many words.  The literature of France has been much more
popular in England lately, but thirty years agone it was somewhat
neglected.  There does seem to be something in French poetry which fails
to please "the German paste in our composition."  Mr. Matthew Arnold, a
disciple of Sainte-Beuve, never could appreciate French poetry.  A poet-
critic has even remarked that the French language is nearly incapable of
poetry!  We cannot argue in such matters, where all depends on the taste
and the ear.

Our ancestors, like the author of the "Faery Queen," translated and
admired Du Bellay and Ronsard; to some critics of our own time this taste
seems a modish affectation.  For one, I have ever found an original charm
in the lyrics of the Pleiad, and have taken great delight in Hugo's
amazing variety of music, in the romance of Alfred de Musset, in the
beautiful cameos of Gautier.  What is poetical, if not the "Song of
Roland," the only true national epic since Homer?  What is frank, natural
verse, if not that of the old _Pastourelles_?  Where is there _naivete_
of narrative and unconscious charm, if not in _Aucassin et Nicolette_?  In
the long normally developed literature of France, so variously rich, we
find the nearest analogy to the literature of Greece, though that of
England contains greater masterpieces, and her verse falls more winningly
on the ear.  France has no Shakespeare and no Milton; we have no Moliere
and no "Song of Roland."  One star differs from another in glory, but it
is a fortunate moment when this planet of France swims into our ken.  Many
of our generation saw it first through Mr. Swinburne's telescope, heard
of it in his criticisms, and are grateful to that watcher of the skies,
even if we do not share all his transports.  There then arose at Oxford,
out of old French, and old oak, and old china, a "school" or "movement."
It was aesthetic, and an early purchaser of Mr. William Morris's wall
papers.  It existed ten or twelve years before the public "caught on," as
they say, to these delights.  But, except one or two of the masters, the
school were only playing at aesthetics, and laughing at their own
performances.  There was more fun than fashion in the cult, which was
later revived, developed, and gossiped about more than enough.

To a writer now dead, and then first met, I am specially bound in
gratitude--the late Mr. J. F. M'Lennan.  Mr. M'Lennan had the most acute
and ingenious of minds which I have encountered.  His writings on early
marriage and early religion were revelations which led on to others.  The
topic of folklore, and the development of custom and myths, is not
generally attractive, to be sure.  Only a few people seem interested in
that spectacle, so full of surprises--the development of all human
institutions, from fairy tales to democracy.  In beholding it we learn
how we owe all things, humanly speaking, to the people and to genius.  The
natural people, the folk, has supplied us, in its unconscious way, with
the stuff of all our poetry, law, ritual: and genius has selected from
the mass, has turned customs into codes, nursery tales into romance, myth
into science, ballad into epic, magic mummery into gorgeous ritual.  The
world has been educated, but not as man would have trained and taught it.
"He led us by a way we knew not," led, and is leading us, we know not
whither; we follow in fear.

The student of this lore can look back and see the long trodden way
behind him, the winding tracks through marsh and forest and over burning
sands.  He sees the caves, the camps, the villages, the towns where the
race has tarried, for shorter times or longer, strange places many of
them, and strangely haunted, desolate dwellings and inhospitable.  But
the scarce visible tracks converge at last on the beaten ways, the ways
to that city whither mankind is wandering, and which it may never win.  We
have a foreboding of a purpose which we know not, a sense as of will,
working, as we would not have worked, to a hidden end.

This is the lesson, I think, of what we call folklore or anthropology,
which to many seems trivial, to many seems dull.  It may become the most
attractive and serious of the sciences; certainly it is rich in strange
curiosities, like those mystic stones which were fingered and arrayed by
the pupils in that allegory of Novalis.  I am not likely to regret the
accident which brought me up on fairy tales, and the inquisitiveness
which led me to examine the other fragments of antiquity.  But the poetry
and the significance of them are apt to be hidden by the enormous crowd
of details.  Only late we find the true meaning of what seems like a mass
of fantastic, savage eccentricities.  I very well remember the moment
when it occurred to me, soon after taking my degree, that the usual ideas
about some of these matters were the reverse of the truth, that the
common theory had to be inverted.  The notion was "in the air," it had
already flashed on Mannhardt, probably, but, like the White Knight in
"Alice," I claimed it for "my own invention."

These reminiscences and reflections have now been produced as far as
1872, or thereabouts, and it is not my intention to pursue them further,
nor to speak of any living contemporaries who have not won their way to
the classical.  In writing of friends and teachers at Oxford, I have not
ventured to express gratitude to those who still live, still teach, still
are the wisest and kindest friends of the hurrying generations.  It is a
silence not of thanklessness, but of respect and devotion.  About
others--contemporaries, or juniors by many years--who have instructed,
consoled, strengthened, and amused us, we must also be silent.




CHAPTER II: RECOLLECTIONS OF ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON


   TUSITALA

   We spoke of a rest in a Fairy hill of the north, but he
      Far from the firths of the east and the racing tides of the west
   Sleeps in the sight and the sound of the infinite southern sea,
      Weary and well content, in his grave on the Vaea crest.

   Tusitala, the lover of children, the teller of tales,
      Giver of counsel and dreams, a wonder, a world's delight,
   Looks o'er the labour of men in the plain and the hill, and the sails
      Pass and repass on the sea that he loved, in the day and the night.

   Winds of the west and the east in the rainy season blow,
      Heavy with perfume, and all his fragrant woods are wet,
   Winds of the east and the west as they wander to and fro,
      Bear him the love of the lands he loved, and the long regret.

   Once we were kindest, he said, when leagues of the limitless sea,
      Flowed between us, but now that no range of the refluent tides
   Sunders us each from each, yet nearer we seem to be,
      When only the unbridged stream of the River of Death divides.

Before attempting to give any "reminiscences" of Mr. Stevenson, it is
right to observe that reminiscences of him can best be found in his own
works.  In his essay on "Child's Play," and in his "Child's Garden of
Verse," he gave to the world his vivid recollections of his imaginative
infancy.  In other essays he spoke of his boyhood, his health, his
dreams, his methods of work and study.  "The Silverado Squatters" reveals
part of his experience in America.  The Parisian scenes in "The Wrecker"
are inspired by his sojourn in French Bohemia; his journeys are recorded
in "Travels with a Donkey" and "An Inland Voyage"; while his South Sea
sketches, which appeared in periodicals, deal with his Oceanic
adventures.  He was the most autobiographical of authors, with an egoism
nearly as complete, and to us as delightful, as the egoism of Montaigne.
Thus, the proper sources of information about the author of "Kidnapped"
are in his delightful books.

"John's own John," as Dr. Holmes says, may be very unlike his neighbour's
John; but in the case of Mr. Stevenson, his Louis was very similar to my
Louis; I mean that, as he presents his personality to the world in his
writings, even so did that personality appear to me in our intercourse.
The man I knew was always a boy.

   "Sing me a song of the lad that is gone,"

he wrote about Prince Charlie, but in his own case the lad was never
"gone."  Like Keats and Shelley, he was, and he looked, of the immortally
young.  He and I were at school together, but I was an elderly boy of
seventeen, when he was lost in the crowd of "gytes," as the members of
the lowest form are called.  Like all Scotch people, we had a vague
family connection; a great-uncle of his, I fancy, married an aunt of my
own, called for her beauty, "The Flower of Ettrick."  So we had both
heard; but these things were before our day.  A lady of my kindred
remembers carrying Stevenson about when he was "a rather peevish baby,"
and I have seen a beautiful photograph of him, like one of Raffael's
children, taken when his years were three or four.  But I never had heard
of his existence till, in 1873, I think, I was at Mentone, in the
interests of my health.  Here I met Mr. Sidney Colvin, now of the British
Museum, and, with Mr. Colvin, Stevenson.  He looked as, in my eyes, he
always did look, more like a lass than a lad, with a rather long, smooth
oval face, brown hair worn at greater length than is common, large lucid
eyes, but whether blue or brown I cannot remember, if brown, certainly
light brown.  On appealing to the authority of a lady, I learn that brown
_was_ the hue.  His colour was a trifle hectic, as is not unusual at
Mentone, but he seemed, under his big blue cloak, to be of slender, yet
agile frame.  He was like nobody else whom I ever met.  There was a sort
of uncommon celerity in changing expression, in thought and speech.  His
cloak and Tyrolese hat (he would admit the innocent impeachment) were
decidedly dear to him.  On the frontier of Italy, why should he not do as
the Italians do?  It would have been well for me if I could have imitated
the wearing of the cloak!

I shall not deny that my first impression was not wholly favourable.
"Here," I thought, "is one of your aesthetic young men, though a very
clever one."  What the talk was about, I do not remember; probably of
books.  Mr. Stevenson afterwards told me that I had spoken of Monsieur
Paul de St. Victor, as a fine writer, but added that "he was not a
British sportsman."  Mr. Stevenson himself, to my surprise, was unable to
walk beyond a very short distance, and, as it soon appeared, he thought
his thread of life was nearly spun.  He had just written his essay,
"Ordered South," the first of his published works, for his "Pentland
Rising" pamphlet was unknown, a boy's performance.  On reading "Ordered
South," I saw, at once, that here was a new writer, a writer indeed; one
who could do what none of us, _nous autres_, could rival, or approach.  I
was instantly "sealed of the Tribe of Louis," an admirer, a devotee, a
fanatic, if you please.  At least my taste has never altered.  From this
essay it is plain enough that the author (as is so common in youth, but
with better reason than many have) thought himself doomed.  Most of us
have gone through that, the Millevoye phase, but who else has shown such
a wise and gay acceptance of the apparently inevitable?  We parted; I
remember little of our converse, except a shrewd and hearty piece of
encouragement given me by my junior, who already knew so much more of
life than his senior will ever do.  For he ran forth to embrace life like
a lover: _his_ motto was never Lucy Ashton's--

   "Vacant heart, and hand, and eye,
   Easy live and quiet die."

Mr. Stevenson came presently to visit me at Oxford.  I make no hand of
reminiscences; I remember nothing about what we did or said, with one
exception, which is not going to be published.  I heard of him, writing
essays in the _Portfolio_ and the _Cornhill_, those delightful views of
life at twenty-five, so brave, so real, so vivid, so wise, so exquisite,
which all should know.  How we looked for "R. L. S." at the end of an
article, and how devout was our belief, how happy our pride, in the young
one!

About 1878, I think (I was now a slave of the quill myself), I received a
brief note from Mr. Stevenson, introducing to me the person whom, in his
essay on his old college magazine, he called "Glasgow Brown."  What his
real name was, whence he came, whence the money came, I never knew.  G.
B. was going to start a weekly Tory paper.  Would I contribute?  G. B.
came to see me.  Mr. Stevenson has described him, _not_ as I would have
described him: like Mr. Bill Sikes's dog, I have the Christian
peculiarity of not liking dogs "as are not of my breed."  G. B.'s paper,
_London_, was to start next week.  He had no writer of political leading
articles.  Would I do a "leader"?  But I was _not_ in favour of Lord
Lytton's Afghan policy.  How could I do a Tory leader?  Well, I did a
neutral-tinted thing, with citations from Aristophanes!  I found
presently some other scribes for G. B.

What a paper that was!  I have heard that G. B. paid in handfuls of gold,
in handfuls of bank-notes.  Nobody ever read _London_, or advertised in
it, or heard of it.  It was full of the most wonderfully clever verses in
old French forms.  They were (it afterwards appeared) by Mr. W. E.
Henley.  Mr. Stevenson himself astonished and delighted the public of
_London_ (that is, the contributors) by his "New Arabian Nights."  Nobody
knew about them but ourselves, a fortunate few.  Poor G. B. died and Mr.
Henley became the editor.  I may not name the contributors, the flower of
the young lions, elderly lions now, there is a new race.  But one lion, a
distinguished and learned lion, said already that fiction, not essay, was
Mr. Stevenson's field.  Well, both fields were his, and I cannot say
whether I would be more sorry to lose _Virginibus Puerisque_ and "Studies
of Men and Books," or "Treasure Island" and "Catriona."  With the decease
of G. B., Pactolus dried up in its mysterious sources, _London_ struggled
and disappeared.

Mr. Stevenson was in town, now and again, at the old Saville Club, in
Saville Row, which had the tiniest and blackest of smoking-rooms.  Here,
or somewhere, he spoke to me of an idea of a tale, a Man who was Two Men.
I said "'William Wilson' by Edgar Poe," and declared that it would never
do.  But his "Brownies," in a vision of the night, showed him a central
scene, and he wrote "Jekyll and Hyde."  My "friend of these days and of
all days," Mr. Charles Longman, sent me the manuscript.  In a very
commonplace London drawing-room, at 10.30 P.M., I began to read it.
Arriving at the place where Utterson the lawyer, and the butler wait
outside the Doctor's room, I threw down the manuscript and fled in a
hurry.  I had no taste for solitude any more.  The story won its great
success, partly by dint of the moral (whatever that may be), more by its
terrible, lucid, visionary power.  I remember Mr. Stevenson telling me,
at this time, that he was doing some "regular crawlers," for this purist
had a boyish habit of slang, and I _think_ it was he who called Julius
Caesar "the howlingest cheese who ever lived."  One of the "crawlers" was
"Thrawn Janet"; after "Wandering Willie's Tale" (but certainly _after_
it), to my taste, it seems the most wonderful story of the "supernatural"
in our language.

Mr. Stevenson had an infinite pleasure in Boisgobey, Montepin, and, of
course, Gaboriau.  There was nothing of the "cultured person" about him.
Concerning a novel dear to culture, he said that he would die by my side,
in the last ditch, proclaiming it the worst fiction in the world.  I make
haste to add that I have only known two men of letters as free as Mr.
Stevenson, not only from literary jealousy, but from the writer's
natural, if exaggerated, distaste for work which, though in his own line,
is very different in aim and method from his own.  I do not remember
another case in which he dispraised any book.  I do remember his
observations on a novel then and now very popular, but not to his taste,
nor, indeed, by any means, impeccable, though stirring; his censure and
praise were both just.  From his occasional fine efforts, the author of
this romance, he said, should have cleared away acres of brushwood, of
ineffectual matter.  It was so, no doubt, as the writer spoken of would
be ready to acknowledge.  But he was an improviser of genius, and Mr.
Stevenson was a conscious artist.

Of course we did by no means always agree in literary estimates; no two
people do.  But when certain works--in his line in one way--were stupidly
set up as rivals of his, the person who was most irritated was not he,
but his equally magnanimous contemporary.  There was no thought of
rivalry or competition in either mind.  The younger romancists who arose
after Mr. Stevenson went to Samoa were his friends by correspondence;
from them, who never saw his face, I hear of his sympathy and
encouragement.  Every writer knows the special temptations of his tribe:
they were temptations not even felt, I do believe, by Mr. Stevenson.  His
heart was far too high, his nature was in every way as generous as his
hand was open.  It is in thinking of these things that one feels afresh
the greatness of the world's loss; for "a good heart is much more than
style," writes one who knew him only by way of letters.

It is a trivial reminiscence that we once plotted a Boisgobesque story
together.  There was a prisoner in a Muscovite dungeon.

"We'll extract information from him," I said.

"How?"

"With corkscrews."

But the mere suggestion of such a process was terribly distasteful to
him; not that I really meant to go to these extreme lengths.  We never,
of course, could really have worked together; and, his maladies
increasing, he became more and more a wanderer, living at Bournemouth, at
Davos, in the Grisons, finally, as all know, in Samoa.  Thus, though we
corresponded, not unfrequently, I never was of the inner circle of his
friends.  Among men there were school or college companions, or
companions of Paris or Fontainebleau, cousins, like Mr. R. A. M.
Stevenson, or a stray senior, like Mr. Sidney Colvin.  From some of them,
or from Mr. Stevenson himself, I have heard tales of "the wild Prince and
Poins."  That he and a friend travelled utterly without baggage, buying a
shirt where a shirt was needed, is a fact, and the incident is used in
"The Wrecker."  Legend says that once he and a friend _did_ possess a
bag, and also, nobody ever knew why, a large bottle of scent.  But there
was no room for the bottle in the bag, so Mr. Stevenson spilled the whole
contents over the other man's head, taking him unawares, that nothing
might be wasted.  I think the tale of the endless staircase, in "The
Wrecker," is founded on fact, so are the stories of the _atelier_, which
I have heard Mr. Stevenson narrate at the Oxford and Cambridge Club.  For
a nocturnal adventure, in the manner of the "New Arabian Nights," a
learned critic already spoken of must be consulted.  It is not my story.
In Paris, at a cafe, I remember that Mr. Stevenson heard a Frenchman say
the English were cowards.  He got up and slapped the man's face.

"_Monsieur, vous m'avez frappe_!" said the Gaul.

"_A ce qu'il parait_," said the Scot, and there it ended.  He also told
me that years ago he was present at a play, I forget what play, in Paris,
where the moral hero exposes a woman "with a history."  He got up and
went out, saying to himself:

"What a play! what a people!"

"_Ah, Monsieur, vous etes bien jeune_!" said an old French gentleman.

Like a right Scot, Mr. Stevenson was fond of "our auld ally of France,"
to whom our country and our exiled kings owed so much.

I rather vaguely remember another anecdote.  He missed his train from
Edinburgh to London, and his sole portable property was a return ticket,
a meerschaum pipe, and a volume of Mr. Swinburne's poems.  The last he
found unmarketable; the pipe, I think, he made merchandise of, but
somehow his provender for the day's journey consisted in one bath bun,
which he could not finish.

These trivial tales illustrate a period in his life and adventures which
I only know by rumour.  Our own acquaintance was, to a great degree,
literary and bookish.  Perhaps it began "with a slight aversion," but it
seemed, like madeira, to be ripened and improved by his long sea voyage;
and the news of his death taught me, at least, the true nature of the
affection which he was destined to win.  Indeed, our acquaintance was
like the friendship of a wild singing bird and of a punctual,
domesticated barn-door fowl, laying its daily "article" for the breakfast-
table of the citizens.  He often wrote to me from Samoa, sometimes with
news of native manners and folklore.  He sent me a devil-box, the "luck"
of some strange island, which he bought at a great price.  After parting
with its "luck," or fetish (a shell in a curious wooden box), the island
was unfortunate, and was ravaged by measles.

I occasionally sent out books needed for Mr. Stevenson's studies, of
which more will be said.  But I must make it plain that, in the body, we
met but rarely.  His really intimate friends were Mr. Colvin and Mr.
Baxter (who managed the practical side of his literary business between
them); Mr. Henley (in partnership with whom he wrote several plays); his
cousin, Mr. R. A. M. Stevenson; and, among other _literati_, Mr. Gosse,
Mr. Austin Dobson, Mr. Saintsbury, Mr Walter Pollock, knew him well.  The
best portrait of Mr. Stevenson that I know is by Sir. W. B. Richmond,
R.A., and is in that gentleman's collection of contemporaries, with the
effigies of Mr. Holman Hunt, Mr. William Morris, Mr. Browning, and
others.  It is unfinished, owing to an illness which stopped the
sittings, and does not show the subject at his best, physically speaking.
There is also a brilliant, slight sketch, almost a caricature, by Mr.
Sargent.  It represents Mr. Stevenson walking about the room in
conversation.

The people I have named, or some of them, knew Mr. Stevenson more
intimately than I can boast of doing.  Unlike each other, opposites in a
dozen ways, we always were united by the love of letters, and of
Scotland, our dear country.  He was a patriot, yet he spoke his mind
quite freely about Burns, about that apparent want of heart in the poet's
amours, which our countrymen do not care to hear mentioned.  Well,
perhaps, for some reasons, it had to be mentioned once, and so no more of
it.

Mr. Stevenson possessed, more than any man I ever met, the power of
making other men fall in love with him.  I mean that he excited a
passionate admiration and affection, so much so that I verily believe
some men were jealous of other men's place in his liking.  I once met a
stranger who, having become acquainted with him, spoke of him with a
touching fondness and pride, his fancy reposing, as it seemed, in a fond
contemplation of so much genius and charm.  What was so taking in him?
and how is one to analyse that dazzling surface of pleasantry, that
changeful shining humour, wit, wisdom, recklessness; beneath which beat
the most kind and tolerant of hearts?

People were fond of him, and people were proud of him: his achievements,
as it were, sensibly raised their pleasure in the world, and, to them,
became parts of themselves.  They warmed their hands at that centre of
light and heat.  It is not every success which has these beneficent
results.  We see the successful sneered at, decried, insulted, even when
success is deserved.  Very little of all this, hardly aught of all this,
I think, came in Mr. Stevenson's way.  After the beginning (when the
praises of his earliest admirers were irritating to dull scribes) he
found the critics fairly kind, I believe, and often enthusiastic.  He was
so much his own severest critic that he probably paid little heed to
professional reviewers.  In addition to his "Rathillet," and other MSS.
which he destroyed, he once, in the Highlands, long ago, lost a
portmanteau with a batch of his writings.  Alas, that he should have lost
or burned anything!  "King's chaff," says our country proverb, "is better
than other folk's corn."

I have remembered very little, or very little that I can write, and about
our last meeting, when he was so near death, in appearance, and so full
of courage--how can I speak?  His courage was a strong rock, not to be
taken or subdued.  When unable to utter a single word, his pencilled
remarks to his attendants were pithy and extremely characteristic.  This
courage and spiritual vitality made one hope that he would, if he desired
it, live as long as Voltaire, that reed among oaks.  There were of
course, in so rare a combination of characteristics, some which were not
equally to the liking of all.  He was highly original in costume, but, as
his photographs are familiar, the point does not need elucidation.  Life
was a drama to him, and he delighted, like his own British admirals, to
do things with a certain air.  He observed himself, I used to think, as
he observed others, and "saw himself" in every part he played.  There was
nothing of the _cabotin_ in this self-consciousness; it was the
unextinguished childish passion for "playing at things" which remained
with him.  I have a theory that all children possess genius, and that it
dies out in the generality of mortals, abiding only with people whose
genius the world is forced to recognise.  Mr. Stevenson illustrates, and
perhaps partly suggested, this private philosophy of mine.

I have said very little; I have no skill in reminiscences, no art to
bring the living aspect of the man before those who never knew him.  I
faintly seem to see the eager face, the light nervous figure, the fingers
busy with rolling cigarettes; Mr. Stevenson talking, listening, often
rising from his seat, standing, walking to and fro, always full of vivid
intelligence, wearing a mysterious smile.  I remember one pleasant dark
afternoon, when he told me many tales of strange adventures, narratives
which he had heard about a murderous lonely inn, somewhere in the States.
He was as good to hear as to read.  I do not recollect much of that
delight in discussion, in controversy, which he shows in his essay on
conversation, where he describes, I believe, Mr. Henley as "Burley," and
Mr. Symonds as "Opalstein."  He had great pleasure in the talk of the
late Professor Fleeming Jenkin, which was both various and copious.  But
in these _noctes coenaeque deum_ I was never a partaker.  In many topics,
such as angling, golf, cricket, whereon I am willingly diffuse, Mr.
Stevenson took no interest.  He was very fond of boating and sailing in
every kind; he hazarded his health by long expeditions among the fairy
isles of ocean, but he "was not a British sportsman," though for his
measure of strength a good pedestrian, a friend of the open air, and of
all who live and toil therein.

As to his literary likings, they appear in his own confessions.  He
revelled in Dickens, but, about Thackeray--well, I would rather have
talked to somebody else!  To my amazement, he was of those (I think) who
find Thackeray "cynical."  "He takes you into a garden, and then pelts
you with"--horrid things!  Mr. Stevenson, on the other hand, had a free
admiration of Mr. George Meredith.  He did not so easily forgive the
_longueus_ and lazinesses of Scott, as a Scot should do.  He read French
much; Greek only in translations.

Literature was, of course, his first love, but he was actually an
advocate at the Scottish Bar, and, as such, had his name on a brazen door-
plate.  Once he was a competitor for a Chair of Modern History in
Edinburgh University; he knew the romantic side of Scottish history very
well.  In his novel, "Catriona," the character of James Mohr Macgregor is
wonderfully divined.  Once I read some unpublished letters of Catriona's
unworthy father, written when he was selling himself as a spy (and lying
as he spied) to the Hanoverian usurper.  Mr. Stevenson might have written
these letters for James Mohr; they might be extracts from "Catriona."

In turning over old Jacobite pamphlets, I found a forgotten romance of
Prince Charles's hidden years, and longed that Mr. Stevenson should
retell it.  There was a treasure, an authentic treasure; there were real
spies, a real assassin; a real, or reported, rescue of a lovely girl from
a fire at Strasbourg, by the Prince.  The tale was to begin _sur le pont
d'Avignon_: a young Scotch exile watching the Rhone, thinking how much of
it he could cover with a salmon fly, thinking of the Tay or Beauly.  To
him enter another shady tramping exile, Blairthwaite, a murderer.  And so
it was to run on, as the author's fancy might lead him, with Alan Breck
and the Master for characters.  At last, in unpublished MSS. I found an
actual Master of Ballantrae, a Highland chief--noble, majestically
handsome--and a paid spy of England!  All these papers I sent out to
Samoa, too late.  The novel was to have been dedicated to me, and that
chance of immortality is gone, with so much else.

Mr. Stevenson's last letters to myself were full of his concern for a
common friend of ours, who was very ill.  Depressed himself, Mr.
Stevenson wrote to this gentleman--why should I not mention Mr. James
Payn?--with consoling gaiety.  I attributed his depression to any cause
but his own health, of which he rarely spoke.  He lamented the
"ill-staged fifth act of life"; he, at least, had no long hopeless years
of diminished force to bear.

I have known no man in whom the pre-eminently manly virtues of kindness,
courage, sympathy, generosity, helpfulness, were more beautifully
conspicuous than in Mr. Stevenson, no man so much loved--it is not too
strong a word--by so many and such various people.  He was as unique in
character as in literary genius.




CHAPTER III: RAB'S FRIEND


To say what ought to be said concerning Dr. John Brown, a man should have
known him well and long, and should remember much of that old generation
of Scotchmen to whom the author of "Rab and his Friends" belonged.  But
that generation has departed.  One by one these wits and scholars of the
North, these _epigoni_ who were not, indeed, of the heroes, but who had
seen and remembered Scott and Wilson, have passed away.  Aytoun and
Carlyle and Dr. Burton, and last, Dr. Brown, are gone.  Sir Theodore
Martin alone is left.  In her memoir of Dr. Burton--the historian of
Scotland, and author of "The Book-hunter"--Mrs. Burton remarks that, in
her husband's later days, only Dr. John Brown and Professor Blackie
remained of all her husband's ancient friends and coevals, of all who
remembered Lockhart, and Hogg, and their times.  But many are left who
knew Dr. Brown far better and more intimately than the author of this
notice.  I can hardly say when I first became acquainted with him,
probably it was in my childhood.  Ever since I was a boy, certainly, I
used to see him at intervals, especially in the Christmas vacations.  But
he seldom moved from Edinburgh, except in summer, which he frequently
passed in the country house of certain friends of his, whose affection
made much of the happiness of his latest years, and whose unfailing
kindness attended him in his dying hours.  Living always in Scotland, Dr.
Brown was seen but rarely by his friends who resided in England.  Thus,
though Dr. Brown's sweetness of disposition and charm of manner, his
humour, and his unfailing sympathy and encouragement, made one feel
toward him as to a familiar friend, yet, of his actual life I saw but
little, and have few reminiscences to contribute.  One can only speak of
that singular geniality of his, that temper of goodness and natural
tolerance and affection, which, as Scotsmen best know, is not universal
among the Scots.  Our race does not need to pray, like the mechanic in
the story, that Providence will give us "a good conceit of ourselves."
But we must acknowledge that the Scotch temper is critical if not
captious, argumentative, inclined to look at the seamy side of men and of
their performances, and to dwell on imperfections rather than on merits
and virtues.  An example of these blemishes of the Scotch disposition,
carried to an extreme degree in the nature of a man of genius, is offered
to the world in the writings and "Reminiscences" of Mr. Carlyle.

Now, Dr. John Brown was at the opposite pole of feeling.  He had no
mawkish toleration of things and people intolerable, but he preferred not
to turn his mind that way.  His thoughts were with the good, the wise,
the modest, the learned, the brave of times past, and he was eager to
catch a reflection of their qualities in the characters of the living, of
all with whom he came into contact.  He was, for example, almost
optimistic in his estimate of the work of young people in art or
literature.  From everything that was beautiful or good, from a summer
day by the Tweed, or from the eyes of a child, or from the humorous
saying of a friend, or from treasured memories of old Scotch worthies,
from recollections of his own childhood, from experience of the stoical
heroism of the poor, he seemed to extract matter for pleasant thoughts of
men and the world, and nourishment for his own great and gentle nature.  I
have never known any man to whom other men seemed so dear--men dead, and
men living.  He gave his genius to knowing them, and to making them
better known, and his unselfishness thus became not only a great personal
virtue, but a great literary charm.  When you met him, he had some "good
story" or some story of goodness to tell--for both came alike to him, and
his humour was as unfailing as his kindness.  There was in his face a
singular charm, blended, as it were, of the expressions of mirth and of
patience.  Being most sensitive to pain, as well as to pleasure, he was
an exception to that rule of Rochefoucauld's--"_nous avons tous assez de
force pour supporter les maux d'autrui_." {2}

He did not bear easily the misfortunes of others, and the evils of his
own lot were heavy enough.  They saddened him; but neither illness, nor
his poignant anxiety for others, could sour a nature so unselfish.  He
appeared not to have lost that anodyne and consolation of religious hope,
which had been the strength of his forefathers, and was his best
inheritance from a remarkable race of Scotsmen.  Wherever he came, he was
welcome; people felt glad when they had encountered him in the
streets--the streets of Edinburgh, where almost every one knows every one
by sight--and he was at least as joyously received by the children and
the dogs as by the grown-up people of every family.  A friend has kindly
shown me a letter in which it is told how Dr. Brown's love of dogs, his
interest in a half-blind old Dandy which was attached to him, was evinced
in the very last hours of his life.  But enough has been said, in general
terms, about the character of "the beloved physician," as Dr. Brown was
called in Edinburgh, and a brief account may be given, in some detail, of
his life and ways.

Dr. John Brown was born in Biggar, one of the gray, slaty-looking little
towns in the pastoral moorlands of southern Scotland.  These towns have
no great beauty that they should be admired by strangers, but the
natives, as Scott said to Washington Irving, are attached to their "gray
hills," and to the Tweed, so beautiful where man's greed does not pollute
it, that the Border people are all in love with it, as Tyro, in Homer,
loved the divine Enipeus.  We hold it "far the fairest of the floods that
run upon the earth."  How dear the border scenery was to Dr. John Brown,
and how well he knew and could express its legendary magic, its charm
woven of countless ancient spells, the music of old ballads, the sorcery
of old stories, may be understood by readers of his essay on "Minchmoor."
{3}  The father of Dr. Brown was the third in a lineage of ministers of
the sect called Seceders.  To explain who the Seceders were, it would be
necessary to explore the sinking morasses of Scotch ecclesiastical
history.  The minister was proud of being not only a "Seceder" but a
"Burgher."  He inherited, to be brief, the traditions of a most
spiritually-minded and most spirited set of men, too much bent, it may
appear to us, on establishing delicate distinctions of opinions, but
certainly most true to themselves and to their own ideals of liberty and
of faith.  Dr. Brown's great-grandfather had been a shepherd boy, who
taught himself Greek that he might read the New Testament; who walked
twenty-four miles--leaving his folded sheep in the night--to buy the
precious volume in St. Andrews, and who, finally, became a teacher of
much repute among his own people.  Of Dr. Brown's father, he himself
wrote a most touching and beautiful account in his "Letter to John
Cairns, D.D."  This essay contains, perhaps, the very finest passages
that the author ever penned.  His sayings about his own childhood remind
one of the manner of Lamb, without that curious fantastic touch which is
of the essence of Lamb's style.  The following lines, for example, are a
revelation of childish psychology, and probably may be applied, with
almost as much truth, to the childhood of our race:--

   "Children are long of seeing, or at least of looking at what is above
   them; they like the ground, and its flowers and stones, its 'red
   sodgers' and lady-birds, and all its queer things; _their world is
   about three feet high_, and they are more often stooping than gazing
   up.  I know I was past ten before I saw, or cared to see, the ceilings
   of the rooms in the manse at Biggar."

I have often thought that the earliest fathers of our race, child-like in
so many ways, were child-like in this, and worshipped, not the phenomena
of the heavens, but objects more on a level with their eyes--the "queer
things" of their low-lying world.  In this essay on his father, Dr. Brown
has written lines about a child's first knowledge of death, which seem as
noteworthy as Steele's famous passage about his father's death and his
own half-conscious grief and anger.  Dr. Brown describes a Scottish
funeral--the funeral of his own mother--as he saw it with the eyes of a
boy of five years old, while his younger brother, a baby of a few months--

   "leaped up and crowed with joy at the strange sight--the crowding
   horsemen, the coaches, and the nodding plumes of the hearse . . .
   Then, to my surprise and alarm, the coffin, resting on its bearers,
   was placed over the dark hole, and I watched with curious eye the
   unrolling of those neat black bunches of cords, which I have often
   enough seen since.  My father took the one at the head, and also
   another much smaller, springing from the same point as his, which he
   had caused to be placed there, and unrolling it, put it into my hand.
   I twisted it firmly round my fingers, and awaited the result; the
   burial men with their real ropes lowered the coffin, and when it
   rested at the bottom it was too far down for me to see it.  The grave
   was made very deep, as he used afterwards to tell us, that it might
   hold us all.  My father first and abruptly let his cord drop, followed
   by the rest.  This was too much.  I now saw what was meant, and held
   on and fixed my fist and feet, and I believe my father had some
   difficulty in forcing open my small fingers; he let the little black
   cord drop, and I remember, in my misery and anger, seeing its open end
   disappearing in the gloom." {4}

The man who wrote this, and many another passage as true and tender,
might surely have been famous in fiction, if he had turned his powers
that way.  He had imagination, humour, pathos; he was always studying and
observing life; his last volume, especially, is like a collection of
fragments that might have gone toward making a work, in some ways not
inferior to the romances of Scott.  When the third volume of Essays was
published, in the spring of his last year, a reviewer, who apparently had
no personal knowledge of Dr. Brown, asked why he did not write a novel.
He was by that time over seventy years of age, and, though none guessed
it, within a few weeks of his death.  What he might have done, had he
given himself to literature only, it is impossible to guess.  But he
caused so much happiness, and did so much good, in that gentle profession
of healing which he chose, and which brought him near to many who needed
consolation more than physic, that we need not forget his deliberate
choice.  Literature had only his _horae subsecivae_, as he said:
_Subseciva quaedam tempora quae ego perire non patior_, as Cicero writes,
"shreds and waste ends of time, which I suffer not to be lost."

The kind of life which Dr. Brown's father and his people lived at Biggar,
the austere life of work, and of thought intensely bent on the real aim
of existence, on God, on the destiny of the soul, is perhaps rare now,
even in rural Scotland.  We are less obedient than of old to the motto of
that ring found on Magus Moor, where Archbishop Shairp was murdered,
_Remember upon Dethe_.  If any reader has not yet made the acquaintance
of Dr. Brown's works, one might counsel him to begin with the "Letter to
John Cairns, D.D.," the fragment of biography and autobiography, the
description of the fountainheads from which the genius of the author
flowed.  In his early boyhood, John Brown was educated by his father, a
man who, from his son's affectionate description, seems to have confined
a fiery and romantic genius within the channels of Seceder and Burgher
theology.  When the father received a call to the "Rose Street Secession
Church," in Edinburgh, the son became a pupil of that ancient Scottish
seminary, the High School--the school where Scott was taught not much
Latin and no Greek worth mentioning.  Scott was still alive and strong in
those days, and Dr. Brown describes how he and his school companions
would take off their hats to the Shirra as he passed in the streets.

"Though lame, he was nimble, and all rough and alive with power; had you
met him anywhere else, you would say he was a Liddesdale store farmer,
come of gentle blood--'a stout, blunt carle,' as he says of himself, with
the swing and stride and the eye of a man of the hills--a large, sunny,
out-of-door air all about him.  On his broad and stooping shoulders was
set that head which, with Shakespeare's and Bonaparte's, is the best
known in all the world."  Scott was then living in 39 Castle Street.  I
do not know whether the many pilgrims, whom one meets moving constantly
in the direction of Melrose and Abbotsford, have thought of making
pilgrimage to Castle Street, and to the grave, there, of Scott's "dear
old friend,"--his dog Camp.  Of Dr. Brown's schoolboy days, one knows
little--days when "Bob Ainslie and I were coming up Infirmary Street from
the High School, our heads together, and our arms intertwisted, as only
lovers and boys know how or why."  Concerning the doctor's character, he
has left it on record that he liked a dog-fight.  "'A dog-fight,' shouted
Bob, and was off, and so was I, both of us all hot, praying that it might
not be over before we were up . . . Dogs like fighting; old Isaac (Watts,
not Walton) says they 'delight' in it, and for the best of all reasons;
and boys are not cruel because they like to see the fight.  This is a
very different thing from a love of making dogs fight."  And this was the
most famous of all dog-fights--since the old Irish Brehons settled the
laws of that sport, and gravely decided what was to be done if a child
interfered, or an idiot, or a woman, or a one-eyed man--for this was the
dog-fight in which Rab first was introduced to his historian.

Six years passed after this battle, and Dr. Brown was a medical student
and a clerk at Minto Hospital.  How he renewed his acquaintance there,
and in what sad circumstances, with Rab and his friends, it is
superfluous to tell, for every one who reads at all has read that story,
and most readers not without tears.  As a medical student in Edinburgh,
Dr. Brown made the friendship of Mr. Syme, the famous surgeon--a
friendship only closed by death.  I only saw them once together, a very
long time ago, and then from the point of view of a patient.  These
occasions are not agreeable, and patients, like the old cock which did
not crow when plucked, are apt to be "very much absorbed"; but Dr.
Brown's attitude toward the man whom he regarded with the reverence of a
disciple, as well as with the affection of a friend, was very remarkable.

When his studies were over, Dr. Brown practised for a year as assistant
to a surgeon in Chatham.  It must have been when he was at Chatham that a
curious event occurred.  Many years later, Charles Dickens was in
Edinburgh, reading his stories in public, and was dining with some
Edinburgh people.  Dickens began to speak about the panic which the
cholera had caused in England: how ill some people had behaved.  As a
contrast, he mentioned that, at Chatham, one poor woman had died,
deserted by every one except a young physician.  Some one, however,
ventured to open the door, and found the woman dead, and the young doctor
asleep, overcome with the fatigue that mastered him on his patient's
death, but quite untouched by the general panic.  "Why, that was Dr. John
Brown," one of the guests observed; and it seems that, thus early in his
career, the doctor had been setting an example of the courage and charity
of his profession.  After a year spent in Chatham, he returned to
Edinburgh, where he spent the rest of his life, busy partly with his art
of healing, partly with literature.  He lived in Rutland Street, near the
railway station, by which Edinburgh is approached from the west, and
close to Princes Street, the chief street of the town, separated by a
green valley, once a loch, from the high Castle Rock.  It was the room in
which his friends were accustomed to see Dr. Brown, and a room full of
interest it was.  In his long life, the doctor had gathered round him
many curious relics of artists and men of letters; a drawing of a dog by
Turner I remember particularly, and a copy of "Don Juan," in the first
edition, with Byron's manuscript notes.  Dr. Brown had a great love and
knowledge of art and of artists, from Turner to Leech; and he had very
many friends among men of letters, such as Mr. Ruskin and Mr. Thackeray.
Dr. Brown himself was a clever designer of rapid little grotesques, rough
sketches of dogs and men.  One or two of them are engraved in the little
paper-covered booklets in which some of his essays were separately
published--booklets which he was used to present to people who came to
see him and who were interested in all that he did.  I remember some
vivacious grotesques which he drew for one of my brothers when we were
schoolboys.  These little things were carefully treasured by boys who
knew Dr. Brown, and found him friendly, and capable of sustaining a
conversation on the points of a Dandy Dinmont terrier and other mysteries
important to youth.  He was a bibliophile--a taste which he inherited
from his father, who "began collecting books when he was twelve, and was
collecting to his last hours."

The last time I ever saw Dr. Brown, a year before his death, he was kind
enough to lend me one of the rarest of his treasures, "Poems," by Mr.
Ruskin.  Probably Mr. Ruskin had presented the book to his old friend; in
no other way were it easy to procure writings which the author withdrew
from publication, if, indeed, they ever were, properly speaking,
published.  Thus Dr. Brown was all things to all men, and to all boys.  He
"had a word for every one," as poor people say, and a word to the point,
for he was as much at home with the shepherd on the hills, or with the
angler between Hollylea and Clovenfords, as with the dusty book-hunter,
or the doggy young Border yeoman, or the child who asked him to "draw her
a picture," or the friend of genius famous through all the world,
Thackeray, when he "spoke, as he seldom did, of divine things."

Three volumes of essays are all that Dr. Brown has left in the way of
compositions: a light, but imperishable literary baggage.  His studies
are usually derived from personal experience, which he reproduced with
singular geniality and simplicity, or they are drawn from the tradition
of the elders, the reminiscences of long-lived Scotch people, who,
themselves, had listened attentively to those who went before them.  Since
Scott, these ancient ladies with wonderful memories have had no such
attentive listener or appreciative reporter as Dr. Brown.  His paper
called "Mystifications," a narrative of the pranks of Miss Stirling
Graham, is a brief, vivid record of the clever and quaint society of
Scotland sixty years ago.  Scotland, or at least Scottish society, is now
only English society--a little narrower, a little prouder, sometimes even
a little duller.  But old people of position spoke the old Scotch tongue
sixty years ago, and were full of wonderful genealogies, full of
reminiscences of the "'45," and the adventures of the Jacobites.  The
very last echoes of that ancient world are dying now from memory, like
the wide reverberations of that gun which Miss Nelly MacWilliam heard on
the day when Prince Charles landed, and which resounded strangely all
through Scotland.

The children of this generation, one fears, will hardly hear of these old
raids and duels, risings and rebellions, by oral tradition handed down,
unbroken, through aunts and grandmothers.  Scott reaped a full, late
harvest of the memories of clannish and feudal Scotland; Dr. Brown came
as a later gleaner, and gathered these stirring tales of "A Jacobite
Family" which are published in the last volume of his essays.  When he
was an observer, not a hearer only, Dr. Brown chiefly studied and best
wrote of the following topics: passages and characters of humour and
pathos which he encountered in his life and profession; children, dogs,
Border scenery, and fellow-workers in life and science.  Under one or
other of these categories all his best compositions might be arranged.
The most famous and most exquisite of all his works in the first class is
the unrivalled "Rab and his Friends"--a study of the stoicism and
tenderness of the Lowland character worthy of Scott.  In a minor way the
little paper on "Jeems," the door-keeper in a Dissenting house of the
Lord, is interesting to Scotch people, though it must seem a rather
curious revelation to all others.  "Her last Half-crown" is another study
of the honesty that survived in a starving and outcast Scotch girl, when
all other virtues, as we commonly reckon virtue, had gone before her
character to some place where, let us hope, they may rejoin her; for if
we are to suffer for the vices which have abandoned us, may we not get
some credit for the virtues that we have abandoned, but that once were
ours, in some heaven paved with bad resolutions unfulfilled?  "The Black
Dwarf's Bones" is a sketch of the misshapen creature from whom Scott
borrowed the character that gives a name to one of his minor Border
stories.  The real Black Dwarf (David Ritchie he was called among men)
was fond of poetry, but hated Burns.  He was polite to the fair, but
classed mankind at large with his favourite aversions: ghosts, fairies,
and robbers.  There was this of human about the Black Dwarf, that "he
hated folk that are aye gaun to dee, and never do't."  The village
beauties were wont to come to him for a Judgment of Paris on their
charms, and he presented each with a flower, which was of a fixed value
in his standard of things beautiful.  One kind of rose, the prize of the
most fair, he only gave thrice.  Paris could not have done his dooms more
courteously, and, if he had but made judicious use of rose, lily, and
lotus, as prizes, he might have pleased all the three Goddesses; Troy
still might be standing, and the lofty house of King Priam.

Among Dr. Brown's papers on children, that called "Pet Marjorie" holds
the highest place.  Perhaps certain passages are "wrote too
sentimentally," as Marjorie Fleming herself remarked about the practice
of many authors.  But it was difficult to be perfectly composed when
speaking of this wonderful fairy-like little girl, whose affection was as
warm as her humour and genius were precocious.  "Infant phenomena" are
seldom agreeable, but Marjorie was so humorous, so quick-tempered, so
kind, that we cease to regard her as an intellectual "phenomenon."  Her
memory remains sweet and blossoming in its dust, like that of little
Penelope Boothby, the child in the mob cap whom Sir Joshua painted, and
who died very soon after she was thus made Immortal.

It is superfluous to quote from the essay on Marjorie Fleming; every one
knows about her and her studies: "Isabella is teaching me to make simme
colings, nots of interrigations, peorids, commoes, &c."  Here is a
Shakespearian criticism, of which few will deny the correctness:
"'Macbeth' is a pretty composition, but awful one."  Again, "I never read
sermons of any kind, but I read novelettes and my Bible."  "'Tom Jones'
and Gray's 'Elegy in a Country Churchyard' are both excellent, and much
spoke of by both sex, particularly by the men."  Her Calvinistic belief
in "_unquestionable_ fire and brimston" is unhesitating, but the young
theologian appears to have substituted "unquestionable" for
"unquenchable."  There is something humorous in the alteration, as if
Marjorie refused to be put off with an "excellent family substitute" for
fire and brimstone, and demanded the "unquestionable" article, no other
being genuine, please observe trade mark.

Among Dr. Brown's contributions to the humorous study of dogs, "Rab," of
course, holds the same place as Marjorie among his sketches of children.
But if his "Queen Mary's Child Garden," the description of the little
garden in which Mary Stuart did _not_ play when a child, is second to
"Marjorie," so "Our Dogs" is a good second to "Rab."  Perhaps Dr. Brown
never wrote anything more mirthful than his description of the sudden
birth of the virtue of courage in Toby, a comic but cowardly mongrel, a
cur of low degree.

   "Toby was in the way of hiding his culinary bones in the small gardens
   before his own and the neighbouring doors.  Mr. Scrymgeour, two doors
   off, a bulky, choleric, red-faced man--_torvo vultu_--was, by law of
   contrast, a great cultivator of flowers, and he had often scowled Toby
   into all but non-existence by a stamp of his foot and a glare of his
   eye.  One day, his gate being open, in walks Toby with a huge bone,
   and making a hole where Scrymgeour had two minutes before been
   planting some precious slip, the name of which on paper and on a stick
   Toby made very light of, substituted his bone, and was engaged
   covering it, or thinking he was covering it up with his shovelling
   nose, when S. spied him through the inner glass door, and was out upon
   him, like the Assyrian, with a terrific _gowl_.  I watched them.
   Instantly Toby made at him with a roar too, and an eye more torve than
   Scrymgeour's, who, retreating without reserve, fell prostrate, there
   is reason to believe, in his own lobby.  Toby contented himself with
   proclaiming his victory at the door, and, returning, finished his bone-
   planting at his leisure; the enemy, who had scuttled behind the glass
   door, glared at him.  From this moment Toby was an altered dog.  Pluck
   at first sight was lord of all . . . That very evening he paid a visit
   to Leo, next door's dog, a big tyrannical bully and coward . . . To
   him Toby paid a visit that very evening, down into his den, and walked
   about, as much as to say, 'Come on, Macduff'; but Macduff did not come
   on."

This story is one of the most amazing examples of instant change of
character on record, and disproves the sceptical remark that "no one was
ever converted, except prize-fighters, and colonels in the army."  I am
sorry to say that Dr. Brown was too fond of dogs to be very much attached
to cats.  I never heard him say anything against cats, or, indeed,
against anybody; but there are passages in his writings which tend to
show that, when young and thoughtless, he was not far from regarding cats
as "the higher vermin."  He tells a story of a Ghazi puss, so to speak, a
victorious cat, which, entrenched in a drain, defeated three dogs with
severe loss, and finally escaped unharmed from her enemies.  Dr. Brown's
family gloried in the possession of a Dandy Dinmont named John Pym, whose
cousin (Auld Pepper) belonged to one of my brothers.  Dr. Brown was much
interested in Pepper, a dog whose family pride was only matched by that
of the mother of Candide, and, at one time, threatened to result in the
extinction of this branch of the House of Pepper.  Dr. Brown had
remarked, and my own observations confirm it, that when a Dandy is not
game, his apparent lack of courage arises "from kindness of heart."

Among Dr. Brown's landscapes, as one may call his descriptions of
scenery, and of the ancient historical associations with Scotch scenery,
"Minchmoor" is the most important.  He had always been a great lover of
the Tweed.  The walk which he commemorates in "Minchmoor" was taken, if I
am not mistaken, in company with Principal Shairp, Professor of Poetry in
the University of Oxford, and author of one of the most beautiful of
Tweedside songs, a modern "Bush aboon Traquair:"--

      "And what saw ye there,
      At the bush aboon Traquair;
   Or what did ye hear that was worth your heed?
      I heard the cushie croon
      Thro' the gowden afternoon,
   And the Quair burn singing doon to the vale o' Tweed."

There is in the country of Scott no pleasanter walk than that which Dr.
Brown took in the summer afternoon.  Within a few miles, many places
famous in history and ballad may be visited: the road by which Montrose's
men fled from Philiphaugh fight; Traquair House, with the bears on its
gates, as on the portals of the Baron of Bradwardine; Williamhope, where
Scott and Mungo Park, the African explorer, parted and went their several
ways.  From the crest of the road you see all the Border hills, the
Maiden Paps, the Eildons cloven in three, the Dunion, the Windburg, and
so to the distant Cheviots, and Smailholm Tower, where Scott lay when a
child, and clapped his hands at the flashes of the lightning, _haud sine
Dis animosus infans_, like Horace.

From the crest of the hill you follow Dr. Brown into the valley of
Yarrow, and the deep black pools, now called the "dowie dens," and so,
"through the pomp of cultivated nature," as Wordsworth says, to the
railway at Selkirk, passing the plain where Janet won back Tamlane from
the queen of the fairies.  All this country was familiar to Dr. Brown,
and on one of the last occasions when I met him, he was living at
Hollylea, on the Tweed, just above Ashestiel, Scott's home while he was
happy and prosperous, before he had the unhappy thought of building
Abbotsford.  At the time I speak of, Dr. Brown had long ceased to write,
and his health suffered from attacks of melancholy, in which the world
seemed very dark to him.  I have been allowed to read some letters which
he wrote in one of these intervals of depression.  With his habitual
unselfishness, he kept his melancholy to himself, and, though he did not
care for society at such times, he said nothing of his own condition that
could distress his correspondent.  In the last year of his life,
everything around him seemed to brighten: he was unusually well, he even
returned to his literary work, and saw his last volume of collected
essays through the press.  They were most favourably received, and the
last letters which I had from him spoke of the pleasure which this
success gave him.  Three editions of his book ("John Leech, and Other
Essays") were published in some six weeks.  All seemed to go well, and
one might even have hoped that, with renewed strength, he would take up
his pen again.  But his strength was less than we had hoped.  A cold
settled on his lungs, and, in spite of the most affectionate nursing, he
grew rapidly weaker.  He had little suffering at the end, and his mind
remained unclouded.  No man of letters could be more widely regretted,
for he was the friend of all who read his books, as, even to people who
only met him once or twice in life, he seemed to become dear and
familiar.

In one of his very latest writings, "On Thackeray's Death," Dr. Brown
told people (what some of them needed, and still need to be told) how
good, kind, and thoughtful for others was our great writer--our greatest
master of fiction, I venture to think, since Scott.  Some of the lines
Dr. Brown wrote of Thackerary might be applied to himself: "He looked
always fresh, with that abounding silvery hair, and his young, almost
infantile face"--a face very pale, and yet radiant, in his last years,
and mildly lit up with eyes full of kindness, and softened by sorrow.  In
his last year, Mr. Swinburne wrote to Dr. Brown this sonnet, in which
there seems something of the poet's prophetic gift, and a voice sounds as
of a welcome home:--

   "Beyond the north wind lay the land of old,
      Where men dwelt blithe and blameless, clothed and fed
      With joy's bright raiment, and with love's sweet bread,--
   The whitest flock of earth's maternal fold,
   None there might wear about his brows enrolled
      A light of lovelier fame than rings your head,
      Whose lovesome love of children and the dead
   All men give thanks for; I, far off, behold
      A dear dead hand that links us, and a light
      The blithest and benignest of the night,--
         The night of death's sweet sleep, wherein may be
      A star to show your spirit in present sight
         Some happier isle in the Elysian sea
         Where Rab may lick the hand of Marjorie."




CHAPTER IV: OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES


Never but once did I enjoy the privilege of meeting the author of "Elsie
Venner"--Oliver Wendell Holmes.  It was at a dinner given by Mr. Lowell,
and of conversation with Dr. Holmes I had very little.  He struck me as
being wonderfully erect, active, and vivacious for his great age.  He
spoke (perhaps I should not chronicle this impression)--he spoke much,
and freely, but rather as if he were wound up to speak, so to say--wound
up, I mean, by a sense of duty to himself and kindness to strangers, who
were naturally curious about so well-known a man.  In his aspect there
was a certain dryness, and, altogether, his vivacity, his ceaselessness,
and a kind of equability of tone in his voice, reminded me of what Homer
says concerning the old men around Priam, above the gate of Troy, how
they "chirped like cicalas on a summer day."  About the matter of his
talk I remember nothing, only the manner remains with me, and mine may
have been a false impression, or the manner may have been accidental, and
of the moment: or, again, a manner appropriate for conversation with
strangers, each coming up one after the other, to view respectfully so
great a lion.  Among his friends and intimates he was probably a
different man, with a tone other and more reposeful.

He had a long, weary task before him, then, to talk his way, ever
courteous, alert, attentive, through part of a London season.  Yet, when
it was all over, he seems to have enjoyed it, being a man who took
pleasure in most sorts of experience.  He did not affect me, for that one
time, with such a sense of pleasure as Mr. Lowell did--Mr. Lowell, whom I
knew so much better, and who was so big, strong, humorous, kind, learned,
friendly, and delightfully natural.

Dr. Holmes, too, was a delightful companion, and I have merely tried to
make a sort of photographic "snap-shot" at him, in a single casual
moment, one of myriads of such moments.  Turning to Dr. Holmes's popular,
as distinct from his professional writings, one is reminded, as one often
is, of the change which seems to come over some books as the reader grows
older.  Many books are to one now what they always were; some, like the
Waverley novels and Shakespeare, grow better on every fresh reading.
There are books which filled me, in boyhood or in youth, with a sort of
admiring rapture, and a delighted wonder at their novelty, their
strangeness, freshness, greatness.  Thus Homer, and the best novels of
Thackeray, and of Fielding, the plays of Moliere and Shakespeare, the
poems of--well, of all the real poets, moved this astonishment of
admiration, and being read again, they move it still.  On a different
level, one may say as much about books so unlike each other, as those of
Poe and of Sir Thomas Browne, of Swift and of Charles Lamb.

There are, again, other books which caused this happy emotion of wonder,
when first perused, long since, but which do so no longer.  I am not much
surprised to find Charles Kingsley's novels among them.

In the case of Dr. Holmes's books, I am very sensible of this
disenchanting effect of time and experience.  "The Professor at the
Breakfast Table" and the novels came into my hands when I was very young,
in "green, unknowing youth."  They seemed extraordinary, new, fantasies
of wisdom and wit; the reflections were such as surprised me by their
depth, the illustrations dazzled by their novelty and brilliance.
Probably they will still be as fortunate with young readers, and I am to
be pitied, I hope, rather than blamed, if I cannot, like the wise thrush--

      "Recapture
   The first fine careless rapture."

By this time, of course, one understands many of the constituents of Dr.
Holmes's genius, the social, historical, ancestral, and professional
elements thereof.  Now, it is the business of criticism to search out and
illustrate these antecedents, and it seems a very odd and unlucky thing,
that the results of this knowledge when acquired, should sometimes be a
partial disenchantment.  But we are not disenchanted at all by this kind
of science, when the author whom we are examining is a great natural
genius, like Shakespeare or Shelley, Keats or Scott.  Such natures bring
to the world far more than they receive, as far as our means of knowing
what they receive are concerned.  The wind of the spirit that is not of
this earth, nor limited by time and space, breathes through their words,
and thoughts, and deeds.  They are not mere combinations, however deft
and subtle, of _known_ atoms.  They must continually delight, and
continually surprise; custom cannot stale them; like the heaven-born Laws
in Sophocles, age can never lull them to sleep.  Their works, when they
are authors, never lose hold on our fancy and our interest.

As far as my own feelings and admiration can inform me, Dr. Holmes,
though a most interesting and amiable and kindly man and writer, was not
of this class.  As an essayist, a delineator of men and morals, an
unassuming philosopher, with a light, friendly wit, he certainly does not
hold one as, for example, Addison does.  The old _Spectator_ makes me
smile, pleases, tickles, diverts me now, even more than when I lay on the
grass and read it by Tweedside, as a boy, when the trout were sluggish,
in the early afternoon.  It is only a personal fact that Dr. Holmes, read
in the same old seasons, with so much pleasure and admiration and
surprise, no longer affects me in the old way.  Carlyle, on the other
hand, in his "Frederick," which used to seem rather long, now entertains
me far more than ever.  But I am well aware that this is a mere
subjective estimate; that Dr. Holmes may really be as great a genius as I
was wont to think him, for criticism is only a part of our impressions.
The opinion of mature experience, as a rule, ought to be sounder than
that of youth; in this case I cannot but think that it is sounder.

Dr. Holmes was a New Englander, and born in what he calls "the Brahmin
caste," the class which, in England, before the sailing of the _May
Flower_, and ever since, had always been literary and highly educated.  "I
like books; I was born and bred among them," he says, "and have the easy
feeling, when I get into their presence, that a stable-boy has among
horses."  He is fond of books, and, above all, of old books--strange, old
medical works, for example--full of portents and prodigies, such as those
of Wierus.

New England, owing to its famous college, Harvard, and its steady
maintenance of the literary and learned tradition among the clergy, was,
naturally, the home of the earliest great American school of writers.
These men--Longfellow, Lowell, Ticknor, Prescott, Hawthorne, and so many
others--had all received the same sort of education as Europeans of
letters used to receive.  They had not started as printers' devils, or
newspaper reporters, or playwrights for the stage, but were academic.  It
does not matter much how a genius begins--as a rural butcher, or an
apothecary, or a clerk of a Writer to the Signet.  Still, the New
Englanders were academic and classical.  New England has, by this time,
established a tradition of its literary origin and character.  Her
children are sons of the Puritans, with their independence, their
narrowness, their appreciation of comfort, their hardiness in doing
without it, their singular scruples of conscience, their sense of the
awfulness of sin, their accessibility to superstition.  We can read of
the later New Englanders in the making, among the works of Cotton Mather,
his father Increase Mather, and the witch-burning, periwig-hating,
doctrinal Judge Sewall, who so manfully confessed and atoned for his
mistake about the Salem witches.  These men, or many of them, were deeply-
learned Calvinists, according to the standard of their day, a day lasting
from, say, the Restoration to 1730.  Cotton Mather, in particular, is
erudite, literary--nay, full of literary vanity--mystical, visionary,
credulous to an amusing degree.

But he is really as British as Baxter, or his Scottish correspondent and
counterpart, Wodrow.  The sons or grandsons of these men gained the War
of Independence.  Of this they are naturally proud, and the circumstance
is not infrequently mentioned in Dr. Holmes's works.  Their democracy is
not roaring modern democracy, but that of the cultivated middle classes.
Their stern Calvinism slackened into many "isms," but left a kind of
religiosity behind it.  One of Dr. Holmes's mouthpieces sums up his whole
creed in the two words _Pater Noster_.  All these hereditary influences
are consciously made conspicuous in Dr. Holmes's writings, as in
Hawthorne's.  In Hawthorne you see the old horror of sin, the old terror
of conscience, the old dread of witchcraft, the old concern about
conduct, converted into aesthetic sources of literary pleasure, of
literary effects.

As a physician and a man of science, Dr. Holmes added abundant knowledge
of the new sort; and apt, unexpected bits of science made popular,
analogies and illustrations afforded by science are frequent in his
works.  Thus, in "Elsie Venner," and in "The Guardian Angel," "heredity"
is his theme.  He is always brooding over the thought that each of us is
so much made up of earlier people, our ancestors, who bequeath to us so
many disagreeable things--vice, madness, disease, emotions, tricks of
gesture.  No doubt these things are bequeathed, but all in such new
proportions and relations, that each of us is himself and nobody else,
and therefore had better make up his mind to _be_ himself, and for
himself responsible.

All this doctrine of heredity, still so dimly understood, Dr. Holmes
derives from science.  But, in passing through his mind, that of a New
Englander conscious of New England's past, science takes a stain of
romance and superstition.  Elsie Venner, through an experience of her
mother's, inherits the nature of the serpent, so the novel is as far from
common life as the tale of "Melusine," or any other echidna.  The fantasy
has its setting in a commonplace New England environment, and thus
recalls a Hawthorne less subtle and concentrated, but much more humorous.
The heroine of the "Guardian Angel," again, exposes a character in
layers, as it were, each stratum of consciousness being inherited from a
different ancestor--among others, a red Indian.  She has many
personalities, like the queer women we read about in French treatises on
hysterics and nervous diseases.  These stories are "fairy tales of
science," by a man of science, who is also a humourist, and has a touch
of the poet, and of the old fathers who were afraid of witches.  The
"blend" is singular enough, and not without its originality of
fascination.

Though a man of science Dr. Holmes apparently took an imaginative
pleasure in all shapes of superstition that he could muster.  I must
quote a passage from "The Professor at the Breakfast Table," as
peculiarly illustrative of his method, and his ways of half accepting the
abnormally romantic--accepting just enough for pleasure, like Sir Walter
Scott.  Connected with the extract is a curious anecdote.

"I think I am a little superstitious.  There were two things, when I was
a boy, that diabolised my imagination,--I mean, that gave me a distinct
apprehension of a formidable bodily shape which prowled round the
neighbourhood where I was born and bred.  The first was a series of marks
called the 'Devil's footsteps.'  These were patches of sand in the
pastures, where no grass grew, where even the low-bush blackberry, the
'dewberry,' as our Southern neighbours call it, in prettier and more
Shakespearian language, did not spread its clinging creepers, where even
the pale, dry, sadly-sweet 'everlasting' could not grow, but all was bare
and blasted.  The second was a mark in one of the public buildings near
my home,--the college dormitory named after a Colonial Governor.  I do
not think many persons are aware of the existence of this mark,--little
having been said about the story in print, as it was considered very
desirable, for the sake of the Institution, to hush it up.  In the north-
west corner, and on the level of the third or fourth storey, there are
signs of a breach in the walls, mended pretty well, but not to be
mistaken.  A considerable portion of that corner must have been carried
away, from within outward.  It was an unpleasant affair, and I do not
care to repeat the particulars; but some young men had been using sacred
things in a profane and unlawful way, when the occurrence, which was
variously explained, took place.  The story of the Appearance in the
chamber was, I suppose, invented afterwards; but of the injury to the
building there could be no question; and the zigzag line, where the
mortar is a little thicker than before, is still distinctly visible.

"The queer burnt spots, called the 'Devil's footsteps,' had never
attracted attention before this time, though there is no evidence that
they had not existed previously, except that of the late Miss M., a
'Goody,' so called, who was positive on the subject, but had a strange
horror of referring to an affair of which she was thought to know
something . . . I tell you it was not so pleasant for a little boy of
impressible nature to go up to bed in an old gambrel-roofed house, with
untenanted locked upper chambers, and a most ghostly garret,--with
'Devil's footsteps' in the fields behind the house, and in front of it
the patched dormitory, where the unexplained occurrence had taken place
which startled those godless youths at their mock devotions, so that one
of them was epileptic from that day forward, and another, after a
dreadful season of mental conflict, took to religion, and became renowned
for his ascetic sanctity."

It is a pity that Dr. Holmes does not give the whole story, instead of
hinting at it, for a similar tale is told at Brazenose College, and
elsewhere.  Now take, along with Dr. Holmes's confession to a grain of
superstition, this remark on, and explanation of, the curious
coincidences which thrust themselves on the notice of most people.

"Excuse me,--I return to my story of the Commonstable.  Young fellows
being always hungry, and tea and dry toast being the meagre fare of the
evening meal, it was a trick of some of the boys to impale a slice of
meat upon a fork, at dinner-time, and stick the fork, holding it, beneath
the table, so that they could get it at tea-time.  The dragons that
guarded this table of the Hesperides found out the trick at last, and
kept a sharp look-out for missing forks;--they knew where to find one, if
it was not in its place.  Now the odd thing was, that, after waiting so
many years to hear of this College trick, I should hear it mentioned a
_second time_ within the same twenty-four hours by a College youth of the
present generation.  Strange, but true.  And so it has happened to me and
to every person, often and often, to be hit in rapid succession by these
twinned facts or thoughts, as if they were linked like chain-shot.

"I was going to leave the simple reader to wonder over this, taking it as
an unexplained marvel.  I think, however, I will turn over a furrow of
subsoil in it.  The explanation is, of course, that in a great many
thoughts there must be a few coincidences, and these instantly arrest our
attention.  Now we shall probably never have the least idea of the
enormous number of impressions which pass through our consciousness,
until in some future life we see the photographic record of our thoughts
and the stereoscopic picture of our actions.

"Now, my dear friends, who are putting your hands to your foreheads, and
saying to yourselves that you feel a little confused, as if you had been
waltzing until things began to whirl slightly round you, is it possible
that you do not clearly apprehend the exact connection of all I have been
saying, and its bearing on what is now to come?  Listen, then.  The
number of these living elements in our bodies illustrates the
incalculable multitude of our thoughts; the number of our thoughts
accounts for those frequent coincidences spoken of; these coincidences in
the world of thought illustrate those which we constantly observe in the
world of outward events."

Now for the anecdote--one of Mark Twain's.

Some years ago, Mark Twain published in _Harper's Magazine_ an article on
"Mental Telegraphy."  He illustrated his meaning by a story of how he
once wrote a long letter on a complicated subject, which had popped into
his head between asleep and awake, to a friend on the other side of
America.  He did not send the letter, but, by return of post, received
one from his friend.  "Now, I'll tell you what he is going to say," said
Mark Twain, read his own unsent epistle aloud, and then, opening his
friend's despatch, proved that they were essentially identical.  This is
what he calls "Mental Telegraphy"; others call it "Telepathy," and the
term is merely descriptive.

Now, on his own showing, in our second extract, Dr. Holmes should have
explained coincidences like this as purely the work of chance, and I
rather incline to think that he would have been right.  But Mark Twain,
in his article on "Mental Telegraphy," cites Dr. Holmes for a story of
how he once, after dinner, as his letters came in, felt constrained to
tell, _a propos des bottes_, the story of the last challenge to judicial
combat in England (1817).  He then opened a newspaper directed to him
from England, the _Sporting Times_, and therein his eyes lighted on an
account of this very affair--Abraham Thornton's challenge to battle when
he was accused of murder, in 1817.  According to Mark Twain, Dr. Holmes
was disposed to accept "Mental Telegraphy" rather than mere chance as the
cause of this coincidence.  Yet the anecdote of the challenge seems to
have been a favourite of his.  It occurs in, "The Professor," in the
fifth section.  Perhaps he told it pretty frequently; probably that is
why the printed version was sent to him; still, he was a little staggered
by the coincidence.  There was enough of Cotton Mather in the man of
science to give him pause.

The form of Dr. Holmes's best known books, the set concerned with the
breakfast-table and "Over the Teacups," is not very fortunate.  Much
conversation at breakfast is a weariness of the flesh.  We want to eat
what is necessary, and then to go about our work or play.  If American
citizens in a boarding-house could endure these long palavers, they must
have been very unlike the hasty feeders caricatured in "Martin
Chuzzlewit."  Macaulay may have monologuised thus at his breakfast
parties in the Albany; but breakfast parties are obsolete--an
unregrettable parcel of things lost.  The monologues, or dialogues, were
published serially in the _Atlantic Monthly_, but they have had a
vitality and a vogue far beyond those of the magazine _causerie_.  Some
of their popularity they may owe to the description of the other
boarders, and to the kind of novel which connects the fortunes of these
personages.  But it is impossible for an Englishman to know whether these
American types are exactly drawn or not.  Their fortunes do not strongly
interest one, though the "Sculpin"--the patriotic, deformed Bostonian,
with his great-great-grandmother's ring (she was hanged for a witch)--is
a very original and singular creation.  The real interest lies in the
wit, wisdom, and learning.  The wit, now and then, seems to-day rather in
the nature of a "goak."  One might give examples, but to do so seems ill-
natured and ungrateful.

There are some very perishable puns.  The learning is not so _recherche_
as it appeared when we knew nothing of Cotton Mather and Robert Calef,
the author of a book against the persecution of witches.  Calef, of
course, was in the right, but I cannot forgive him for refusing to see a
lady, known to Mr. Mather, who floated about in the air.  That she did so
was no good reason for hanging or burning a number of parishioners; but,
did she float, and, if so, how?  Mr. Calef said it would be a miracle, so
he declined to view the performance.  His logic was thin, though of a
familiar description.  Of all old things, at all events, Dr. Holmes was
fond.  He found America scarcely aired, new and raw, devoid of history
and of associations.  "The Tiber has a voice for me, as it whispers to
the piers of the Pons AElius, even more full of meaning than my
well-beloved Charles, eddying round the piles of West Boston Bridge."  No
doubt this is a common sentiment among Americans.

Occasionally, like Hawthorne, they sigh for an historical atmosphere, and
then, when they come to Europe and get it, they do not like it, and think
Schenectady, New York, "a better place."  It is not easy to understand
what ailed Hawthorne with Europe; he was extremely caustic in his
writings about that continent, and discontented.  Our matrons were so
stout and placid that they irritated him.  Indeed, they are a little
heavy in hand, still there are examples of agreeable slimness, even in
this poor old country.  Fond as he was of the historical past, Mr. Holmes
remained loyal to the historical present.  He was not one of those
Americans who are always censuring England, and always hankering after
her.  He had none of that irritable feeling, which made a great
contemporary of his angrily declare that _he_ could endure to hear "Ye
Mariners of England" sung, because of his own country's successes, some
time ago.  They were gallant and conspicuous victories of the American
frigates; we do not grudge them.  A fair fight should leave no rancour,
above all in the victors, and Dr. Holmes's withers would have been
unwrung by Campbell's ditty.

He visited England in youth, and fifty years later.  On the anniversary
of the American defeat at Bunker's Hill (June 17), Dr. Holmes got his
degree in the _old_ Cambridge.  He received degrees at Edinburgh and at
Oxford, in his "Hundred Days in Europe" he says very little about these
historic cities.  The men at Oxford asked, "Did he come in the 'One Hoss
Shay'?" the name of his most familiar poem in the lighter vein.  The
whole visit to England pleased and wearied him.  He likened it to the
_shass caffy_ of Mr. Henry Foker--the fillip at the end of the long
banquet of life.  He went to see the Derby, for he was fond of horses, of
racing, and, in a sportsmanlike way, of boxing.  He had the great
boldness once, _audax juventa_, to write a song in praise of that
comfortable creature--wine.  The prudery of many Americans about the
juice of the grape is a thing very astonishing to a temperate Briton.  An
admirable author, who wrote an account of the old convivial days of an
American city, found that reputable magazines could not accept such a
degrading historical record.  There was no nonsense about Dr. Holmes.  His
poems were mainly "occasional" verses for friendly meetings; or humorous,
like the celebrated "One Horse Shay."  Of his serious verses, the
"Nautilus" is probably too familiar to need quotation; a noble fancy is
nobly and tunefully "moralised."  Pleasing, cultivated, and so forth, are
adjectives not dear to poets.  To say "sublime," or "magical," or
"strenuous," of Dr. Holmes's muse, would be to exaggerate.  How far he
maintained his scholarship, I am not certain; but it is odd that, in his
preface to "The Guardian Angel," he should quote from "Jonathan Edwards
the younger," a story for which he might have cited Aristotle.

Were I to choose one character out of Dr. Holmes's creations as my
favourite, it would be "a frequent correspondent of his," and of mine--the
immortal Gifted Hopkins.  Never was minor poet more kindly and genially
portrayed.  And if one had to pick out three of his books, as the best
worth reading, they would be "The Professor," "Elsie Venner," and "The
Guardian Angel."  They have not the impeccable art and distinction of
"The House of the Seven Gables" and "The Scarlet Letter," but they
combine fantasy with living human interest, and with humour.  With Sir
Thomas Browne, and Dr. John Brown, and--may we not add Dr. Weir
Mitchell?--Dr. Holmes excellently represents the physician in humane
letters.  He has left a blameless and most amiable memory, unspotted by
the world.  His works are full of the savour of his native soil,
naturally, without straining after "Americanism;" and they are national,
not local or provincial.  He crossed the great gulf of years, between the
central age of American literary production--the time of Hawthorne and
Poe--to our own time, and, like Nestor, he reigned among the third
generation.  As far as the world knows, the shadow of a literary quarrel
never fell on him; he was without envy or jealousy, incurious of his own
place, never vain, petulant, or severe.  He was even too good-humoured,
and the worst thing I have heard of him is that he could never say "no"
to an autograph hunter.




CHAPTER V: MR. MORRIS'S POEMS


"Enough," said the pupil of the wise Imlac, "you have convinced me that
no man can be a poet."  The study of Mr. William Morris's poems, in the
new collected edition, {5} has convinced me that no man, or, at least, no
middle-aged man, can be a critic.  I read Mr. Morris's poems (thanks to
the knightly honours conferred on the Bard of Penrhyn, there is now no
ambiguity as to 'Mr. Morris'), but it is not the book only that I read.
The scroll of my youth is unfolded.  I see the dear place where first I
perused "The Blue Closet"; the old faces of old friends flock around me;
old chaff, old laughter, old happiness re-echo and revive.  St. Andrews,
Oxford, come before the mind's eye, with

      "Many a place
      That's in sad case
   Where joy was wont afore, oh!"

as Minstrel Burne sings.  These voices, faces, landscapes mingle with the
music and blur the pictures of the poet who enchanted for us certain
hours passed in the paradise of youth.  A reviewer who finds himself in
this case may as well frankly confess that he can no more criticise Mr.
Morris dispassionately than he could criticise his old self and the
friends whom he shall never see again, till he meets them

   "Beyond the sphere of time,
      And sin, and grief's control,
   Serene in changeless prime
      Of body and of soul."

To write of one's own "adventures among books" may be to provide
anecdotage more or less trivial, more or less futile, but, at least, it
is to write historically.  We know how books have affected, and do affect
ourselves, our bundle of prejudices and tastes, of old impressions and
revived sensations.  To judge books dispassionately and impersonally, is
much more difficult--indeed, it is practically impossible, for our own
tastes and experiences must, more or less, modify our verdicts, do what
we will.  However, the effort must be made, for to say that, at a certain
age, in certain circumstances, an individual took much pleasure in "The
Life and Death of Jason," the present of a college friend, is certainly
not to criticise "The Life and Death of Jason."

There have been three blossoming times in the English poetry of the
nineteenth century.  The first dates from Wordsworth, Coleridge, Scott,
and, later, from Shelley, Byron, Keats.  By 1822 the blossoming time was
over, and the second blossoming time began in 1830-1833, with young Mr.
Tennyson and Mr. Browning.  It broke forth again, in 1842 and did not
practically cease till England's greatest laureate sang of the "Crossing
of the Bar."  But while Tennyson put out his full strength in 1842, and
Mr. Browning rather later, in "Bells and Pomegranates" ("Men and Women"),
the third spring came in 1858, with Mr. Morris's "Defence of Guenevere,"
and flowered till Mr. Swinburne's "Atalanta in Calydon" appeared in 1865,
followed by his poems of 1866.  Mr. Rossetti's book of 1870 belonged, in
date of composition, mainly to this period.

In 1858, when "The Defence of Guenevere" came out, Mr. Morris must have
been but a year or two from his undergraduateship.  Every one has heard
enough about his companions, Mr. Burne Jones, Mr. Rossetti, Canon Dixon,
and the others of the old _Oxford and Cambridge Magazine_, where Mr.
Morris's wonderful prose fantasies are buried.  Why should they not be
revived, these strangely coloured and magical dreams?  As literature, I
prefer them vastly above Mr. Morris's later romances in prose--"The
Hollow Land" above "News from Nowhere!"  Mr. Morris and his friends were
active in the fresh dawn of a new romanticism, a mediaeval and Catholic
revival, with very little Catholicism in it for the most part.  This
revival is more "innerly," as the Scotch say, more intimate, more
"earnest" than the larger and more genial, if more superficial,
restoration by Scott.  The painful doubt, the scepticism of the Ages of
Faith, the dark hours of that epoch, its fantasy, cruelty, luxury, no
less than its colour and passion, inform Mr. Morris's first poems.  The
fourteenth and the early fifteenth century is his "period."  In "The
Defence of Guenevere" he is not under the influence of Chaucer, whose
narrative manner, without one grain of his humour, inspires "The Life and
Death of Jason" and "The Earthly Paradise."  In the early book the rugged
style of Mr. Browning has left a mark.  There are cockney rhymes, too,
such as "short" rhyming to "thought."  But, on the whole, Mr. Morris's
early manner was all his own, nor has he ever returned to it.  In the
first poem, "The Queen's Apology," is this passage:--

   "Listen: suppose your time were come to die,
   And you were quite alone and very weak;
   Yea, laid a-dying, while very mightily

   "The wind was ruffling up the narrow streak
   Of river through your broad lands running well:
   Suppose a hush should come, then some one speak:

   "'One of these cloths is heaven, and one is hell,
   Now choose one cloth for ever, which they be,
   I will not tell you, you must somehow tell

   "'Of your own strength and mightiness; here, see!'
   Yea, yea, my lord, and you to ope your eyes,
   At foot of your familiar bed to see

   "A great God's angel standing, with such dyes,
   Not known on earth, on his great wings, and hands,
   Held out two ways, light from the inner skies

   "Showing him well, and making his commands
   Seem to be God's commands, moreover, too,
   Holding within his hands the cloths on wands;

   "And one of these strange choosing-cloths was blue,
   Wavy and long, and one cut short and red;
   No man could tell the better of the two.

   "After a shivering half-hour you said,
   'God help! heaven's colour, the blue;' and he said, 'Hell.'
   Perhaps you then would roll upon your bed,

   "And cry to all good men that loved you well,
   'Ah, Christ! if only I had known, known, known.'"

There was nothing like that before in English poetry; it has the
_bizarrerie_ of a new thing in beauty.  How far it is really beautiful
how can I tell?  How can I discount the "personal bias"?  Only I know
that it is unforgettable.  Again (Galahad speaks):--

         "I saw
   One sitting on the altar as a throne,
      Whose face no man could say he did not know,
   And, though the bell still rang, he sat alone,
      With raiment half blood-red, half white as snow."

Such things made their own special ineffaceable impact.

Leaving the Arthurian cycle, Mr. Morris entered on his especially
sympathetic period--the gloom and sad sunset glory of the late fourteenth
century, the age of Froissart and wicked, wasteful wars.  To Froissart it
all seemed one magnificent pageant of knightly and kingly fortunes; he
only murmurs a "great pity" for the death of a knight or the massacre of
a town.  It is rather the pity of it that Mr. Morris sees: the hearts
broken in a corner, as in "Sir Peter Harpedon's End," or beside "The
Haystack in the Floods."  Here is a picture like life of what befell a
hundred times.  Lady Alice de la Barde hears of the death of her knight:--

   "ALICE

         "Can you talk faster, sir?
   Get over all this quicker? fix your eyes
   On mine, I pray you, and whate'er you see
   Still go on talking fast, unless I fall,
   Or bid you stop.

   "SQUIRE

         "I pray your pardon then,
   And looking in your eyes, fair lady, say
   I am unhappy that your knight is dead.
   Take heart, and listen! let me tell you all.
   We were five thousand goodly men-at-arms,
   And scant five hundred had he in that hold;
   His rotten sandstone walls were wet with rain,
   And fell in lumps wherever a stone hit;
   Yet for three days about the barriers there
   The deadly glaives were gather'd, laid across,
   And push'd and pull'd; the fourth our engines came;
   But still amid the crash of falling walls,
   And roar of bombards, rattle of hard bolts,
   The steady bow-strings flash'd, and still stream'd out
   St. George's banner, and the seven swords,
   And still they cried, 'St. George Guienne,' until
   Their walls were flat as Jericho's of old,
   And our rush came, and cut them from the keep."

The astonishing vividness, again, of the tragedy told in "Geffray Teste
Noire" is like that of a vision in a magic mirror or a crystal ball,
rather than like a picture suggested by printed words.  "Shameful Death"
has the same enchanted kind of presentment.  We look through a "magic
casement opening on the foam" of the old waves of war.  Poems of a pure
fantasy, unequalled out of Coleridge and Poe, are "The Wind" and "The
Blue Closet."  Each only lives in fantasy.  Motives, and facts, and
"story" are unimportant and out of view.  The pictures arise distinct,
unsummoned, spontaneous, like the faces and places which are flashed on
our eyes between sleeping and waking.  Fantastic, too, but with more of a
recognisable human setting, is "Golden Wings," which to a slight degree
reminds one of Theophile Gautier's _Chateau de Souvenir_.

   "The apples now grow green and sour
      Upon the mouldering castle wall,
      Before they ripen there they fall:
   There are no banners on the tower,

   The draggled swans most eagerly eat
      The green weeds trailing in the moat;
      Inside the rotting leaky boat
   You see a slain man's stiffen'd feet."

These, with "The Sailing of the Sword," are my own old favourites.  There
was nothing like them before, nor will be again, for Mr. Morris, after
several years of silence, abandoned his early manner.  No doubt it was
not a manner to persevere in, but happily, in a mood and a moment never
to be re-born or return, Mr. Morris did fill a fresh page in English
poetry with these imperishable fantasies.  They were absolutely neglected
by "the reading public," but they found a few staunch friends.  Indeed, I
think of "Guenevere" as FitzGerald did of Tennyson's poems before 1842.
But this, of course, is a purely personal, probably a purely capricious,
estimate.  Criticism may aver that the influence of Mr. Rossetti was
strong on Mr. Morris before 1858.  Perhaps so, but we read Mr. Morris
first (as the world read the "Lay" before "Christabel"), and my own
preference is for Mr. Morris.

It was after eight or nine years of silence that Mr. Morris produced, in
1866 or 1867, "The Life and Death of Jason."  Young men who had read
"Guenevere" hastened to purchase it, and, of course, found themselves in
contact with something very unlike their old favourite.  Mr. Morris had
told a classical tale in decasyllabic couplets of the Chaucerian sort,
and he regarded the heroic age from a mediaeval point of view; at all
events, not from an historical and archaeological point of view.  It was
natural in Mr. Morris to "envisage" the Greek heroic age in this way, but
it would not be natural in most other writers.  The poem is not much
shorter than the "Odyssey," and long narrative poems had been out of
fashion since "The Lord of the Isles" (1814).

All this was a little disconcerting.  We read "Jason," and read it with
pleasure, but without much of the more essential pleasure which comes
from magic and distinction of style.  The peculiar qualities of Keats,
and Tennyson, and Virgil are not among the gifts of Mr. Morris.  As
people say of Scott in his long poems, so it may be said of Mr.
Morris--that he does not furnish many quotations, does not glitter in
"jewels five words long."

In "Jason" he entered on his long career as a narrator; a poet retelling
the immortal primeval stories of the human race.  In one guise or another
the legend of Jason is the most widely distributed of romances; the North
American Indians have it, and the Samoans and the Samoyeds, as well as
all Indo-European peoples.  This tale, told briefly by Pindar, and at
greater length by Apollonius Rhodius, and in the "Orphica," Mr. Morris
took up and handled in a single and objective way.  His art was always
pictorial, but, in "Jason" and later, he described more, and was less
apt, as it were, to flash a picture on the reader, in some incommunicable
way.

In the covers of the first edition were announcements of the "Earthly
Paradise": that vast collection of the world's old tales retold.  One
might almost conjecture that "Jason" had originally been intended for a
part of the "Earthly Paradise," and had outgrown its limits.  The tone is
much the same, though the "criticism of life" is less formally and
explicitly stated.

For Mr. Morris came at last to a "criticism of life."  It would not have
satisfied Mr. Matthew Arnold, and it did not satisfy Mr. Morris!  The
burden of these long narrative poems is _vanitas vanitatum_: the
fleeting, perishable, unsatisfying nature of human existence, the dream
"rounded by a sleep."  The lesson drawn is to make life as full and as
beautiful as may be, by love, and adventure, and art.  The hideousness of
modern industrialism was oppressing to Mr. Morris; that hideousness he
was doing his best to relieve and redeem, by poetry, and by all the many
arts and crafts in which he was a master.  His narrative poems are,
indeed, part of his industry in this field.  He was not born to slay
monsters, he says, "the idle singer of an empty day."  Later, he set
about slaying monsters, like Jason, or unlike Jason, scattering dragon's
teeth to raise forces which he could not lay, and could not direct.

I shall go no further into politics or agitation, and I say this much
only to prove that Mr. Morris's "criticism of life," and prolonged,
wistful dwelling on the thought of death, ceased to satisfy himself.  His
own later part, as a poet and an ally of Socialism, proved this to be
true.  It seems to follow that the peculiarly level, lifeless, decorative
effect of his narratives, which remind us rather of glorious tapestries
than of pictures, was no longer wholly satisfactory to himself.  There is
plenty of charmed and delightful reading--"Jason" and the "Earthly
Paradise" are literature for The Castle of Indolence, but we do miss a
strenuous rendering of action and passion.  These Mr. Morris had rendered
in "The Defence of Guinevere": now he gave us something different,
something beautiful, but something deficient in dramatic vigour.
Apollonius Rhodius is, no doubt, much of a pedant, a literary writer of
epic, in an age of Criticism.  He dealt with the tale of "Jason," and
conceivably he may have borrowed from older minstrels.  But the Medea of
Apollonius Rhodius, in her love, her tenderness, her regret for home, in
all her maiden words and ways, is undeniably a character more living,
more human, more passionate, and more sympathetic, than the Medea of Mr.
Morris.  I could almost wish that he had closely followed that classical
original, the first true love story in literature.  In the same way I
prefer Apollonius's spell for soothing the dragon, as much terser and
more somniferous than the spell put by Mr. Morris into the lips of Medea.
Scholars will find it pleasant to compare these passages of the
Alexandrine and of the London poets.  As a brick out of the vast palace
of "Jason" we may select the song of the Nereid to Hylas--Mr. Morris is
always happy with his Nymphs and Nereids:--

      "I know a little garden-close
   Set thick with lily and with rose,
   Where I would wander if I might
   From dewy dawn to dewy night,
   And have one with me wandering.
      And though within it no birds sing,
   And though no pillared house is there,
   And though the apple boughs are bare
   Of fruit and blossom, would to God,
   Her feet upon the green grass trod,
   And I beheld them as before.
      There comes a murmur from the shore,
   And in the place two fair streams are,
   Drawn from the purple hills afar,
   Drawn down unto the restless sea;
   The hills whose flowers ne'er fed the bee,
   The shore no ship has ever seen,
   Still beaten by the billows green,
   Whose murmur comes unceasingly
   Unto the place for which I cry.
      For which I cry both day and night,
   For which I let slip all delight,
   That maketh me both deaf and blind,
   Careless to win, unskilled to find,
   And quick to lose what all men seek.
      Yet tottering as I am, and weak,
   Still have I left a little breath
   To seek within the jaws of death
   An entrance to that happy place,
   To seek the unforgotten face
   Once seen, once kissed, once rest from me
   Anigh the murmuring of the sea."

"Jason" is, practically, a very long tale from the "Earthly Paradise," as
the "Earthly Paradise" is an immense treasure of shorter tales in the
manner of "Jason."  Mr. Morris reverted for an hour to his fourteenth
century, a period when London was "clean."  This is a poetic license;
many a plague found mediaeval London abominably dirty!  A Celt himself,
no doubt, with the Celt's proverbial way of being _impossibilium
cupitor_, Mr. Morris was in full sympathy with his Breton Squire, who, in
the reign of Edward III., sets forth to seek the Earthly Paradise, and
the land where Death never comes.  Much more dramatic, I venture to
think, than any passage of "Jason," is that where the dreamy seekers of
dreamland, Breton and Northman, encounter the stout King Edward III.,
whose kingdom is of this world.  Action and fantasy are met, and the
wanderers explain the nature of their quest.  One of them speaks of death
in many a form, and of the flight from death:--

      "His words nigh made me weep, but while he spoke
   I noted how a mocking smile just broke
   The thin line of the Prince's lips, and he
   Who carried the afore-named armoury
   Puffed out his wind-beat cheeks and whistled low:
   But the King smiled, and said, 'Can it be so?
   I know not, and ye twain are such as find
   The things whereto old kings must needs be blind.
   For you the world is wide--but not for me,
   Who once had dreams of one great victory
   Wherein that world lay vanquished by my throne,
   And now, the victor in so many an one,
   Find that in Asia Alexander died
   And will not live again; the world is wide
   For you I say,--for me a narrow space
   Betwixt the four walls of a fighting place.
      Poor man, why should I stay thee? live thy fill
   Of that fair life, wherein thou seest no ill
   But fear of that fair rest I hope to win
   One day, when I have purged me of my sin.
      Farewell, it yet may hap that I a king
   Shall be remembered but by this one thing,
   That on the morn before ye crossed the sea
   Ye gave and took in common talk with me;
   But with this ring keep memory with the morn,
   O Breton, and thou Northman, by this horn
   Remember me, who am of Odin's blood.'"

All this encounter is a passage of high invention.  The adventures in
Anahuac are such as Bishop Erie may have achieved when he set out to find
Vinland the Good, and came back no more, whether he was or was not
remembered by the Aztecs as Quetzalcoatl.  The tale of the wanderers was
Mr. Morris's own; all the rest are of the dateless heritage of our race,
fairy tales coming to us, now "softly breathed through the flutes of the
Grecians," now told by Sagamen of Iceland.  The whole performance is
astonishingly equable; we move on a high tableland, where no tall peaks
of Parnassus are to be climbed.  Once more literature has a narrator, on
the whole much more akin to Spenser than to Chaucer, Homer, or Sir
Walter.  Humour and action are not so prominent as contemplation of a
pageant reflected in a fairy mirror.  But Mr. Morris has said himself,
about his poem, what I am trying to say:--

      "Death have we hated, knowing not what it meant;
   Life have we loved, through green leaf and through sere,
   Though still the less we knew of its intent;
   The Earth and Heaven through countless year on year,
   Slow changing, were to us but curtains fair,
   Hung round about a little room, where play
   Weeping and laughter of man's empty day."

Mr. Morris had shown, in various ways, the strength of his sympathy with
the heroic sagas of Iceland.  He had rendered one into verse, in "The
Earthly Paradise," above all, "Grettir the Strong" and "The Volsunga" he
had done into English prose.  His next great poem was "The Story of
Sigurd," a poetic rendering of the theme which is, to the North, what the
Tale of Troy is to Greece, and to all the world.  Mr. Morris took the
form of the story which is most archaic, and bears most birthmarks of its
savage origin--the version of the "Volsunga," not the German shape of the
"Nibelungenlied."  He showed extraordinary skill, especially in making
human and intelligible the story of Regin, Otter, Fafnir, and the Dwarf
Andvari's Hoard.

   "It was Reidmar the Ancient begat me; and now was he waxen old,
   And a covetous man and a king; and he bade, and I built him a hall,
   And a golden glorious house; and thereto his sons did he call,
   And he bade them be evil and wise, that his will through them might be
   wrought.
   Then he gave unto Fafnir my brother the soul that feareth nought,
   And the brow of the hardened iron, and the hand that may never fail,
   And the greedy heart of a king, and the ear that hears no wail.

   "But next unto Otter my brother he gave the snare and the net,
   And the longing to wend through the wild-wood, and wade the highways
   wet;
   And the foot that never resteth, while aught be left alive
   That hath cunning to match man's cunning or might with his might to
   strive.

   "And to me, the least and the youngest, what gift for the slaying of
   ease?
   Save the grief that remembers the past, and the fear that the future
   sees;
   And the hammer and fashioning-iron, and the living coal of fire;
   And the craft that createth a semblance, and fails of the heart's
   desire;
   And the toil that each dawning quickens, and the task that is never
   done;
   And the heart that longeth ever, nor will look to the deed that is
   won.

   "Thus gave my father the gifts that might never be taken again;
   Far worse were we now than the Gods, and but little better than men.
   But yet of our ancient might one thing had we left us still:
   We had craft to change our semblance, and could shift us at our will
   Into bodies of the beast-kind, or fowl, or fishes cold;
   For belike no fixed semblance we had in the days of old,
   Till the Gods were waxen busy, and all things their form must take
   That knew of good and evil, and longed to gather and make."

But when we turn to the passage of the _eclaircissement_ between Sigurd
and Brynhild, that most dramatic and most _modern_ moment in the ancient
tragedy, the moment where the clouds of savage fancy scatter in the light
of a hopeless human love, then, I must confess, I prefer the simple,
brief prose of Mr. Morris's translation of the "Volsunga" to his rather
periphrastic paraphrase.  Every student of poetry may make the comparison
for himself, and decide for himself whether the old or the new is better.
Again, in the final fight and massacre in the hall of Atli, I cannot but
prefer the Slaying of the Wooers, at the close of the "Odyssey," or the
last fight of Roland at Roncesvaux, or the prose version of the
"Volsunga."  All these are the work of men who were war-smiths as well as
song-smiths.  Here is a passage from the "murder grim and great":--

   "So he saith in the midst of the foemen with his war-flame reared on
   high,
   But all about and around him goes up a bitter cry
   From the iron men of Atli, and the bickering of the steel
   Sends a roar up to the roof-ridge, and the Niblung war-ranks reel
   Behind the steadfast Gunnar: but lo, have ye seen the corn,
   While yet men grind the sickle, by the wind streak overborne
   When the sudden rain sweeps downward, and summer groweth black,
   And the smitten wood-side roareth 'neath the driving thunder-wrack?
   So before the wise-heart Hogni shrank the champions of the East
   As his great voice shook the timbers in the hall of Atli's feast,
   There he smote and beheld not the smitten, and by nought were his
   edges stopped;
   He smote and the dead were thrust from him; a hand with its shield he
   lopped;
   There met him Atli's marshal, and his arm at the shoulder he shred;
   Three swords were upreared against him of the best of the kin of the
   dead;
   And he struck off a head to the rightward, and his sword through a
   throat he thrust,
   But the third stroke fell on his helm-crest, and he stooped to the
   ruddy dust,
   And uprose as the ancient Giant, and both his hands were wet:
   Red then was the world to his eyen, as his hand to the labour he set;
   Swords shook and fell in his pathway, huge bodies leapt and fell;
   Harsh grided shield and war-helm like the tempest-smitten bell,
   And the war-cries ran together, and no man his brother knew,
   And the dead men loaded the living, as he went the war-wood through;
   And man 'gainst man was huddled, till no sword rose to smite,
   And clear stood the glorious Hogni in an island of the fight,
   And there ran a river of death 'twixt the Niblung and his foes,
   And therefrom the terror of men and the wrath of the Gods arose."

I admit that this does not affect me as does the figure of Odysseus
raining his darts of doom, or the courtesy of Roland when the blinded
Oliver smites him by mischance, and, indeed, the Keeping of the Stair by
Umslopogaas appeals to me more vigorously as a strenuous picture of war.
To be just to Mr. Morris, let us give his rendering of part of the
Slaying of the Wooers, from his translation of the "Odyssey":--

   "And e'en as the word he uttered, he drew his keen sword out
   Brazen, on each side shearing, and with a fearful shout
   Rushed on him; but Odysseus that very while let fly
   And smote him with the arrow in the breast, the pap hard by,
   And drove the swift shaft to the liver, and adown to the ground fell
   the sword
   From out of his hand, and doubled he hung above the board,
   And staggered; and whirling he fell, and the meat was scattered
   around,
   And the double cup moreover, and his forehead smote the ground;
   And his heart was wrung with torment, and with both feet spurning he
   smote
   The high-seat; and over his eyen did the cloud of darkness float.

   "And then it was Amphinomus, who drew his whetted sword
   And fell on, making his onrush 'gainst Odysseus the glorious lord,
   If perchance he might get him out-doors: but Telemachus him forewent,
   And a cast of the brazen war-spear from behind him therewith sent
   Amidmost of his shoulders, that drave through his breast and out,
   And clattering he fell, and the earth all the breadth of his forehead
   smote."

There is no need to say more of Mr. Morris's "Odysseus."  Close to the
letter of the Greek he usually keeps, but where are the surge and thunder
of Homer?  Apparently we must accent the penultimate in "Amphinomus" if
the line is to scan.  I select a passage of peaceful beauty from Book
V.:--

   "But all about that cavern there grew a blossoming wood,
   Of alder and of poplar and of cypress savouring good;
   And fowl therein wing-spreading were wont to roost and be,
   For owls were there and falcons, and long-tongued crows of the sea,
   And deeds of the sea they deal with and thereof they have a care
   But round the hollow cavern there spread and flourished fair
   A vine of garden breeding, and in its grapes was glad;
   And four wells of the white water their heads together had,
   And flowing on in order four ways they thence did get;
   And soft were the meadows blooming with parsley and violet.
   Yea, if thither indeed had come e'en one of the Deathless, e'en he
   Had wondered and gladdened his heart with all that was there to see.
   And there in sooth stood wondering the Flitter, the Argus-bane.
   But when o'er all these matters in his soul he had marvelled amain,
   Then into the wide cave went he, and Calypso, Godhead's Grace,
   Failed nowise there to know him as she looked upon his face;
   For never unknown to each other are the Deathless Gods, though they
   Apart from one another may be dwelling far away.
   But Odysseus the mighty-hearted within he met not there,
   Who on the beach sat weeping, as oft he was wont to wear
   His soul with grief and groaning, and weeping; yea, and he
   As the tears he was pouring downward yet gazed o'er the untilled sea."

This is close enough to the Greek, but

   "_And flowing on in order four ways they thence did get_"

is not precisely musical.  Why is Hermes "The Flitter"?  But I have often
ventured to remonstrate against these archaistic peculiarities, which to
some extent mar our pleasure in Mr. Morris's translations.  In his
version of the rich Virgilian measure they are especially out of place.
The "AEneid" is rendered with a roughness which might better befit a
translation of Ennius.  Thus the reader of Mr. Morris's poetical
translations has in his hands versions of almost literal closeness, and
(what is extremely rare) versions of poetry by a poet.  But his
acquaintance with Early English and Icelandic has added to the poet a
strain of the philologist, and his English in the "Odyssey," still more
in the "AEneid," is occasionally more _archaic_ than the Greek of 900
B.C.  So at least it seems to a reader not unversed in attempts to fit
the classical poets with an English rendering.  But the true test is in
the appreciation of the lovers of poetry in general.

To them, as to all who desire the restoration of beauty in modern life,
Mr. Morris has been a benefactor almost without example.  Indeed, were
adequate knowledge mine, Mr. Morris's poetry should have been criticised
as only a part of the vast industry of his life in many crafts and many
arts.  His place in English life and literature is unique as it is
honourable.  He did what he desired to do--he made vast additions to
simple and stainless pleasures.




CHAPTER VI: MRS. RADCLIFFE'S NOVELS


Does any one now read Mrs. Radcliffe, or am I the only wanderer in her
windy corridors, listening timidly to groans and hollow voices, and
shielding the flame of a lamp, which, I fear, will presently flicker out,
and leave me in darkness?  People know the name of "The Mysteries of
Udolpho;" they know that boys would say to Thackeray, at school, "Old
fellow, draw us Vivaldi in the Inquisition."  But have they penetrated
into the chill galleries of the Castle of Udolpho?  Have they shuddered
for Vivaldi in face of the sable-clad and masked Inquisition?  Certainly
Mrs. Radcliffe, within the memory of man, has been extremely popular.  The
thick double-columned volume in which I peruse the works of the
Enchantress belongs to a public library.  It is quite the dirtiest,
greasiest, most dog's-eared, and most bescribbled tome in the collection.
Many of the books have remained, during the last hundred years, uncut,
even to this day, and I have had to apply the paper knife to many an
author, from Alciphron (1790) to Mr. Max Muller, and Dr. Birkbeck Hill's
edition of Bozzy's "Life of Dr. Johnson."  But Mrs. Radcliffe has been
read diligently, and copiously annotated.

This lady was, in a literary sense, and though, like the sire of Evelina,
he cast her off, the daughter of Horace Walpole.  Just when King Romance
seemed as dead as Queen Anne, Walpole produced that Gothic tale, "The
Castle of Otranto," in 1764.  In that very year was born Anne Ward, who,
in 1787, married William Radcliffe, Esq., M.A., Oxon.  In 1789 she
published "The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne."  The scene, she tells us,
is laid in "the most romantic part of the Highlands, the north-east coast
of Scotland."  On castles, anywhere, she doted.  Walpole, not Smollett or
Miss Burney, inspired her with a passion for these homes of old romance.
But the north-east coast of Scotland is hardly part of the Highlands at
all, and is far from being very romantic.  The period is "the dark ages"
in general.  Yet the captive Earl, when "the sweet tranquillity of
evening threw an air of tender melancholy over his mind . . . composed
the following sonnet, which (having committed it to paper) he the next
evening dropped upon the terrace.  He had the pleasure to observe that
the paper was taken up by the ladies, who immediately retired into the
castle."  These were not the manners of the local Mackays, of the
Sinclairs, and of "the small but fierce clan of Gunn," in the dark ages.

But this was Mrs. Radcliffe's way.  She delighted in descriptions of
scenery, the more romantic the better, and usually drawn entirely from
her inner consciousness.  Her heroines write sonnets (which never but
once _are_ sonnets) and other lyrics, on every occasion.  With his usual
generosity Scott praised her landscape and her lyrics, but, indeed, they
are, as Sir Walter said of Mrs. Hemans, "too poetical," and probably they
were skipped, even by her contemporary devotees.  "The Castles of Athlin
and Dunbayne" frankly do not permit themselves to be read, and it was not
till 1790, with "A Sicilian Romance," that Mrs. Radcliffe "found
herself," and her public.  After reading, with breathless haste, through,
"A Sicilian Romance," and "The Romance of the Forest," in a single day,
it would ill become me to speak lightly of Mrs. Radcliffe.  Like
Catherine Morland, I love this lady's tender yet terrific fancy.

Mrs. Radcliffe does not always keep on her highest level, but we must
remember that her last romance, "The Italian," is by far her best.  She
had been feeling her way to this pitch of excellence, and, when she had
attained to it, she published no more.  The reason is uncertain.  She
became a Woman's Rights woman, and wrote "The Female Advocate," not a
novel!  Scott thinks that she may have been annoyed by her imitators, or
by her critics, against whom he defends her in an admirable passage, to
be cited later.  Meanwhile let us follow Mrs. Radcliffe in her upward
course.

The "Sicilian Romance" appeared in 1790, when the author's age was twenty-
six.  The book has a treble attraction, for it contains the germ of
"Northanger Abbey," and the germ of "Jane Eyre," and--the germ of Byron!
Like "Joseph Andrews," "Northanger Abbey" began as a parody (of Mrs.
Radcliffe) and developed into a real novel of character.  So too Byron's
gloomy scowling adventurers, with their darkling past, are mere
repetitions in rhyme of Mrs. Radcliffe's Schedoni.  This is so obvious
that, when discussing Mrs. Radcliffe's Schedoni, Scott adds, in a note,
parallel passages from Byron's "Giaour."  Sir Walter did not mean to
mock, he merely compared two kindred spirits.  "The noble poet" "kept on
the business still," and broke into octosyllabics, borrowed from Scott,
his descriptions of miscreants borrowed from Mrs. Radcliffe.

"A Sicilian Romance" has its scene in the palace of Ferdinand, fifth
Marquis of Mazzini, on the northern coast of Sicily.  The time is about
1580, but there is nothing in the manners or costume to indicate that, or
any other period.  Such "local colour" was unknown to Mrs. Radcliffe, as
to Clara Reeve.  In Horace Walpole, however, a character goes so far in
the mediaeval way as to say "by my halidome."

The Marquis Mazzini had one son and two daughters by his first amiable
consort, supposed to be long dead when the story opens.  The son is the
original of Henry Tilney in "Northanger Abbey," and in General Tilney
does Catherine Morland recognise a modern Marquis of Mazzini.  But the
Marquis's wife, to be sure, is _not_ dead; like the first Mrs. Rochester
she is concealed about the back premises, and, as in "Jane Eyre," it is
her movements, and those of her gaolers, that produce mystery, and make
the reader suppose that "the place is haunted."  It is, of course, only
the mystery and the "machinery" of Mrs. Radcliffe that Miss Bronte
adapted.  These passages in "Jane Eyre" have been censured, but it is not
easy to see how the novel could do without them.  Mrs. Radcliffe's tale
entirely depends on its machinery.  Her wicked Marquis, having secretly
immured Number One, has now a new and beautiful Number Two, whose
character does not bear inspection.  This domestic position, as Number
Two, we know, was declined by the austere virtue of Jane Eyre.

"Phenomena" begin in the first chapter of "A Sicilian Romance,"
mysterious lights wander about uninhabited parts of the castle, and are
vainly investigated by young Ferdinand, son of the Marquis.  This
Hippolytus the Chaste, loved all in vain by the reigning Marchioness, is
adored by, and adores, her stepdaughter, Julia.  Jealousy and revenge are
clearly indicated.  But, in chasing mysterious lights and figures through
mouldering towers, Ferdinand gets into the very undesirable position of
David Balfour, when he climbs, in the dark, the broken turret stair in
his uncle's house of Shaws (in "Kidnapped").  Here is a _fourth_ author
indebted to Mrs. Radcliffe: her disciples are Miss Austen, Byron, Miss
Bronte, and Mr. Louis Stevenson!  Ferdinand "began the ascent.  He had
not proceeded very far, when the stones of a step which his foot had just
quitted gave way, and, dragging with them those adjoining, formed a chasm
in the staircase that terrified even Ferdinand, who was left tottering on
the suspended half of the steps, in momentary expectation of falling to
the bottom with the stone on which he rested.  In the terror which this
occasioned, he attempted to save himself by catching at a kind of beam
which suspended over the stairs, when the lamp dropped from his hand, and
he was left in total darkness."

Can anything be more "amazing horrid," above all as there are mysterious
figures in and about the tower?  Mrs. Radcliffe's lamps always fall, or
are blown out, in the nick of time, an expedient already used by Clara
Reeve in that very mild but once popular ghost story, "The Old English
Baron" (1777).  All authors have such favourite devices, and I wonder how
many fights Mr. Stanley Weyman's heroes have fought, from the cellar to
their favourite tilting ground, the roof of a strange house!

Ferdinand hung on to the beam for an hour, when the ladies came with a
light, and he scrambled back to solid earth.  In his next nocturnal
research, "a sullen groan arose from beneath where he stood," and when he
tried to force a door (there are scores of such weird doors in Mrs.
Radcliffe) "a groan was repeated, more hollow and dreadful than the
first.  His courage forsook him"--and no wonder!  Of course he could not
know that the author of the groans was, in fact, his long-lost mother,
immured by his father, the wicked Marquis.  We need not follow the
narrative through the darkling crimes and crumbling galleries of this
terrible castle on the north coast of Sicily.  Everybody is always
"gazing in silent terror," and all the locks are rusty.  "A savage and
dexterous banditti" play a prominent part, and the imprisoned Ferdinand
"did not hesitate to believe that the moans he heard came from the
restless spirit of the murdered della Campo."  No working hypothesis
could seem more plausible, but it was erroneous.  Mrs. Radcliffe does not
deal in a single avowed ghost.  She finally explains away, by normal
causes, everything that she does not forget to explain.  At the most, she
indulges herself in a premonitory dream.  On this point she is true to
common sense, without quite adopting the philosophy of David Hume.  "I do
not say that spirits have appeared," she remarks, "but if several
discreet unprejudiced persons were to assure me that they had seen one--I
should not be bold or proud enough to reply, it is impossible!"  But Hume
_was_ bold and proud enough: he went further than Mrs. Radcliffe.

Scott censures Mrs. Radcliffe's employment of explanations.  He is in
favour of "boldly avowing the use of supernatural machinery," or of
leaving the matter in the vague, as in the appearance of the wraith of
the dying Alice to Ravenswood.  But, in Mrs. Radcliffe's day, common
sense was so tyrannical, that the poor lady's romances would have been
excluded from families, if she had not provided normal explanations of
her groans, moans, voices, lights, and wandering figures.  The ghost-hunt
in the castle finally brings Julia to a door, whose bolts, "strengthened
by desperation, she forced back."  There was a middle-aged lady in the
room, who, after steadily gazing on Julia, "suddenly exclaimed, 'My
daughter!' and fainted away."  Julia being about seventeen, and Madame
Mazzini, her mamma, having been immured for fifteen years, we observe, in
this recognition, the force of the maternal instinct.

The wicked Marquis was poisoned by the partner of his iniquities, who
anon stabbed herself with a poniard.  The virtuous Julia marries the
chaste Hippolytus, and, says the author, "in reviewing this story, we
perceive a singular and striking instance of moral retribution."

We also remark the futility of locking up an inconvenient wife, fabled to
be defunct, in one's own country house.  Had Mr. Rochester, in "Jane
Eyre," studied the "Sicilian Romance," he would have shunned an obsolete
system, inconvenient at best, and apt, in the long run, to be disastrous.

In the "Romance of the Forest" (1791), Mrs. Radcliffe remained true to
Mr. Stanley Weyman's favourite period, the end of the sixteenth century.
But there are no historical characters or costumes in the story, and all
the persons, as far as language and dress go, might have been alive in
1791.

The story runs thus: one de la Motte, who appears to have fallen from
dissipation to swindling, is, on the first page, discovered flying from
Paris and the law, with his wife, in a carriage.  Lost in the dark on a
moor, he follows a light, and enters an old lonely house.  He is seized
by ruffians, locked in, and expects to be murdered, which he knows that
he cannot stand, for he is timid by nature.  In fact, a ruffian puts a
pistol to La Motte's breast with one hand, while with the other he drags
along a beautiful girl of eighteen.  "Swear that you will convey this
girl where I may never see her more," exclaims the bully, and La Motte,
with the young lady, is taken back to his carriage.  "If you return
within an hour you will be welcomed with a brace of bullets," is the
ruffian's parting threat.

So La Motte, Madame La Motte, and the beautiful girl drive away, La
Motte's one desire being to find a retreat safe from the police of an
offended justice.

Is this not a very original, striking, and affecting situation;
provocative, too, of the utmost curiosity?  A fugitive from justice, in a
strange, small, dark, ancient house, is seized, threatened, and presented
with a young and lovely female stranger.  In this opening we recognise
the hand of a master genius.  There _must_ be an explanation of
proceedings so highly unconventional, and what can the reason be?  The
reader is _empoigne_ in the first page, and eagerly follows the flight of
La Motte, also of Peter, his coachman, an attached, comic, and familiar
domestic.  After a few days, the party observe, in the recesses of a
gloomy forest, the remains of a Gothic abbey.  They enter; by the light
of a flickering lamp they penetrate "horrible recesses," discover a room
handsomely provided with a trapdoor, and determine to reside in a
dwelling so congenial, though, as La Motte judiciously remarks, "not in
all respects strictly Gothic."  After a few days, La Motte finds that
somebody is inquiring for him in the nearest town.  He seeks for a hiding-
place, and explores the chambers under the trapdoor.  Here he finds, in a
large chest--what do you suppose he finds?  It was a human skeleton!  Yet
in this awful vicinity he and his wife, with Adeline (the fair stranger)
conceal themselves.  The brave Adeline, when footsteps are heard, and a
figure is beheld in the upper rooms, accosts the stranger.  His keen eye
presently detects the practicable trapdoor, he raises it, and the
cowering La Motte recognises in the dreaded visitor--his own son, who had
sought him out of filial affection.

Already Madame La Motte has become jealous of Adeline, especially as her
husband is oddly melancholy, and apt to withdraw into a glade, where he
mysteriously disappears into the recesses of a genuine Gothic sepulchre.
This, to the watchful eyes of a wife, is proof of faithlessness on the
part of a husband.  As the son, Louis, really falls in love with Adeline,
Madame La Motte becomes doubly unkind to her, and Adeline now composes
quantities of poems to Night, to Sunset, to the Nocturnal Gale, and so
on.

In this uncomfortable situation, two strangers arrive in a terrific
thunderstorm.  One is young, the other is a Marquis.  On seeing this
nobleman, "La Motte's limbs trembled, and a ghastly paleness overspread
his countenance.  The Marquis was little less agitated," and was, at
first, decidedly hostile.  La Motte implored forgiveness--for what?--and
the Marquis (who, in fact, owned the Abbey, and had a shooting lodge not
far off) was mollified.  They all became rather friendly, and Adeline
asked La Motte about the stories of hauntings, and a murder said to have
been, at some time, committed in the Abbey.  La Motte said that the
Marquis could have no connection with such fables; still, there _was_ the
skeleton.

Meanwhile, Adeline had conceived a flame for Theodore, the young officer
who accompanied his colonel, the Marquis, on their first visit to the
family.  Theodore, who returned her passion, had vaguely warned her of an
impending danger, and then had failed to keep tryst with her, one
evening, and had mysteriously disappeared.  Then unhappy Adeline dreamed
about a prisoner, a dying man, a coffin, a voice from the coffin, and the
appearance within it of the dying man, amidst torrents of blood.  The
chamber in which she saw these visions was most vividly represented.  Next
day the Marquis came to dinner, and, _though reluctantly_, consented to
pass the night: Adeline, therefore, was put in a new bedroom.  Disturbed
by the wind shaking the mouldering tapestry, she found a concealed door
behind the arras and a suite of rooms, _one of which was the chamber of
her dream_!  On the floor lay a rusty dagger!  The bedstead, being
touched, crumbled, and disclosed a small roll of manuscripts.  They were
not washing bills, like those discovered by Catherine Morland in
"Northanger Abbey."  Returning to her own chamber, Adeline heard the
Marquis professing to La Motte a passion for herself.  Conceive her
horror!  Silence then reigned, till all was sudden noise and confusion;
the Marquis flying in terror from his room, and insisting on instant
departure.  His emotion was powerfully displayed.

What had occurred?  Mrs. Radcliffe does not say, but horror, whether
caused by a conscience ill at ease, or by events of a terrific and
supernatural kind, is plainly indicated.  In daylight, the Marquis
audaciously pressed his unholy suit, and even offered marriage, a hollow
mockery, for he was well known to be already a married man.  The scenes
of Adeline's flight, capture, retention in an elegant villa of the
licentious noble, renewed flight, rescue by Theodore, with Theodore's
arrest, and wounding of the tyrannical Marquis, are all of breathless
interest.  Mrs. Radcliffe excels in narratives of romantic escapes, a
topic always thrilling when well handled.  Adeline herself is carried
back to the Abbey, but La Motte, who had rather not be a villain if he
could avoid it, enables her again to secure her freedom.  He is clearly
in the power of the Marquis, and his life has been unscrupulous, but he
retains traces of better things.  Adeline is now secretly conveyed to a
peaceful valley in Savoy, the home of the honest Peter (the coachman),
who accompanies her.  Here she learns to know and value the family of La
Luc, the kindred of her Theodore (by a romantic coincidence), and, in the
adorable scenery of Savoy, she throws many a ballad to the Moon.

La Motte, on the discovery of Adeline's flight, was cast into prison by
the revengeful Marquis, for, in fact, soon after settling in the Abbey,
it had occurred to La Motte to commence highwayman.  His very first
victim had been the Marquis, and, during his mysterious retreats to a
tomb in a glade in the forest, he had, in short, been contemplating his
booty, jewels which he could not convert into ready money.  Consequently,
when the Marquis first entered the Abbey, La Motte had every reason for
alarm, and only pacified the vindictive aristocrat by yielding to his
cruel schemes against the virtue of Adeline.

Happily for La Motte, a witness appeared at his trial, who cast a lurid
light on the character of the Marquis.  That villain, to be plain, had
murdered his elder brother (the skeleton of the Abbey), and had been
anxious to murder, it was added, his own natural daughter--that is,
Adeline!  His hired felons, however, placed her in a convent, and, later
(rather than kill her, on which the Marquis insisted), simply thrust her
into the hands of La Motte, who happened to pass by that way, as we saw
in the opening of this romance.  Thus, in making love to Adeline, his
daughter, the Marquis was, unconsciously, in an awkward position.  On
further examination of evidence, however, things proved otherwise.
Adeline was _not_ the natural daughter of the Marquis, but his niece, the
legitimate daughter and heiress of his brother (the skeleton of the
Abbey).  The MS. found by Adeline in the room of the rusty dagger added
documentary evidence, for it was a narrative of the sufferings of her
father (later the skeleton), written by him in the Abbey where he was
imprisoned and stabbed, and where his bones were discovered by La Motte.
The hasty nocturnal flight of the Marquis from the Abbey is thus
accounted for: he had probably been the victim of a terrific
hallucination representing his murdered brother; whether it was veridical
or merely subjective Mrs. Radcliffe does not decide.  Rather than face
the outraged justice of his country, the Marquis, after these
revelations, took poison.  La Motte was banished; and Adeline, now
mistress of the Abbey, removed the paternal skeleton to "the vault of his
ancestors."  Theodore and Adeline were united, and virtuously resided in
a villa on the beautiful banks of the Lake of Geneva.

Such is the "Romance of the Forest," a fiction in which character is
subordinate to plot and incident.  There is an attempt at character
drawing in La Motte, and in his wife; the hero and heroine are not
distinguishable from Julia and Hippolytus.  But Mrs. Radcliffe does not
aim at psychological niceties, and we must not blame her for withholding
what it was no part of her purpose to give.  "The Romance of the Forest"
was, so far, infinitely the most thrilling of modern English works of
fiction.  "Every reader felt the force," says Scott, "from the sage in
his study, to the family group in middle life," and nobody felt it more
than Scott himself, then a young gentleman of nineteen, who, when asked
how his time was employed, answered, "I read no Civil Law."  He did read
Mrs. Radcliffe, and, in "The Betrothed," followed her example in the
story of the haunted chamber where the heroine faces the spectre attached
to her ancient family.

"The Mysteries of Udolpho," Mrs. Radcliffe's next and most celebrated
work, is not (in the judgment of this reader, at least) her masterpiece.
The booksellers paid her what Scott, erroneously, calls "the
unprecedented sum of 500 pounds" for the romance, and they must have made
a profitable bargain.  "The public," says Scott, "rushed upon it with all
the eagerness of curiosity, and rose from it with unsated appetite."  I
arise with a thoroughly sated appetite from the "Mysteries of Udolpho."
The book, as Sir Walter saw, is "The Romance of the Forest" raised to a
higher power.  We have a similar and similarly situated heroine, cruelly
detached from her young man, and immured in a howling wilderness of a
brigand castle in the Apennines.  In place of the Marquis is a miscreant
on a larger and more ferocious scale.  The usual mysteries of voices,
lights, secret passages, and innumerable doors are provided regardless of
economy.  The great question, which I shall not answer, is, _what did the
Black Veil conceal_?  _Not_ "the bones of Laurentina," as Catherine
Morland supposed.

Here is Emily's adventure with the veil.  "She paused again, and then,
with a timid hand, lifted the veil; but instantly let it fall--perceiving
that what it had concealed was no picture, and before she could leave the
chamber she dropped senseless on the floor.  When she recovered her
recollection, . . . horror occupied her mind."  Countless mysteries
coagulate around this veil, and the reader is apt to be disappointed when
the awful curtain is withdrawn.  But he has enjoyed, for several hundred
pages, the pleasures of anticipation.  A pedantic censor may remark that,
while the date of the story is 1580, all the virtuous people live in an
idyllic fashion, like creatures of Rousseau, existing solely for
landscape and the affections, writing poetry on Nature, animate and
inanimate, including the common Bat, and drawing in water colours.  In
those elegant avocations began, and in these, after an interval of
adventures "amazing horrid," concluded the career of Emily.

Mrs. Radcliffe keeps the many entangled threads of her complex web well
in hand, and incidents which puzzle you at the beginning fall naturally
into place before the end.  The character of the heroine's silly, vain,
unkind, and unreasonable aunt is vividly designed (that Emily should
mistake the corse of a moustached bandit for that of her aunt is an
incident hard to defend).  Valancourt is not an ordinary spotless hero,
but sows his wild oats, and reaps the usual harvest; and Annette is a
good sample of the usual _soubrette_.  When one has said that the
landscapes and bandits of this romance are worthy of Poussin and Salvator
Rosa, from whom they were probably translated into words, not much
remains to be added.  Sir Walter, after repeated perusals, considered
"Udolpho" "a step beyond Mrs. Radcliffe's former work, high as that had
justly advanced her."  But he admits that "persons of no mean judgment"
preferred "The Romance of the Forest."  With these amateurs I would be
ranked.  The ingenuity and originality of the "Romance" are greater: our
friend the skeleton is better than that Thing which was behind the Black
Veil, the escapes of Adeline are more thrilling than the escape of Emily,
and the "Romance" is not nearly so long, not nearly so prolix as
"Udolpho."

The roof and crown of Mrs. Radcliffe's work is "The Italian" (1797), for
which she received 800 pounds. {6}  The scene is Naples, the date about
1764; the topic is the thwarted loves of Vivaldi and Ellena; the villain
is the admirable Schedoni, the prototype of Byron's lurid characters.

"The Italian" is an excellent novel.  The Prelude, "the dark and vaulted
gateway," is not unworthy of Hawthorne, who, I suspect, had studied Mrs.
Radcliffe.  The theme is more like a theme of this world than usual.  The
parents of a young noble might well try to prevent him from marrying an
unknown and penniless girl.  The Marchese Vivaldi only adopts the
ordinary paternal measures; the Marchesa, and her confessor the
dark-souled Schedoni, go farther--as far as assassination.  The casuistry
by which Schedoni brings the lady to this pass, while representing her as
the originator of the scheme, is really subtle, and the scenes between
the pair show an extraordinary advance on Mrs. Radcliffe's earlier art.
The mysterious Monk who counteracts Schedoni remains an unsolved mystery
to me, but of that I do not complain.  He is as good as the Dweller in
the Catacombs who haunts Miriam in Hawthorne's "Marble Faun."  The
Inquisition, its cells, and its tribunals are coloured

      "As when some great painter dips
   His pencil in the gloom of earthquake and eclipse."

The comic valet, Paulo, who insists on being locked up in the dungeons of
the Inquisition merely because his master is there, reminds one of Samuel
Weller, he is a Neapolitan Samivel.  The escapes are Mrs. Radcliffe's
most exciting escapes, and to say that is to say a good deal.  Poetry is
not written, or not often, by the heroine.  The scene in which Schedoni
has his dagger raised to murder Ellena, when he discovers that she is his
daughter, "is of a new, grand, and powerful character" (Scott), while it
is even more satisfactory to learn later that Ellena was _not_ Schedoni's
daughter after all.

Why Mrs. Radcliffe, having reached such a pitch of success, never again
published a novel, remains more mysterious than any of her Mysteries.
Scott justly remarks that her censors attacked her "by showing that she
does not possess the excellences proper to a style of composition totally
different from that which she has attempted."  This is the usual way of
reviewers.  Tales that fascinated Scott, Fox, and Sheridan, "which
possess charms for the learned and unlearned, the grave and gay, the
gentleman and clown," do not deserve to be dismissed with a sneer by
people who have never read them.  Following Horace Walpole in some
degree, Mrs. Radcliffe paved the way for Scott, Byron, Maturin, Lewis,
and Charlotte Bronte, just as Miss Burney filled the gap between Smollett
and Miss Austen.  Mrs. Radcliffe, in short, kept the Lamp of Romance
burning much more steadily than the lamps which, in her novels, are
always blown out, in the moment of excited apprehension, by the night
wind walking in the dank corridors of haunted abbeys.  But mark the
cruelty of an intellectual parent!  Horace Walpole was Mrs. Radcliffe's
father in the spirit.  Yet, on September 4, 1794, he wrote to Lady
Ossory: "I have read some of the descriptive verbose tales, of which your
Ladyship says I was the patriarch by several mothers" (Miss Reeve and
Mrs. Radcliffe?).  "All I can say for myself is that I do not think my
concubines have produced issue more natural for excluding the aid of
anything marvellous."




CHAPTER VII: A SCOTTISH ROMANTICIST OF 1830


The finding of a rare book that you have wanted long is one of the
happier moments in life.  Whatever we may think of life when we
contemplate it as a whole, it is a delight to discover what one has
sought for years, especially if the book be a book which you really want
to read, and not a thing whose value is given by the fashion of
collecting.  Perhaps nobody ever collected before

   THE
   DEATH-WAKE, OR LUNACY
   A NECROMAUNT

   In Three Chimeras

   BY THOMAS T. STODDART.

   "Is't like that lead contains her?--
   It were too gross
   To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave."--
   _Shakespeare_.

   EDINBURGH:
   Printed for HENRY CONSTABLE, Edinburgh,
   And HURST, CHANCE, & CO., London.

   MDCCCXXXI.

This is my rare book, and it is rare for an excellent good reason, as
will be shown.  But first of the author.  Mr. Thomas Tod Stoddart was
born in 1810.  He died in 1880.  Through all his pilgrimage of
three-score years and ten, his "rod and staff did comfort him," as the
Scottish version of the Psalms has it; nay, his staff was his rod.  He
"was an angler," as he remarked when a friend asked: "Well, Tom, what are
you doing now."  He was the patriarch, the Father Izaak, of Scottish
fishers, and he sleeps, according to his desire, like Scott, within
hearing of the Tweed.  His memoir, published by his daughter, in
"Stoddart's Angling Songs" (Blackwood), is an admirable biography, _quo
fit ut omnis Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella Vita senis_.

But it is with the "young Tom Stoddart," the poet of twenty, not with the
old angling sage, that we have to do.  Miss Stoddart has discreetly
republished only the Angling Songs of her father, the pick of them being
classical in their way.  Now, as Mr. Arnold writes:--

   "Two desires toss about
      The poet's feverish blood,
   One drives him to the world without,
      And one to solitude."

The young Stoddart's two desires were poetry and fishing.  He began with
poetry.  "At the age of ten his whole desire was to produce an immortal
tragedy . . . Blood and battle were the powers with which he worked, and
with no meaner tool.  Every other dramatic form he despised."  It is
curious to think of the schoolboy, the born Romanticist, labouring at
these things, while Gerard de Nerval, and Victor Hugo, and Theophile
Gautier, and Petrus Borel were boys also--boys of the same ambitions, and
with much the same romantic tastes.  Stoddart had, luckily, another love
besides the Muse.  "With the spring and the May fly, the dagger dipped in
gore paled before the supple rod, and the dainty midge."  Finally, the
rod and midge prevailed.

   "Wee dour-looking hooks are the thing,
   Mouse body and laverock wing."

But before he quite abandoned all poetry save fishing ditties, he wrote
and published the volume whose title-page we have printed, "The Death
Wake."  The lad who drove home from an angling expedition in a hearse had
an odd way of combining his amusements.  He lived among poets and critics
who were anglers--Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd (who cast but a heavy line,
they say, in Yarrow), Aytoun, Christopher North, De Quincey--

   "No fisher
   But a well-wisher
   To the game,"

as Scott has it--these were his companions, older or younger.  None of
these, certainly not Wilson, nor Hogg, nor Aytoun, were friends of the
Romantic school, as illustrated by Keats and Shelley.  None of them
probably knew much of Gautier, De Nerval, Borel, le lycanthrope, and the
other boys in that boyish movement of 1830.  It was only Stoddart,
unconsciously in sympathy with Paris, and censured by his literary
friends, who produced the one British Romantic work of 1830.  The title
itself shows that he was partly laughing at his own performance; he has
the mockery of _Les Jeunes France_ in him, as well as the wormy and
obituary joys of _La Comedie de la Mort_.  The little book came out,
inspired by "all the poetasters."  Christopher North wrote, four years
later, in _Blackwood's Magazine_, a tardy review.  He styled it "an
ingeniously absurd poem, with an ingeniously absurd title, written in a
strange, namby-pamby sort of style, between the weakest of Shelley and
the strongest of Barry Cornwall."  The book "fell dead from the Press,"
far more dead than "Omar Khayyam."  Nay, misfortune pursued it, Miss
Stoddart kindly informs me, and it was doomed to the flames.  The
"remainder," the bulk of the edition, was returned to the poet in sheets,
and by him was deposited in a garret.  The family had a cook, one Betty,
a descendant, perhaps, of "that unhappy Betty or Elizabeth Barnes, cook
of Mr. Warburton, Somerset Herald," who burned, among other quartos,
Shakespeare's "Henry I.," "Henry II.," and "King Stephen."  True to her
inherited instincts, Mr. Stoddart's Betty, slowly, relentlessly, through
forty years, used "The Death Wake" for the needs and processes of her
art.  The whole of the edition, except probably a few "presentation
copies," perished in the kitchen.  As for that fell cook, let us hope
that

   "The Biblioclastic Dead
      Have diverse pains to brook,
   They break Affliction's bread
      With Betty Barnes, the Cook,"

as the author of "The Bird Bride" sings.

Miss Stoddart had just informed me of this disaster, which left one
almost hopeless of ever owning a copy of "The Death Wake," when I found a
brown paper parcel among many that contained to-day's minor poetry "with
the author's compliments," and lo, in this unpromising parcel was the
long-sought volume!  Ever since one was a small boy, reading Stoddart's
"Scottish Angler," and old _Blackwood's_, one had pined for a sight of
"The Necromaunt," and here, clean in its "pure purple mantle" of smooth
cloth, lay the desired one!

   "Like Dian's kiss, unasked, unsought,
   It gave itself, and was not bought,"

being, indeed, the discovery and gift of a friend who fishes and studies
the Lacustrine Muses.

The copy has a peculiar interest; it once belonged to Aytoun, the writer
of "The Scottish Cavaliers," of "The Bon Gaultier Ballads," and of
"Firmilian," the scourge of the Spasmodic School.  Mr. Aytoun has adorned
the margins with notes and with caricatures of skulls and cross-bones,
while the fly-leaves bear a sonnet to the author, and a lyric in
doggerel.  Surely this is, indeed, a literary curiosity.  The sonnet runs
thus:--

   "O wormy Thomas Stoddart, who inheritest
      Rich thoughts and loathsome, nauseous words and rare,
   Tell me, my friend, why is it that thou ferretest
      And gropest in each death-corrupted lair?
   Seek'st thou for maggots such as have affinity
      With those in thine own brain, or dost thou think
      That all is sweet which hath a horrid stink?
   Why dost thou make Haut-gout thy sole divinity?
   Here is enough of genius to convert
      Vile dung to precious diamonds and to spare,
   Then why transform the diamond into dirt,
      And change thy mind, which should be rich and fair,
   Into a medley of creations foul,
   As if a Seraph would become a Ghoul?"

No doubt Mr. Stoddart's other passion for angling, in which he used a
Scottish latitude concerning bait, {7} impelled him to search for "worms
and maggots":--

   "Fire and faggots,
   Worms and maggots,"

as Aytoun writes on the other fly-leaf, are indeed the matter of "The
Death Wake."

Then, why, some one may ask, write about "The Death Wake" at all?  Why
rouse again the nightmare of a boy of twenty?  Certainly I am not to say
that "The Death Wake" is a pearl of great price, but it does contain
passages of poetry--of poetry very curious because it is full of the new
note, the new melody which young Mr. Tennyson was beginning to waken.  It
anticipates Beddoes, it coincides with Gautier and _Les Chimeres_ of
Gerard, it answers the accents, then unheard in England, of Poe.  Some
American who read out of the way things, and was not too scrupulous,
recognised, and robbed, a brother in Tom Stoddart.  Eleven years after
"The Death Wake" appeared in England, it was published in _Graham's
Magazine_, as "Agatha, a Necromaunt in Three Chimeras," by Louis
Fitzgerald Tasistro.  Now Poe was closely connected with _Graham's
Magazine_, and after "Arthur Gordon Pym," "Louis Fitzgerald Tasistro"
does suggest Edgar Allen Poe.  But Poe was not Tasistro.

So much for the literary history of the Lunacy.

The poem begins--Chimera I. begins:--

   "An anthem of a sister choristry!
   And, like a windward murmur of the sea,
   O'er silver shells, so solemnly it falls!"

The anthem accompanies a procession of holy fathers towards a bier;

         "Agathe
   Was on the lid--a name.  And who?  No more!
   'Twas only Agathe."

A solitary monk is prowling around in the moonlit cathedral; he has a
brow of stony marble, he has raven hair, and he falters out the name of
Agathe.  He has said adieu to that fair one, and to her sister Peace,
that lieth in her grave.  He has loved, and loves, the silent Agathe.  He
was the son of a Crusader,

         "And Julio had fain
   Have been a warrior, but his very brain
   Grew fevered at the sickly thought of death,
   And to be stricken with a want of breath."

On the whole he did well not to enter the service.  Mr. Aytoun has here
written--"A rum Cove for a hussar."

         "And he would say
   A curse be on their laurels.
         And anon
   Was Julio forgotten and his line--
   No wonder for this frenzied tale of mine."

How? asks Aytoun, nor has the grammatical enigma yet been unriddled.

   "Oh! he was wearied of this passing scene!
   But loved not Death; his purpose was between
   Life and the grave; and it would vibrate there
   Like a wild bird that floated far and fair
   Betwixt the sun and sea!"

So "he became monk," and was sorry he had done so, especially when he met
a pretty maid,

   "And this was Agathe, young Agathe,
   A motherless fair girl,"

whose father was a kind of Dombey, for

      "When she smiled
   He bade no father's welcome to the child,
   But even told his wish, and will'd it done,
   For her to be sad-hearted, and a nun!"

So she "took the dreary veil."

They met like a blighted Isabella and Lorenzo:

   "They met many a time
   In the lone chapels after vesper chime,
   They met in love and fear."

Then, one day,

         "He heard it said:
   Poor Julio, thy Agathe is dead."

She died

   "Like to a star within the twilight hours
   Of morning, and she was not!  Some have thought
   The Lady Abbess gave her a mad draught."

Here Mr. Aytoun, with sympathy, writes "Damn her!" (the Lady Abbess, that
is) and suggests that thought must be read "thaft."

Through "the arras of the gloom" (arras is good), the pale breezes are
moaning, and Julio is wan as stars unseen for paleness.  However, he
lifts the tombstone "as it were lightsome as a summer gladness."  "A
summer gladness," remarks Mr. Aytoun, "may possibly weigh about half-an-
ounce."  Julio came on a skull, a haggard one, in the grave, and Mr.
Aytoun kindly designs a skeleton, ringing a bell, and crying "Dust ho!"

Now go, and give your poems to your friends!

Finally Julio unburies Agathe:--

      "Thou must go,
   My sweet betrothed, with me, but not below,
   Where there is darkness, dream, and solitude,
   But where is light, and life, and one to brood
   Above thee, till thou wakest.  Ha, I fear
   Thou wilt not wake for ever, sleeping here,
   Where there are none but the winds to visit thee.
   And Convent fathers, and a choristry
   Of sisters saying Hush!  But I will sing
   Rare songs to thy pure spirit, wandering
   Down on the dews to hear me; I will tune
   The instrument of the ethereal moon,
   And all the choir of stars, to rise and fall
   In harmony and beauty musical."

Is this not melodious madness, and is this picture of the distraught
priest, setting forth to sail the seas with his dead lady, not an
invention that Nanteuil might have illustrated, and the clan of
Bousingots approved?

The Second Chimera opens nobly:--

   "A curse! a curse! {8} the beautiful pale wing
   Of a sea-bird was worn with wandering,
   And, on a sunny rock beside the shore,
   It stood, the golden waters gazing o'er;
   And they were nearing a brown amber flow
   Of weeds, that glittered gloriously below!"

Julio appears with Agathe in his arms, and what ensues is excellent of
its kind:--

   "He dropt upon a rock, and by him placed,
   Over a bed of sea-pinks growing waste,
   The silent ladye, and he mutter'd wild,
   Strange words about a mother and no child.
   "And I shall wed thee, Agathe! although
   Ours be no God-blest bridal--even so!"
   And from the sand he took a silver shell,
   That had been wasted by the fall and swell
   Of many a moon-borne tide into a ring--
   A rude, rude ring; it was a snow-white thing,
   Where a lone hermit limpet slept and died
   In ages far away.  'Thou art a bride,
   Sweet Agathe!  Wake up; we must not linger!'
   He press'd the ring upon her chilly finger,
   And to the sea-bird on its sunny stone
   Shouted, 'Pale priest that liest all alone
   Upon thy ocean altar, rise, away
   To our glad bridal!' and its wings of gray
   All lazily it spread, and hover'd by
   With a wild shriek--a melancholy cry!
   Then, swooping slowly o'er the heaving breast
   Of the blue ocean, vanished in the west."

Julio sang a mad song of a mad priest to a dead maid:--

   . . .

   "A rosary of stars, love! a prayer as we glide,
   And a whisper on the wind, and a murmur on the tide,
   And we'll say a fair adieu to the flowers that are seen,
   With shells of silver sown in radiancy between.

   "A rosary of stars, love! the purest they shall be,
   Like spirits of pale pearls in the bosom of the sea;
   Now help thee, {9} Virgin Mother, with a blessing as we go,
   Upon the laughing waters that are wandering below."

One can readily believe that Poe admired this musical sad song, if,
indeed, he ever saw the poem.

One may give too many extracts, and there is scant room for the
extraordinary witchery of the midnight sea and sky, where the dead and
the distraught drift wandering,

   "And the great ocean, like the holy hall,
   Where slept a Seraph host maritimal,
   Was gorgeous with wings of diamond"--

it was a sea

   "Of radiant and moon-breasted emerald."

There follows another song--

   "'Tis light to love thee living, girl, when hope is full and fair,
   In the springtide of thy beauty, when there is no sorrow there
   No sorrow on thy brow, and no shadow on thy heart,
   When, like a floating sea-bird, bright and beautiful thou art

   . . .

   "But when the brow is blighted, like a star at morning tide
   And faded is the crimson blush upon the cheek beside,
   It is to love as seldom love the brightest and the best,
   When our love lies like a dew upon the one that is at rest."

We ought to distrust our own admiration of what is rare, odd, novel to
us, found by us in a sense, and especially one must distrust one's liking
for the verses of a Tweedside angler, of a poet whose forebears lie in
the green kirkyard of Yarrow.  But, allowing for all this, I cannot but
think these very musical, accomplished, and, in their place, appropriate
verses, to have been written by a boy of twenty.  Nor is it a common
imagination, though busy in this vulgar field of horrors, that lifts the
pallid bride to look upon the mirror of the sea--

   "And bids her gaze into the startled sea,
   And says, 'Thine image, from eternity,
   Hath come to meet thee, ladye!' and anon
   He bade the cold corse kiss the shadowy one
   That shook amid the waters."

The picture of the madness of thirst, allied to the disease of the brain,
is extremely powerful, the delirious monk tells the salt sea waves

   "That ye have power, and passion, and a sound
   As of the flying of an angel round
   The mighty world; that ye are one with time!"

Here, I can't but think, is imagination.

Mr. Aytoun, however, noted none of those passages, nor that where, in
tempest and thunder, a shipwrecked sailor swims to the strange boat, sees
the Living Love and the Dead, and falls back into the trough of the wave.
But even the friendly pencil of Bon Gaultier approves the passage where
an isle rises above the sea, and the boat is lightly stranded on the
shore of pure and silver shells.  The horrors of corruption, in the Third
Chimera, may be left unquoted, Aytoun parodies--

   "The chalk, the chalk, the cheese, the cheese, the cheeses,
   And straightway dropped he down upon his kneeses."

Julio comes back to reason, hates the dreadful bride, and feeds on
limpets, "by the mass, he feasteth well!"

There was a holy hermit on the isle,

   "I ween like other hermits, so was he."

He is Agathe's father, and he has retired to an eligible island where he
may repent his cruelty to his daughter.  Julio tells his tale, and goes
mad again.  The apostrophe to Lunacy which follows is marked "Beautiful"
by Aytoun, and is in the spirit of Charles Lamb's remark that madness has
pleasures unknown to the sane.

         "Thou art, thou art alone,
   A pure, pure being, but the God on high
   Is with thee ever as thou goest by."

Julio watches again beside the Dead, till morning comes, bringing

   "A murmur far and far, of those that stirred
   Within the great encampment of the sea."

The tide sweeps the mad and the dead down the shores.  "He perished in a
dream."  As for the Hermit, he buried them, not knowing who they were,
but on a later day found and recognised the golden cross of Agathe,

   "For long ago he gave that blessed cross
   To his fair girl, and knew the relic still."

So the Hermit died of remorse, and one cannot say, with Walton, "and I
hope the reader is sorry."

The "other poems" are vague memories of Shelley, or anticipations of Poe.
One of them is curiously styled "Her, a Statue," and contains a passage
that reminds us of a rubaiyat of Omar's,

         "She might see
   A love-wing'd Seraph glide in glory by,
   Striking the tent of its mortality.

   "But that is but a tent wherein may rest
   A Sultan to the realm of Death addrest;
   The Sultan rises, and the dark Ferrash
   Strikes, and prepares it for another guest."

Most akin to Poe is the "Hymn to Orion,"

   "Dost thou, in thy vigil, hail
   Arcturus on his chariot pale,
   Leading him with a fiery flight--
   Over the hollow hill of night?"

This, then, is a hasty sketch, and incomplete, of a book which, perhaps,
is only a curiosity, but which, I venture to think, gave promise of a
poet.  Where is the lad of twenty who has written as well to-day--nay,
where is the mature person of forty?  There was a wind of poetry abroad
in 1830, blowing over the barricades of Paris, breathing by the sedges of
Cam, stirring the heather on the hills of Yarrow.  Hugo, Mr. Browning,
Lord Tennyson, caught the breeze in their sails, and were borne adown the
Tigris of romance.  But the breath that stirred the loch where Tom
Stoddart lay and mused in his boat, soon became to him merely the curl on
the waters of lone St. Mary's or Loch Skene, and he began casting over
the great uneducated trout of a happier time, forgetful of the Muse.  He
wrote another piece, with a sonorous and delightful title, "Ajalon of the
Winds."  Where is "Ajalon of the Winds"?  Miss Stoddart knows nothing of
it, but I fancy that the thrice-loathed Betty could have told a tale.

   MALIM CONVIVIS QVAM PLACVISSE COQVIS.

We need not, perhaps, regret that Mr. Stoddart withdrew from the
struggles and competitions of poetic literature.  No very high place, no
very glorious crown, one fancies, would have been his.  His would have
been anxiety, doubt of self, disappointment, or, if he succeeded, the
hatred, and envyings, and lies which even then dogged the steps of the
victor.  It was better to be quiet and go a-fishing.

   "Sorrow, sorrow speed away
      To our angler's quiet mound,
   With the old pilgrim, twilight gray,
      Enter through the holy ground;
   There he sleeps whose heart is twined
      With wild stream and wandering burn,
   Wooer of the western wind
      Watcher of the April morn!"




CHAPTER VIII: THE CONFESSIONS OF SAINT AUGUSTINE


My copy of the Confessions is a dark little book, "a size uncumbersome to
the nicest hand," in the format of an Elzevir, bound in black morocco,
and adorned with "blind-tooled," that is ungilt, skulls and crossbones.
It has lost the title-page with the date, but retains the frontispiece,
engraved by Huret.  Saint Augustine, in his mitre and other episcopal
array, with a quill in his hand, sits under a flood of inspiring
sunshine.  The dumpy book has been much read, was at some time the
property of Mr. John Philips, and bears one touching manuscript note, of
which more hereafter.  It is, I presume, a copy of the translation by Sir
Toby Matthew.  The author of the Preface declares, with truth, that the
translator "hath consulted so closely and earnestly with the saint that
he seemeth to have lighted his torch att his fire, and to speak in the
best and most significant English, what and how he would have done had he
understood our language."

There can be no better English version of this famous book, in which
Saint Augustine tells the story of his eager and passionate youth--a
youth tossed about by the contending tides of Love, human and divine.
Reading it to-day, with a mundane curiosity, we may half regret the space
which he gives to theological metaphysics, and his brief tantalising
glimpses of what most interests us now--the common life of men when the
Church was becoming mistress of the world, when the old Religions were
dying of allegory and moral interpretations and occult dreams.  But, even
so, Saint Augustine's interest in himself, in the very obscure origins of
each human existence, in the psychology of infancy and youth, in school
disputes, and magical pretensions; his ardent affections, his
exultations, and his faults, make his memoirs immortal among the
unveilings of the spirit.  He has studied babies, that he may know his
dark beginnings, and the seeds of grace and of evil.  "Then, by degrees,
I began to find where I was; and I had certain desires to declare my will
to those by whom it might be executed.  But I could not do it, . . .
therefore would I be tossing my arms, and sending out certain cryes, . . .
and when they obeyed me not . . . I would fall into a rage, and that
not against such as were my subjects or servants, but against my Elders
and my betters, and I would revenge myself upon them by crying."  He has
observed that infants "begin to laugh, first sleeping, and then shortly
waking;" a curious note, but he does not ask wherefore the sense of
humour, or the expression of it, comes to children first in their
slumber.  Of what do babies dream?  And what do the nested swallows
chirrup to each other in their sleep?

"Such have I understood that such infants are as I could know, and such
have I been told that I was by them who brought me up, though even they
may rather be accounted not to know, than to know these things."  One
thing he knows, "that even infancy is subject to sin."  From the womb we
are touched with evil.  "Myselfe have seene and observed some little
child, who could not speake; and yet he was all in an envious kind of
wrath, looking pale with a bitter countenance upon his foster-brother."
In an envious kind of wrath!  Is it not the motive of half our politics,
and too much of our criticism?  Such is man's inborn nature, not to be
cured by laws or reforms, not to be washed out of his veins, though
"blood be shed like rain, and tears like a mist."  For "an infant cannot
endure a companion to feed with him in a fountain of milk which is richly
abounding and overflowing, although that companion be wholly destitute,
and can take no other food but that."  This is the Original Sin,
inherited, innate, unacquired; for this are "babes span-long" to suffer,
as the famous or infamous preacher declared.  "Where, or at what time,
was I ever innocent?" he cries, and hears no answer from "the dark
backward and abysm" of the pre-natal life.

Then the Saint describes a child's learning to speak; how he amasses
verbal tokens of things, "having tamed, and, as it were, broken my mouth
to the pronouncing of them."  "And so I began to launch out more deeply
into the tempestuous traffique and society of mankind."  Tempestuous
enough he found or made it--this child of a Pagan father and a Christian
saint, Monica, the saint of Motherhood.  The past generations had
"chalked out certain laborious ways of learning," and, perhaps, Saint
Augustine never forgave the flogging pedagogue--the _plagosus Orbilius_
of his boyhood.  Long before his day he had found out that the sorrows of
children, and their joys, are no less serious than the sorrows of mature
age.  "Is there, Lord, any man of so great a mind that he can think
lightly of those racks, and hooks, and other torments, for the avoiding
whereof men pray unto Thee with great fear from one end of the world to
the other, as that he can make sport at such as doe most sharply inflict
these things upon them, as our parents laughed at the torments which we
children susteyned at our master's hands?"  Can we suppose that Monica
laughed, or was it only the heathen father who approved of "roughing it?"
"Being yet a childe, I began to beg Thy ayde and succour; and I did
loosen the knots of my tongue in praying Thee; and I begged, being yet a
little one, with no little devotion, that I might not be beaten at the
schoole."  One is reminded of Tom Tulliver, who gave up even praying that
he might learn one part of his work: "Please make Mr. --- say that I am
not to do mathematics."

The Saint admits that he lacked neither memory nor wit, "but he took
delight in playing."  "The plays and toys of men are called business,
yet, when children fall unto them, the same men punish them."  Yet the
schoolmaster was "more fed upon by rage," if beaten in any little
question of learning, than the boy; "if in any match at Ball I had been
maistered by one of my playfellows."  He "aspired proudly to be
victorious in the matches which he made," and I seriously regret to say
that he would buy a match, and pay his opponent to lose when he could not
win fairly.  He liked romances also, "to have myne eares scratched with
lying fables"--a "lazy, idle boy," like him who dallied with Rebecca and
Rowena in the holidays of Charter House.

Saint Augustine, like Sir Walter Scott at the University of Edinburgh,
was "The Greek Dunce."  Both of these great men, to their sorrow and
loss, absolutely and totally declined to learn Greek.  "But what the
reason was why I hated the Greeke language, while I was taught it, being
a child, I do not yet understand."  The Saint was far from being alone in
that distaste, and he who writes loathed Greek like poison--till he came
to Homer.  Latin the Saint loved, except "when reading, writing, and
casting of accounts was taught in Latin, which I held not for lesse
paynefull or penal than the very Greeke.  I wept for Dido's death, who
made herselfe away with the sword," he declares, "and even so, the saying
that two and two makes foure was an ungrateful song in mine ears; whereas
the wooden horse full of armed men, the burning of Troy, and the very
Ghost of Creusa, was a most delightful spectacle of vanity."

In short, the Saint was a regular Boy--a high-spirited, clever, sportive,
and wilful creature.  He was as fond as most boys of the mythical tales,
"and for that I was accounted to be a towardly boy."  Meanwhile he does
not record that Monica disliked his learning the foolish dear old heathen
fables--"that flood of hell!"

Boyhood gave place to youth, and, allowing for the vanity of
self-accusation, there can be little doubt that the youth of Saint
Augustine was _une jeunesse orageuse_.  "And what was that wherein I took
delight but to love and to be beloved."  There was ever much sentiment
and affection in his amours, but his soul "could not distinguish the
beauty of chast love from the muddy darkness of lust.  Streams of them
did confusedly boyl in me"--in his African veins.  "With a restless kind
of weariness" he pursued that Other Self of the Platonic dream,
neglecting the Love of God:

   "Oh, how late art thou come, O my Joy!"

The course of his education--for the Bar, as we should say--carried him
from home to Carthage, where he rapidly forgot the pure counsels of his
mother "as old wife's consailes."  "And we delighted in doing ill, not
only for the pleasure of the fact, but even for the affection of prayse."
Even Monica, it seems, justified the saying:

   "Every woman is at heart a Rake."

Marriage would have been his making, Saint Augustine says, "but she
desired not even that so very much, lest the cloggs of a wife might have
hindered her hopes of me . . . In the meantime the reins were loosed to
me beyond reason."  Yet the sin which he regrets most bitterly was
nothing more dreadful than the robbery of an orchard!  Pears he had in
plenty, none the less he went, with a band of roisterers, and pillaged
another man's pear tree.  "I loved the sin, not that which I obtained by
the same, but I loved the sin itself."  There lay the sting of it!  They
were not even unusually excellent pears.  "A Peare tree ther was, neere
our vineyard, heavy loaden with fruite, which tempted not greatly either
the sight or tast.  To the shaking and robbing thereof, certaine most
wicked youthes (whereof I was one) went late at night.  We carried away
huge burthens of fruit from thence, not for our owne eating, but to be
cast before the hoggs."

Oh, moonlit night of Africa, and orchard by these wild seabanks where
once Dido stood; oh, laughter of boys among the shaken leaves, and sound
of falling fruit; how do you live alone out of so many nights that no man
remembers?  For Carthage is destroyed, indeed, and forsaken of the sea,
yet that one hour of summer is to be unforgotten while man has memory of
the story of his past.

Nothing of this, to be sure, is in the mind of the Saint, but a long
remorse for this great sin, which he earnestly analyses.  Nor is he so
penitent but that he is clear-sighted, and finds the spring of his mis-
doing in the Sense of Humour!  "It was a delight and laughter which
tickled us, even at the very hart, to find that we were upon the point of
deceiving them who feared no such thing from us, and who, if they had
known it, would earnestly have procured the contrary."

Saint Augustine admits that he lived with a fast set, as people say
now--"the Depravers" or "Destroyers"; though he loved them little, "whose
actions I ever did abhor, that is, their Destruction of others, amongst
whom I yet lived with a kind of shameless bashfulness."  In short, the
"Hell-Fire Club" of that day numbered a reluctant Saint among its
members!  It was no Christian gospel, but the Hortensius of Cicero which
won him from this perilous society.  "It altered my affection, and made
me address my prayers to Thee, O Lord, and gave me other desires and
purposes than I had before.  All vain hopes did instantly grow base in
myne eyes, and I did, with an incredible heat of hart, aspire towards the
Immortality of Wisdom."  Thus it was really "Saint Tully," and not the
mystic call of _Tolle_! _Lege_! that "converted" Augustine, diverting the
current of his life into the channel of Righteousness.  "How was I
kindled then, oh, my God, with a desire to fly from earthly things
towards Thee."

There now remained only the choice of a Road.  Saint Augustine dates his
own conversion from the day of his turning to the strait Christian
orthodoxy.  Even the Platonic writings, had he known Greek, would not
have satisfied his desire.  "For where was that Charity that buildeth
upon the foundation of Humility, which is Christ Jesus? . . . These
pages" (of the Platonists) "carried not in them this countenance of
piety--the tears of confession, and that sacrifice of Thine which is an
afflicted spirit, a contrite and humbled heart, the salvation of Thy
people, the Spouse, the City, the pledge of Thy Holy Spirit, the Cup of
our Redemption.  No man doth there thus express himself.  Shall not my
soul be subject to God, for of Him is my salvation?  For He is my God,
and my salvation, my protectour; I shall never be moved.  No man doth
there once call and say to him: 'Come unto me all you that labour.'"

The heathen doctors had not the grace which Saint Augustine instinctively
knew he lacked--the grace of Humility, nor the Comfort that is not from
within but from without.  To these he aspired; let us follow him on the
path by which he came within their influence; but let us not forget that
the guide on the way to the City was kind, clever, wordy, vain old Marcus
Tullius Cicero.  It is to the City that all our faces should be set, if
we knew what belongs to our peace; thither we cast fond, hopeless,
backward glances, even if we be of those whom Tertullian calls "Saint
Satan's Penitents."  Here, in Augustine, we meet a man who found the
path--one of the few who have found it, of the few who have won that Love
which is our only rest.  It may be worth while to follow him to the
journey's end.

The treatise of Cicero, then, inflamed Augustine "to the loving and
seeking and finding and holding and inseparably embracing of wisdom
itself, wheresoever it was."  Yet, when he looked for wisdom in the
Christian Scriptures, all the literary man, the rhetorician in him, was
repelled by the simplicity of the style.  Without going further than Mr.
Pater's book, "Marius, the Epicurean," and his account of Apuleius, an
English reader may learn what kind of style a learned African of that
date found not too simple.  But Cicero, rather than Apuleius, was
Augustine's ideal; that verbose and sonorous eloquence captivated him, as
it did the early scholars when learning revived.  Augustine had dallied a
little with the sect of the Manichees, which appears to have grieved his
mother more than his wild life.

But she was comforted by a vision, when she found herself in a wood, and
met "a glorious young man," who informed her that "where she was there
should her son be also."  Curious it is to think that this very semblance
of a glorious young man haunts the magical dreams of heathen Red Indians,
advising them where they shall find game, and was beheld in such
ecstasies by John Tanner, a white man who lived with the Indians, and
adopted their religion.  The Greeks would have called this appearance
Hermes, even in this guise Odysseus met him in the oak wood of Circe's
Isle.  But Augustine was not yet in his mother's faith; he still taught
and studied rhetoric, contending for its prizes, but declining to be
aided by a certain wizard of his acquaintance.  He had entered as a
competitor for a "Tragicall poeme," but was too sportsmanlike to seek
victory by art necromantic.  Yet he followed after Astrologers, because
they used no sacrifices, and did not pretend to consult spirits.  Even
the derision of his dear friend Nebridius could not then move him from
those absurd speculations.  His friend died, and "his whole heart was
darkened;" "mine eyes would be looking for him in all places, but they
found him not, and I hated all things because they told me no news of
him."  He fell into an extreme weariness of life, and no less fear of
death.  He lived but by halves; having lost _dimidium animae suae_, and
yet dreaded death, "Lest he might chance to have wholy dyed whome I
extremely loved."  So he returned to Carthage for change, and sought
pleasure in other friendships; but "Blessed is the man that loves Thee
and his friend in Thee and his enemy for Thee.  For he only never loseth
a dear friend to whom all men are dear, for His sake, who is never lost."

Here, on the margin of the old book, beside these thoughts, so beautiful
if so helpless, like all words, to console, some reader long dead has
written:--

   "Pray for your poor servant, J. M."

And again,

   "Pray for your poor friend."

Doubtless, some Catholic reader, himself bereaved, is imploring the
prayers of a dear friend dead; and sure we need their petitions more than
they need ours, who have left this world of temptation, and are at peace.

After this loss Saint Augustine went to Rome, his ambition urging him,
perhaps, but more his disgust with the violent and riotous life of
students in Carthage.  To leave his mother was difficult, but "I lyed to
my mother, yea, such a mother, and so escaped from her."  And now he had
a dangerous sickness, and afterwards betook himself to converse with the
orthodox, for example at Milan with Saint Ambrose.  In Milan his mother
would willingly have continued in the African ritual--a Pagan
survival--carrying wine and food to the graves of the dead; but this
Saint Ambrose forbade, and she obeyed him for him "she did extremely
affect for the regard of my spirituall good."

From Milan his friend Alipius preceded him to Rome, and there "was
damnably delighted" with the gladiatorial combats, being "made drunk with
a delight in blood."  Augustine followed him to Rome, and there lost the
girl of his heart, "so that my heart was wounded, as that the very blood
did follow."  The lady had made a vow of eternal chastity, "having left
me with a son by her."  But he fell to a new love as the old one was
departed, and yet the ancient wound pained him still "after a more
desperate and dogged manner."

_Haeret letalis arundo_!

By these passions his conversion was delayed, the carnal and spiritual
wills fighting against each other within him.  "Give me chastity and
continency, O Lord," he would pray, "but do not give it yet," and perhaps
this is the frankest of the confessions of Saint Augustine.  In the midst
of this war of the spirit and the flesh, "Behold I heard a voyce, as if
it had been of some boy or girl from some house not farre off, uttering
and often repeating these words in a kind of singing voice,

   "_Tolle, Lege; Tolle, Lege_,
   Take up and read, take up and read."

So he took up a Testament, and, opening it at random, after the manner of
his Virgilian lots, read:--

"Not in surfeiting and wantonness, not in causality and uncleanness,"
with what follows.  "Neither would I read any further, neither was there
any cause why I should."  Saint Augustine does not, perhaps, mean us to
understand (as his translator does), that he was "miraculously called."
He knew what was right perfectly well before; the text only clinched a
resolve which he has found it very hard to make.  Perhaps there was a
trifle of superstition in the matter.  We never know how superstitious we
are.  At all events, henceforth "I neither desired a wife, nor had I any
ambitious care of any worldly thing."  He told his mother, and Monica
rejoiced, believing that now her prayers were answered.

Such is the story of the conversion of Saint Augustine.  It was the
maturing of an old purpose, and long deferred.  Much stranger stories are
told of Bunyan and Colonel Gardiner.  He gave up rhetoric; another man
was engaged "to sell words" to the students of Milan.  Being now
converted, the Saint becomes less interesting, except for his account of
his mother's death, and of that ecstatic converse they held "she and I
alone, leaning against a window, which had a prospect upon the garden of
our lodging at Ostia."  They

   "Came on that which is, and heard
   The vast pulsations of the world."

"And whilest we thus spake, and panted towards the divine, we grew able
to take a little taste thereof, with the whole strife of our hearts, and
we sighed profoundly, and left there, confined, the very top and flower
of our souls and spirits; and we returned to the noyse of language again,
where words are begun and ended."

Then Monica fell sick to death, and though she had ever wished to lie
beside her husband in Africa, she said: "Lay this Body where you will.
Let not any care of it disquiet you; only this I entreat, that you will
remember me at the altar of the Lord, wheresoever you be."  "But upon the
ninth day of her sickness, in the six-and-fiftieth year of her age, and
the three-and-thirtieth of mine, that religious and pious soul was
discharged from the prison of her body."

The grief of Augustine was not less keen, it seems, than it had been at
the death of his friend.  But he could remember how "she related with
great dearness of affection, how she never heard any harsh or unkind word
to be darted out of my mouth against her."  And to this consolation was
added who knows what of confidence and tenderness of certain hope, or a
kind of deadness, perhaps, that may lighten the pain of a heart very
often tried and inured to every pain.  For it is certain that "this green
wound" was green and grievous for a briefer time than the agony of his
earlier sorrows.  He himself, so earnest in analysing his own emotions,
is perplexed by the short date of his tears, and his sharpest grief: "Let
him read it who will, and interpret it as it pleaseth him."

So, with the death of Monica, we may leave Saint Augustine.  The most
human of books, the "Confessions," now strays into theology.  Of all
books that which it most oddly resembles, to my fancy at least, is the
poems of Catullus.  The passion and the tender heart they have in common,
and in common the war of flesh and spirit; the shameful inappeasable love
of Lesbia, or of the worldly life; so delightful and dear to the poet and
to the saint, so despised in other moods conquered and victorious again,
among the battles of the war in our members.  The very words in which the
Veronese and the Bishop of Hippo described the pleasure and gaiety of an
early friendship are almost the same, and we feel that, born four hundred
years later, the lover of Lesbia, the singer of Sirmio might actually
have found peace in religion, and exchanged the earthly for the heavenly
love.




CHAPTER IX: SMOLLETT


The great English novelists of the eighteenth century turned the course
of English Literature out of its older channel.  Her streams had
descended from the double peaks of Parnassus to irrigate the enamelled
fields and elegant parterres of poetry and the drama, as the critics of
the period might have said.  But Richardson, Fielding, Smollett, and
Sterne, diverted the waters, from poetry and plays, into the region of
the novel, whither they have brought down a copious alluvial deposit.
Modern authors do little but till this fertile Delta: the drama is now in
the desert, poetry is a drug, and fiction is literature.  Among the
writers who made this revolution, Smollett is, personally, the least well
known to the world, despite the great part which autobiography and
confessions play in his work.  He is always talking about himself, and
introducing his own experiences.  But there is little evidence from
without; his extant correspondence is scanty; he was not in Dr. Johnson's
circle, much less was he in that of Horace Walpole.  He was not a popular
man, and probably he has long ceased to be a popular author.  About 1780
the vendors of children's books issued abridgments of "Tom Jones" and
"Pamela," "Clarissa" and "Joseph Andrews," adapted to the needs of infant
minds.  It was a curious enterprise, certainly, but the booksellers do
not seem to have produced "Every Boy's Roderick Random," or "Peregrine
Pickle for the Young."  Smollett, in short, is less known than Fielding
and Sterne, even Thackeray says but a word about him, in the "English
Humorists," and he has no place in the series of "English Men of
Letters."

What we know of Smollett reveals a thoroughly typical Scot of his period;
a Scot of the species absolutely opposed to Sir Pertinax Macsycophant,
and rather akin to the species of Robert Burns.  "Rather akin," we may
say, for Smollett, like Burns, was a humorist, and in his humour far from
dainty; he was a personal satirist, and a satirist far from chivalrous.
Like Burns, too, he was a poet of independence; like Burns, and even more
than Burns, in a time of patronage he was recalcitrant against patrons.
But, unlike Burns, he was _farouche_ to an extreme degree; and, unlike
Burns, he carried very far his prejudices about his "gentrice," his
gentle birth.  Herein he is at the opposite pole from the great peasant
poet.

Two potent characteristics of his country were at war within him.  There
was, first, the belief in "gentrice," in a natural difference of kind
between men of coat armour and men without it.  Thus Roderick Random, the
starving cadet of a line of small lairds, accepts the almost incredible
self-denial and devotion of Strap as merely his due.  Prince Charles
could not have taken the devotion of Henry Goring, or of Neil MacEachain,
more entirely as a matter of course, involving no consideration in
return, than Roderick took the unparalleled self-sacrifice of his barber
friend and school-mate.  Scott has remarked on this contemptuous and
ungrateful selfishness, and has contrasted it with the relations of Tom
Jones and Partridge.  Of course, it is not to be assumed that Smollett
would have behaved like Roderick, when, "finding the fire in my apartment
almost extinguished, I vented my fury upon poor Strap, whose ear I
pinched with such violence that he roared hideously with pain . . . "  To
be sure Roderick presently "felt unspeakable remorse . . . foamed at the
mouth, and kicked the chairs about the room."  Now Strap had rescued
Roderick from starvation, had bestowed on him hundreds of pounds, and had
carried his baggage, and dined on his leavings.  But Strap was not gently
born!  Smollett would not, probably, have acted thus, but he did not
consider such conduct a thing out of nature.

On the other side was Smollett's Scottish spirit of independence.  As
early as 1515, James Ingles, chaplain of Margaret Tudor, wrote to Adam
Williamson, "You know the use of this country. . . . The man hath more
words than the master, and will not be content except he know the
master's counsel.  There is no order among us."  Strap had the instinct
of feudal loyalty to a descendant of a laird.  But Smollett boasts that,
being at the time about twenty, and having burdened a nobleman with his
impossible play, "The Regicide," "resolved to punish his barbarous
indifference, and actually discarded my Patron."  _He_ was not given to
"booing" (in the sense of bowing), but had, of all known Scots, the most
"canty conceit o' himsel'."  These qualities, with a violence of temper
which took the form of beating people when on his travels, cannot have
made Smollett a popular character.  He knew his faults, as he shows in
the dedication of "Ferdinand, Count Fathom," to himself.  "I have known
you trifling, superficial, and obstinate in dispute; meanly jealous and
awkwardly reserved; rash and haughty in your resentment; and coarse and
lowly in your connections."

He could, it is true, on occasion, forgive (even where he had not been
wronged), and could compensate, in milder moods, for the fierce attacks
made in hours when he was "meanly jealous."  Yet, in early life at least,
he regarded his own Roderick Random as "modest and meritorious,"
struggling nobly with the difficulties which beset a "friendless orphan,"
especially from the "selfishness, envy, malice, and base indifference of
mankind."  Roderick himself is, in fact, the incarnation of the basest
selfishness.  In one of his adventures he is guilty of that extreme
infamy which the d'Artagnan of "The Three Musketeers" and of the
"Memoirs" committed, and for which the d'Artagnan of _Le Vicomte de
Bragelonne_ took shame to himself.  While engaged in a virtuous passion,
Roderick not only behaves like a vulgar debauchee, but pursues the
meanest arts of the fortune-hunter who is ready to marry any woman for
her money.  Such is the modest and meritorious orphan, and mankind now
carries its "base indifference" so far, that Smollett's biographer, Mr.
Hannay, says, "if Roderick had been hanged, I, for my part, should have
heard the tidings unmoved . . . Smollett obviously died without realising
how nearly the hero, who was in some sort a portrait of himself, came to
being a ruffian."

Dr. Carlyle, in 1758, being in London, found Smollett "much of a
humorist, and not to be put out of his way."  A "humorist," here, means
an overbearingly eccentric person, such as Smollett, who lived much in a
society of literary dependants, was apt to become.  But Dr. Carlyle also
found that, though Smollett "described so well the characters of ruffians
and profligates," he did not resemble them.  Dr. Robertson, the
historian, "expressed great surprise at his polished and agreeable
manners, and the great urbanity of his conversation."  He was handsome in
person, as his portrait shows, but his "nervous system was exceedingly
irritable and subject to passion," as he says in the Latin account of his
health which, in 1763, he drew up for the physician at Montpellier.
Though, when he chose, he could behave like a man of breeding, and though
he undeniably had a warm heart for his wife and daughter, he did not
always choose to behave well.  Except Dr. Moore, his biographer, he seems
to have had few real friends during most of his career.

As to persons whom he chose to regard as his enemies, he was beyond
measure rancorous and dangerous.  From his first patron, Lord Lyttelton,
to his last, he pursued them with unscrupulous animosity.  If he did not
mean actually to draw portraits of his grandfather, his cousins, his
school-master, and the apothecary whose gallipots he attended--in
"Roderick Random,"--yet he left the originals who suggested his
characters in a very awkward situation.  For assuredly he did entertain a
spite against his grandfather: and as many of the incidents in "Roderick
Random" were autobiographical, the public readily inferred that others
were founded on fact.

The outlines of Smollett's career are familiar, though gaps in our
knowledge occur.  Perhaps they may partly be filled up by the aid of
passages in his novels, plays, and poems: in these, at all events, he
describes conditions and situations through which he himself may, or
must, have passed.

Born in 1721, he was a younger son of Archibald, a younger son of Sir
James Smollett of Bonhill, a house on the now polluted Leven, between
Loch Lomond and the estuary of the Clyde.  Smollett's father made an
imprudent marriage: the grandfather provided a small, but competent
provision for him and his family, during his own life.  The father,
Archibald, died; the grandfather left nothing to the mother of Tobias and
her children, but they were assisted with scrimp decency by the heirs.
Hence the attacks on the grandfather and cousins of Roderick Random: but,
later, Smollett returned to kinder feelings.

In some ways Tobias resembled his old grandsire.  About 1710 that
gentleman wrote a Memoir of his own life.  Hence we learn that _he_, in
childhood, like Roderick Random, was regarded as "a clog and burden," and
was neglected by his father, ill-used by his step-mother.  Thus Tobias
had not only his own early poverty to resent, but had a hereditary grudge
against fortune, and "the base indifference of mankind."  The old
gentleman was lodged "with very hard and penurious people," at Glasgow
University.  He rose in the world, and was a good Presbyterian Whig, but
"had no liberty" to help to forfeit James II.  "The puir child, his son"
(James III. and VIII.), "if he was really such, was innocent, and it were
hard to do anything that would touch the son for the father's fault."  The
old gentleman, therefore, though a Member of Parliament, evaded attending
the first Parliament after the Union: "I had no freedom to do it, because
I understood that the great business to be agitated therein was to make
laws for abjuring the Pretender . . . which I could not go in with, being
always of opinion that it was hard to impose oaths on people who had not
freedom to take them."

This was uncommonly liberal conduct, in a Whig, and our Smollett, though
no Jacobite, was in distinct and courageous sympathy with Jacobite
Scotland.  Indeed, he was as patriotic as Burns, or as his own Lismahago.
These were times, we must remember, in which Scottish patriotism was more
than a mere historical sentiment.  Scotland was inconceivably poor, and
Scots, in England, were therefore ridiculous.  The country had, so far,
gained very little by the Union, and the Union was detested even by
Scottish Whig Earls.  It is recorded by Moore that, while at the
Dumbarton Grammar School, Smollett wrote "verses to the memory of
Wallace, of whom he became an early admirer," having read "Blind Harry's
translation of the Latin poems of John Blair," chaplain to that hero.
There probably never were any such Latin poems, but Smollett began with
the same hero-worship as Burns.  He had the attachment of a Scot to his
native stream, the Leven, which later he was to celebrate.  Now if
Smollett had credited Roderick Random with these rural, poetical, and
patriotic tastes, his hero would have been much more human and amiable.
There was much good in Smollett which is absent in Random.  But for some
reason, probably because Scotland was unpopular after the Forty-Five,
Smollett merely describes the woes, ill usage, and retaliations of
Roderick.  That he suffered as Random did is to the last degree
improbable.  He had a fair knowledge of Latin, and was not destitute of
Greek, while his master, a Mr. Love, bore a good character both for
humanity and scholarship.  He must have studied the classics at Glasgow
University, where he was apprenticed to Mr. Gordon, a surgeon.  Gordon,
again, was an excellent man, appreciated by Smollett himself in after
days, and the odious Potion of "Roderick Random" must, like his rival,
Crab, have been merely a fancy sketch of meanness, hypocrisy, and
profligacy.  Perhaps the good surgeon became the victim of that "one
continued string of epigrammatic sarcasms," such as Mr. Colquhoun told
Ramsay of Ochtertyre, Smollett used to play off on his companions, "for
which no talents could compensate."  Judging by Dr. Carlyle's Memoirs
this intolerable kind of display was not unusual in Caledonian
conversation: but it was not likely to make Tobias popular in England.

Thither he went in 1739, with very little money, "and a very large
assortment of letters of recommendation: whether his relatives intended
to compensate for the scantiness of the one by their profusion in the
other is uncertain; but he has often been heard to declare that their
liberality in the last article was prodigious."  The Smolletts were not
"kinless loons"; they had connections: but who, in Scotland, had money?
Tobias had passed his medical examinations, but he rather trusted in his
MS. tragedy, "The Regicide."  Tragical were its results for the author.
Inspired by George Buchanan's Latin history of Scotland, Smollett had
produced a play, in blank verse, on the murder of James I.  That a boy,
even a Scottish boy, should have an overweening passion for this unlucky
piece, that he should expect by such a work to climb a step on fortune's
ladder, is nowadays amazing.  For ten years he clung to it, modified it,
polished, improved it, and then published it in 1749, after the success
of "Roderick Random."  Twice he told the story of his theatrical mishaps
and disappointments, which were such as occur to every writer for the
stage.  He wailed over them in "Roderick Random," in the story of Mr.
Melopoyn; he prolonged his cry, in the preface to "The Regicide," and
probably the noble whom he "lashed" (very indecently) in his two satires
("Advice," 1746, "Reproof," 1747, and in "Roderick Random") was the
patron who could not get the tragedy acted.  First, in 1739, he had a
patron whom he "discarded."  Then he went to the West Indies, and,
returning in 1744, he lugged out his tragedy again, and fell foul again
of patrons, actors, and managers.  What befell him was the common fate.
People did not, probably, hasten to read his play: managers and
"supercilious peers" postponed that entertainment, or, at least, the
noblemen could not make the managers accept it if they did not want it.
Our taste differs so much from that of the time which admired Home's
"Douglas," and "The Regicide" was so often altered to meet objections,
that we can scarcely criticise it.  Of course it is absolutely
unhistorical; of course it is empty of character, and replete with
fustian, and ineffably tedious; but perhaps it is not much worse than
other luckier tragedies of the age.  Naturally a lover calls his wounded
lady "the bleeding fair."  Naturally she exclaims--

         "Celestial powers
   Protect my father, shower upon his--oh!"  (Dies).

Naturally her adorer answers with--

         "So may our mingling souls
   To bliss supernal wing our happy--oh!"  (Dies).

We are reminded of--

         "Alas, my Bom!"  (Dies).
   "'Bastes' he would have said!"

The piece, if presented, must have been damned.  But Smollett was so
angry with one patron, Lord Lyttelton, that he burlesqued the poor man's
dirge on the death of his wife.  He was so angry with Garrick that he
dragged him into "Roderick Random" as Marmozet.  Later, obliged by
Garrick, and forgiving Lyttelton, he wrote respectfully about both.  But,
in 1746 (in "Advice"), he had assailed the "proud lord, who smiles a
gracious lie," and "the varnished ruffians of the State."  Because
Tobias's play was unacted, people who tried to aid him were liars and
ruffians, and a great deal worse, for in his satire, as in his first
novel, Smollett charges men of high rank with the worst of unnamable
crimes.  Pollio and Lord Strutwell, whoever they may have been, were
probably recognisable then, and were undeniably libelled, though they did
not appeal to a jury.  It is improbable that Sir John Cope had ever tried
to oblige Smollett.  His ignoble attack on Cope, after that unfortunate
General had been fairly and honourably acquitted of incompetence and
cowardice, was, then, wholly disinterested.  Cope is "a courtier Ape,
appointed General."

   "Then Pug, aghast, fled faster than the wind,
   Nor deign'd, in three-score miles, to look behind;
   While every band for orders bleat in vain,
   And fall in slaughtered heaps upon the plain,"--

of Preston Pans.

Nothing could be more remote from the truth, or more unjustly cruel.
Smollett had not here even the excuse of patriotism.  Sir John Cope was
no Butcher Cumberland.  In fact the poet's friend is not wrong, when, in
"Reproof," he calls Smollett "a flagrant misanthrope."  The world was out
of joint for the cadet of Bonhill: both before and after his very trying
experiences as a ship surgeon the managers would not accept "The
Regicide."  This was reason good why Smollett should try to make a little
money and notoriety by penning satires.  They are fierce, foul-mouthed,
and pointless.  But Smollett was poor, and he was angry; he had the
examples of Pope and Swift before him; which, as far as truculence went,
he could imitate.  Above all, it was then the fixed belief of men of
letters that some peer or other ought to aid and support them; and, as no
peer did support Smollett, obviously they were "varnished ruffians."  He
erred as he would not err now, for times, and ways of going wrong, are
changed.  But, at best, how different are his angry couplets from the
lofty melancholy of Johnson's satires!

Smollett's "small sum of money" did not permit him long to push the
fortunes of his tragedy, in 1739; and as for his "very large assortment
of letters of recommendation," they only procured for him the post of
surgeon's mate in the _Cumberland_ of the line.  Here he saw enough of
the horrors of naval life, enough of misery, brutality, and
mismanagement, at Carthagena (1741), to supply materials for the salutary
and sickening pages on that theme in "Roderick Random."  He also saw and
appreciated the sterling qualities of courage, simplicity, and
generosity, which he has made immortal in his Bowlings and Trunnions.

It is part of a novelist's business to make one half of the world know
how the other half lives; and in this province Smollett anticipated
Dickens.  He left the service as soon as he could, when the beaten fleet
was refitting at Jamaica.  In that isle he seems to have practised as a
doctor; and he married, or was betrothed to, a Miss Lascelles, who had a
small and far from valuable property.  The real date of his marriage is
obscure: more obscure are Smollett's resources on his return to London,
in 1744.  Houses in Downing Street can never have been cheap, but we find
"Mr. Smollett, surgeon in Downing Street, Westminster," and, in 1746, he
was living in May Fair, not a region for slender purses.  His tragedy was
now bringing in nothing but trouble, to himself and others.  His satires
cannot have been lucrative.  As a dweller in May Fair he could not
support himself, like his Mr. Melopoyn, by writing ballads for street
singers.  Probably he practised in his profession.  In "Count Fathom" he
makes his adventurer "purchase an old chariot, which was new painted for
the occasion, and likewise hire a footman . . . This equipage, though
much more expensive than his finances could bear, he found absolutely
necessary to give him a chance of employment . . . A walking physician
was considered as an obscure pedlar."  A chariot, Smollett insists, was
necessary to "every raw surgeon"; while Bob Sawyer's expedient of "being
called from church" was already _vieux jeu_, in the way of advertisement.
Such things had been "injudiciously hackneyed."  In this passage of
Fathom's adventures, Smollett proclaims his insight into methods of
getting practice.  A physician must ingratiate himself with apothecaries
and ladies' maids, or "acquire interest enough" to have an infirmary
erected "by the voluntary subscriptions of his friends."  Here Smollett
denounces hospitals, which "encourage the vulgar to be idle and
dissolute, by opening an asylum to them and their families, from the
diseases of poverty and intemperance."  This is odd morality for one who
suffered from "the base indifference of mankind."  He ought to have known
that poverty is not a vice for which the poor are to be blamed; and that
intemperance is not the only other cause of their diseases.  Perhaps the
unfeeling passage is a mere paradox in the style of his own Lismahago.

With or without a chariot, it is probable that Tobias had not an
insinuating style, or "a good bedside manner"; friends to support a
hospital for his renown he had none; but, somehow, he could live in May
Fair, and, in 1746, could meet Dr. Carlyle and Stewart, son of the
Provost of Edinburgh, and other Scots, at the Golden Ball in Cockspur
Street.  There they were enjoying "a frugal supper and a little punch,"
when the news of Culloden arrived.  Carlyle had been a Whig volunteer:
he, probably, was happy enough; but Stewart, whose father was in prison,
grew pale, and left the room.  Smollett and Carlyle then walked home
through secluded streets, and were silent, lest their speech should
bewray them for Scots.  "John Bull," quoth Smollett, "is as haughty and
valiant to-day, as he was abject and cowardly on the Black Wednesday when
the Highlanders were at Derby."

"Weep, Caledonia, weep!" he had written in his tragedy.  Now he wrote
"Mourn, hapless Caledonia, mourn."  Scott has quoted, from Graham of
Gartmore, the story of Smollett's writing verses, while Gartmore and
others were playing cards.  He read them what he had written, "The Tears
of Scotland," and added the last verse on the spot, when warned that his
opinions might give offence.

   "Yes, spite of thine insulting foe,
   My sympathising verse shall flow."

The "Tears" are better than the "Ode to Blue-Eyed Ann," probably Mrs.
Smollett.  But the courageous author of "The Tears of Scotland," had
manifestly broken with patrons.  He also broke with Rich, the manager at
Covent Garden, for whom he had written an opera libretto.  He had failed
as doctor, and as dramatist; nor, as satirist, had he succeeded.  Yet he
managed to wear wig and sword, and to be seen in good men's company.
Perhaps his wife's little fortune supported him, till, in 1748, he
produced "Roderick Random."  It is certain that we never find Smollett in
the deep distresses of Dr. Johnson and Goldsmith.  Novels were now in
vogue; "Pamela" was recent, "Joseph Andrews" was yet more recent,
"Clarissa Harlowe" had just appeared, and Fielding was publishing "Tom
Jones."  Smollett, too, tried his hand, and, at last, he succeeded.

His ideas of the novel are offered in his preface.  The Novel, for him,
is a department of Satire; "the most entertaining and universally
improving."  To Smollett, "Roderick Random" seemed an "improving" work!
_Ou le didacticisme va t'il se nicher_?  Romance, he declares, "arose in
ignorance, vanity, and superstition," and declined into "the ludicrous
and unnatural."  Then Cervantes "converted romance to purposes far more
useful and entertaining, by making it assume the sock, and point out the
follies of ordinary life."  Romance was to revive again some twenty years
after its funeral oration was thus delivered.  As for Smollett himself,
he professedly "follows the plan" of Le Sage, in "Gil Blas" (a plan as
old as Petronius Arbiter, and the "Golden Ass" of Apuleius); but he gives
more place to "compassion," so as not to interfere with "generous
indignation, which ought to animate the reader against the sordid and
vicious disposition of the world."  As a contrast to sordid vice, we are
to admire "modest merit" in that exemplary orphan, Mr. Random.  This
gentleman is a North Briton, because only in North Britain can a poor
orphan get such an education as Roderick's "birth and character require,"
and for other reasons.  Now, as for Roderick, the schoolmaster "gave
himself no concern about the progress I made," but, "should endeavour,
with God's help, to prevent my future improvement."  It must have been at
Glasgow University, then, that Roderick learned "Greek very well, and was
pretty far advanced in the mathematics," and here he must have used his
genius for the _belles lettres_, in the interest of his "amorous
complexion," by "lampooning the rivals" of the young ladies who admired
him.

Such are the happy beginnings, accompanied by practical jokes, of this
interesting model.  Smollett's heroes, one conceives, were intended to be
fine, though not faultless young fellows; men, not plaster images; brave,
generous, free-living, but, as Roderick finds once, when examining his
conscience, pure from serious stains on that important faculty.  To us
these heroes often appear no better than ruffians; Peregrine Pickle, for
example, rather excels the infamy of Ferdinand, Count Fathom, in certain
respects; though Ferdinand is professedly "often the object of our
detestation and abhorrence," and is left in a very bad, but, as "Humphrey
Clinker" shows, in by no means a hopeless way.  Yet, throughout, Smollett
regarded himself as a moralist, a writer of improving tendencies; one who
"lashed the vices of the age."  He was by no means wholly mistaken, but
we should probably wrong the eighteenth century if we accepted all
Smollett's censures as entirely deserved.  The vices which he lashed are
those which he detected, or fancied that he detected, in people who
regarded a modest and meritorious Scottish orphan with base indifference.
Unluckily the greater part of mankind was guilty of this crime, and
consequently was capable of everything.

Enough has probably been said about the utterly distasteful figure of
Smollett's hero.  In Chapter LX. we find him living on the resources of
Strap, then losing all Strap's money at play, and then "I bilk my
taylor."  That is, Roderick orders several suits of new clothes, and
sells them for what they will fetch.  Meanwhile Strap can live honestly
anywhere, while he has his ten fingers.  Roderick rescues himself from
poverty by engaging, with his uncle, in the slave trade.  We are apt to
consider this commerce infamous.  But, in 1763, the Evangelical director
who helped to make Cowper "a castaway," wrote, as to the slaver's
profession: "It is, indeed, accounted a genteel employment, and is
usually very profitable, though to me it did not prove so, the Lord
seeing that a large increase of wealth could not be good for me."  The
reverend gentleman had, doubtless, often sung--

      "_Time for us to go_,
      _Time for us to go_,
   _And when we'd got the hatches down_,
      '_Twas time for us to go_!"

Roderick, apart from "black ivory," is aided by his uncle and his long
lost father.  The base world, in the persons of Strap, Thompson, the
uncle, Mr. Sagely, and other people, treats him infinitely better than he
deserves.  His very love (as always in Smollett) is only an animal
appetite, vigorously insisted upon by the author.  By a natural reaction,
Scott, much as he admired Smollett, introduced his own blameless heroes,
and even Thackeray could only hint at the defects of youth, in "Esmond."
Thackeray is accused of making his good people stupid, or too simple, or
eccentric, and otherwise contemptible.  Smollett went further: Strap, a
model of benevolence, is ludicrous and a coward; even Bowling has the
stage eccentricities of the sailor.  Mankind was certain, in the long
run, to demand heroes more amiable and worthy of respect.  Our
inclinations, as Scott says, are with "the open-hearted, good-humoured,
and noble-minded Tom Jones, whose libertinism (one particular omitted) is
perhaps rendered but too amiable by his good qualities."  To be sure
Roderick does befriend "a reclaimed street-walker" in her worst need, but
why make her the _confidante_ of the virginal Narcissa?  Why reward Strap
with her hand?  Fielding decidedly, as Scott insists, "places before us
heroes, and especially heroines, of a much higher as well as more
pleasing character, than Smollett was able to present."

"But the deep and fertile genius of Smollett afforded resources
sufficient to make up for these deficiencies . . . If Fielding had
superior taste, the palm of more brilliancy of genius, more inexhaustible
richness of invention, must in justice be awarded to Smollett.  In
comparison with his sphere, that in which Fielding walked was limited . . ."
The second part of Scott's parallel between the men whom he
considered the greatest of our novelists, qualifies the first.  Smollett's
invention was not richer than Fielding's, but the sphere in which he
walked, the circle of his experience, was much wider.  One division of
life they knew about equally well, the category of rakes, adventurers,
card-sharpers, unhappy authors, people of the stage, and ladies without
reputations, in every degree.  There were conditions of higher society,
of English rural society, and of clerical society, which Fielding, by
birth and education, knew much better than Smollett.  But Smollett had
the advantage of his early years in Scotland, then as little known as
Japan; with the "nautical multitude," from captain to loblolly boy, he
was intimately familiar; with the West Indies he was acquainted; and he
later resided in Paris, and travelled in Flanders, so that he had more
experience, certainly, if not more invention, than Fielding.

In "Roderick Random" he used Scottish "local colour" very little, but his
life had furnished him with a surprising wealth of "strange experiences."
Inns were, we must believe, the favourite home of adventures, and
Smollett could ring endless changes on mistakes about bedrooms.  None of
them is so innocently diverting as the affair of Mr. Pickwick and the
lady in yellow curl-papers; but the absence of that innocence which
heightens Mr. Pickwick's distresses was welcome to admirers of what Lady
Mary Wortley Montagu calls "gay reading."

She wrote from abroad, in 1752, "There is something humorous in R.
Random, that makes me believe that the author is H. Fielding"--her
kinsman.  Her ladyship did her cousin little justice.  She did not
complain of the morals of "R. Random," but thought "Pamela" and
"Clarissa" "likely to do more general mischief than the works of Lord
Rochester."  Probably "R. Random" did little harm.  His career is too
obviously ideal.  Too many ups and downs occur to him, and few orphans of
merit could set before themselves the ideal of bilking their tailors,
gambling by way of a profession, dealing in the slave trade, and
wheedling heiresses.

The variety of character in the book is vast; in Morgan we have an
excellent, fiery, Welshman, of the stage type; the different minor
miscreants are all vividly designed; the eccentric lady author may have
had a real original; Miss Snapper has much vivacity as a wit; the French
adventures in the army are, in their rude barbaric way, a forecast of
Barry Lyndon's; and, generally, both Scott and Thackeray owe a good deal
to Smollett in the way of suggestions.  Smollett's extraordinary love of
dilating on noisome smells and noisome sights, that intense affection for
the physically nauseous, which he shared with Swift, is rather less
marked in "Roderick" than in "Humphrey Clinker," and "The Adventures of
an Atom."  The scenes in the Marshalsea must have been familiar to
Dickens.  The terrible history of Miss Williams is Hogarth's Harlot's
Progress done into unsparing prose.  Smollett guides us at a brisk pace
through the shady and brutal side of the eighteenth century; his vivacity
is as unflagging as that of his disagreeable rattle of a hero.  The
passion usually understood as love is, to be sure, one of which he seems
to have no conception; he regards a woman much as a greedy person might
regard a sirloin of beef, or, at least, a plate of ortolans.  At her
marriage a bride is "dished up;" that is all.

Thus this "gay writing" no longer makes us gay.  In reading "Peregrine
Pickle" and "Humphrey Clinker," a man may find himself laughing aloud,
but hardly in reading "Roderick Random."  The fun is of the cruel
primitive sort, arising merely from the contemplation of somebody's
painful discomfiture.  Bowling and Rattlin may be regarded with
affectionate respect; but Roderick has only physical courage and vivacity
to recommend him.  Whether Smollett, in Flaubert's deliberate way,
purposely abstained from moralising on the many scenes of physical
distress which he painted; or whether he merely regarded them without
emotion, has been debated.  It seems more probable that he thought they
carried their own moral.  It is the most sympathetic touch in Roderick's
character, that he writes thus of his miserable crew of slaves: "Our ship
being freed from the disagreeable lading of negroes, _to whom indeed I
had been a miserable slave since our leaving the coast of Guinea_, I
began to enjoy myself."  Smollett was a physician, and had the
pitifulness of his profession; though we see how casually he makes Random
touch on his own unwonted benevolence.

People had not begun to know the extent of their own brutality in the
slave trade, but Smollett probably did know it.  If a curious prophetic
letter attributed to him, and published more than twenty years after his
death, be genuine; he had the strongest opinions about this form of
commercial enterprise.  But he did not wear his heart on his sleeve,
where he wore his irritable nervous system.  It is probable enough that
he felt for the victims of poverty, neglect, and oppression (despite his
remarks on hospitals) as keenly as Dickens.  We might regard his
offensively ungrateful Roderick as a purely dramatic exhibition of a
young man, if his other heroes were not as bad, or worse; if their few
redeeming qualities were not stuck on in patches; and if he had omitted
his remark about Roderick's "modest merit."  On the other hand, the good
side of Matthew Bramble seems to be drawn from Smollett's own character,
and, if that be the case, he can have had little sympathy with his own
humorous Barry Lyndons.  Scott and Thackeray leaned to the favourable
view: Smollett, his nervous system apart, was manly and kindly.

As regards plot, "Roderick Random" is a mere string of picturesque
adventures.  It is at the opposite pole from "Tom Jones" in the matter of
construction.  There is no reason why it should ever stop except the
convenience of printers and binders.  Perhaps we lay too much stress on
the somewhat mechanical art of plot-building.  Fielding was then setting
the first and best English example of a craft in which the very greatest
authors have been weak, or of which they were careless.  Smollett was
always rather more incapable, or rather more indifferent, in
plot-weaving, than greater men.

In our day of royalties, and gossip about the gains of authors, it would
be interesting to know what manner and size of a cheque Smollett received
from his publisher, the celebrated Mr. Osborne.  We do not know, but
Smollett published his next novel "on commission," "printed for the
Author"; so probably he was not well satisfied with the pecuniary result
of "Roderick Random."  Thereby, says Dr. Moore, he "acquired much more
reputation than money."  So he now published "The Regicide" "by
subscription, that method of publication being then more reputable than
it has been thought since" (1797).  Of "The Regicide," and its unlucky
preface, enough, or more, has been said.  The public sided with the
managers, not with the meritorious orphan.

For the sake of pleasure, or of new experiences, or of economy, Smollett
went to Paris in 1750, where he met Dr. Moore, later his biographer, the
poetical Dr. Akenside, and an affected painter.  He introduced the poet
and painter into "Peregrine Pickle"; and makes slight use of a group of
exiled Jacobites, including Mr. Hunter of Burnside.  In 1750, there were
Jacobites enough in the French capital, all wondering very much where
Prince Charles might be, and quite unconscious that he was their
neighbour in a convent in the Rue St. Dominique.  Though Moore does not
say so (he is provokingly economical of detail), we may presume that
Smollett went wandering in Flanders, as does Peregrine Pickle.  It is
curious that he should introduce a Capucin, a Jew, and a black-eyed
damsel, all in the Ghent diligence, when we know that Prince Charles did
live in Ghent, with the black-eyed Miss Walkenshaw, did go about
disguised as a Capucin, and was tracked by a Jewish spy, while the other
spy, Young Glengarry, styled himself "Pickle."  But all those events
occurred about a year after the novel was published in 1751.

Before that date Smollett had got an M.D. degree from Aberdeen
University, and, after returning from France, he practised for a year or
two at Bath.  But he could not expect to be successful among fashionable
invalids, and, in "Humphrey Clinker," he make Matthew Bramble give such
an account of the Bath waters as M. Zola might envy.  He was still trying
to gain ground in his profession, when, in March 1751, Mr. D. Wilson
published the first edition of "Peregrine Pickle" "for the Author,"
unnamed.  I have never seen this first edition, which was "very curious
and disgusting."  Smollett, in his preface to the second edition, talks
of "the art and industry that were used to stifle him in the birth, by
certain booksellers and others."  He now "reformed the manners, and
corrected the expressions," removed or modified some passages of personal
satire, and held himself exempt from "the numerous shafts of envy,
rancour, and revenge, that have lately, both in private and public, been
levelled at his reputation."  Who were these base and pitiless dastards?
Probably every one who did not write favourably about the book.  Perhaps
Smollett suspected Fielding, whom he attacks in several parts of his
works, treating him as a kind of Jonathan Wild, a thief-taker, and an
associate with thieves.  Why Smollett thus misconducted himself is a
problem, unless he was either "meanly jealous," or had taken offence at
some remarks in Fielding's newspaper.  Smollett certainly began the war,
in the first edition of "Peregrine Pickle."  He made a kind of palinode
to the "trading justice" later, as other people of his kind have done.

A point in "Peregrine Pickle" easily assailed was the long episode about
a Lady of Quality: the beautiful Lady Vane, whose memoirs Smollett
introduced into his tale.  Horace Walpole found that she had omitted the
only feature in her career of which she had just reason to be proud: the
number of her lovers.  Nobody doubted that Smollett was paid for casting
his mantle over Lady Vane: moreover, he might expect a success of
scandal.  The _roman a clef_ is always popular with scandal-mongers, but
its authors can hardly hope to escape rebuke.

It was not till 1752 that Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, in Italy, received
"Peregrine," with other fashionable romances--"Pompey the Little," "The
Parish Girl," "Eleanora's Adventures," "The Life of Mrs. Theresa
Constantia Phipps," "The Adventures of Mrs. Loveil," and so on.  Most of
them contained portraits of real people, and, no doubt, most of them were
therefore successful.  But where are they now?  Lady Mary thought Lady
Vane's part of "Peregrine" "more instructive to young women than any
sermon that I know."  She regarded Fielding as with Congreve, the only
"original" of her age, but Fielding had to write for bread, and that is
"the most contemptible way of getting bread."  She did not, at this time,
even know Smollett's name, but she admired him, and, later, calls him "my
dear Smollett."  This lady thought that Fielding did not know what sorry
fellows his Tom Jones and Captain Booth were.  Not near so sorry as
Peregine Pickle were they, for this gentleman is a far more atrocious
ruffian than Roderick Random.

None the less "Peregrine" is Smollett's greatest work.  Nothing is so
rich in variety of character, scene, and adventure.  We are carried along
by the swift and copious volume of the current, carried into very queer
places, and into the oddest miscellaneous company, but we cannot escape
from Smollett's vigorous grasp.  Sir Walter thought that "Roderick"
excelled its successor in "ease and simplicity," and that Smollett's
sailors, in "Pickle," "border on caricature."  No doubt they do: the
eccentricities of Hawser Trunnion, Esq., are exaggerated, and Pipes is
less subdued than Rattlin, though always delightful.  But Trunnion
absolutely makes one laugh out aloud: whether he is criticising the
sister of Mr. Gamaliel Pickle in that gentleman's presence, at a
pot-house; or riding to the altar with his squadron of sailors, tacking
in an unfavourable gale; or being run away into a pack of hounds, and
clearing a hollow road over a waggoner, who views him with "unspeakable
terror and amazement."  Mr. Winkle as an equestrian is not more entirely
acceptable to the mind than Trunnion.  We may speak of "caricature," but
if an author can make us sob with laughter, to criticise him solemnly is
ungrateful.

Except Fielding occasionally, and Smollett, and Swift, and Sheridan, and
the authors of "The Rovers," one does not remember any writers of the
eighteenth century who quite upset the gravity of the reader.  The scene
of the pedant's dinner after the manner of the ancients, does not seem to
myself so comic as the adventures of Trunnion, while the bride is at the
altar, and the bridegroom is tacking and veering with his convoy about
the fields.  One sees how the dinner is done: with a knowledge of
Athenaeus, Juvenal, Petronius, and Horace, many men could have written
this set piece.  But Trunnion is quite inimitable: he is a child of
humour and of the highest spirits, like Mr. Weller the elder.  Till Scott
created Mause Headrig, no Caledonian had ever produced anything except
"Tam o' Shanter," that could be a pendant to Trunnion.  His pathos is
possibly just a trifle overdone, though that is not my own opinion.  Dear
Trunnion! he makes me overlook the gambols of his detestable _protege_,
the hero.

That scoundrel is not an impossible caricature of an obstinate, vain,
cruel libertine.  Peregrine was precisely the man to fall in love with
Emilia _pour le bon motif_, and then attempt to ruin her, though she was
the sister of his friend, by devices worthy of Lovelace at his last and
lowest stage.  Peregrine's overwhelming vanity, swollen by facile
conquests, would inevitably have degraded him to this abyss.  The
intrigue was only the worst of those infamous practical jokes of his, in
which Smollett takes a cruel and unholy delight.  Peregrine, in fact, is
a hero of _naturalisme_, except that his fits of generosity are mere
patches daubed on, and that his reformation is a farce, in which a modern
_naturaliste_ would have disdained to indulge.  Emilia, in her scene with
Peregrine in the _bouge_ to which he has carried her, rises much above
Smollett's heroines, and we could like her, if she had never forgiven
behaviour which was beneath pardon.

Peregrine's education at Winchester bears out Lord Elcho's description of
that academy in his lately published Memoirs.  It was apt to develop
Peregrines; and Lord Elcho himself might have furnished Smollett with
suitable adventures.  There can be no doubt that Cadwallader Crabtree
suggested Sir Malachi Malagrowther to Scott, and that Hatchway and Pipes,
taking up their abode with Peregrine in the Fleet, gave a hint to Dickens
for Sam Weller and Mr. Pickwick in the same abode.  That "Peregrine"
"does far excel 'Joseph Andrews' and 'Amelia'," as Scott declares, few
modern readers will admit.  The world could do much better without
"Peregrine" than without "Joseph"; while Amelia herself alone is a study
greatly preferable to the whole works of Smollett: such, at least, is the
opinion of a declared worshipper of that peerless lady.  Yet "Peregrine"
is a kind of Odyssey of the eighteenth century: an epic of humour and of
adventure.

In February 1753, Smollett "obliged the town" with his "Adventures of
Ferdinand, Count Fathom," a cosmopolitan swindler and adventurer.  The
book is Smollett's "Barry Lyndon," yet as his hero does not tell his own
story, but is perpetually held up as a "dreadful example," there is none
of Thackeray's irony, none of his subtlety.  "Here is a really bad man, a
foreigner too," Smollett seems to say, "do not be misled, oh maidens, by
the wiles of such a Count!  Impetuous youth, play not with him at
billiards, basset, or gleek.  Fathers, on such a rogue shut your doors:
collectors, handle not his nefarious antiques.  Let all avoid the path
and shun the example of Ferdinand, Count Fathom!"

Such is Smollett's sermon, but, after all, Ferdinand is hardly worse than
Roderick or Peregrine.  The son of a terrible old sutler and
camp-follower, a robber and slayer of wounded men, Ferdinand had to live
by his wits, and he was hardly less scrupulous, after all, than Peregrine
and Roderick.  The daubs of casual generosity were not laid on, and that
is all the difference.  As Sophia Western was mistaken for Miss Jenny
Cameron, so Ferdinand was arrested as Prince Charles, who, in fact,
caused much inconvenience to harmless travellers.  People were often
arrested as "The Pretender's son" abroad as well as in England.

The life and death of Ferdinand's mother, shot by a wounded hussar in her
moment of victory, make perhaps the most original and interesting part of
this hero's adventures.  The rest is much akin to his earlier novels, but
the history of Rinaldo and Monimia has a passage not quite alien to the
vein of Mrs. Radcliffe.  Some remarks in the first chapter show that
Smollett felt the censures on his brutality and "lowness," and he
promises to seek "that goal of perfection where nature is castigated
almost even to still life . . . where decency, divested of all substance,
hovers about like a fantastic shadow."

Smollett never reached that goal, and even the shadow of decency never
haunted him so as to make him afraid with any amazement.  Smollett avers
that he "has had the courage to call in question the talents of a pseudo-
patron," and so is charged with "insolence, rancour, and scurrility."  Of
all these things, and of worse, he had been guilty; his offence had never
been limited to "calling in question the talents" of persons who had been
unsuccessful in getting his play represented.  Remonstrance merely
irritated Tobias.  His new novel was but a fainter echo of his old
novels, a panorama of scoundrelism, with the melodramatic fortunes of the
virtuous Monimia for a foil.  If read to-day, it is read as a sketch of
manners, or want of manners.  The scene in which the bumpkin squire rooks
the accomplished Fathom at hazard, in Paris, is prettily conceived, and
Smollett's indignation at the British system of pews in church is
edifying.  But when Monimia appears to her lover as he weeps at her tomb,
and proves to be no phantom, but a "warm and substantial" Monimia,
capable of being "dished up," like any other Smollettian heroine, the
reader is sensibly annoyed.  Tobias as _un romantique_ is absolutely too
absurd; "not here, oh Tobias, are haunts meet for thee."

Smollett's next novel, "Sir Launcelot Greaves," was not published till
1761, after it had appeared in numbers, in _The British Magazine_.  This
was a sixpenny serial, published by Newbery.  The years between 1753 and
1760 had been occupied by Smollett in quarrelling, getting imprisoned for
libel, editing the _Critical Review_, writing his "History of England,"
translating (or adapting old translations of) "Don Quixote," and driving
a team of literary hacks, whose labours he superintended, and to whom he
gave a weekly dinner.  These exploits are described by Dr. Carlyle, and
by Smollett himself, in "Humphrey Clinker."  He did not treat his vassals
with much courtesy or consideration; but then they expected no such
treatment.  We have no right to talk of his doings as "a blood-sucking
method, literary sweating," like a recent biographer of Smollett.  Not to
speak of the oddly mixed metaphor, we do not know what Smollett's
relations to his retainers really were.  As an editor he had to see his
contributors.  The work of others he may have recommended, as "reader" to
publishers.  Others may have made transcripts for him, or translations.
That Smollett "sweated" men, or sucked their blood, or both, seems a
crude way of saying that he found them employment.  Nobody says that
Johnson "sweated" the persons who helped him in compiling his Dictionary;
or that Mr. Jowett "sweated" the friends and pupils who aided him in his
translation of Plato.  Authors have a perfect right to procure literary
assistance, especially in learned books, if they pay for it, and
acknowledge their debt to their allies.  On the second point, Smollett
was probably not in advance of his age.

"Sir Launcelot Greaves" is, according to Chambers, "a sorry specimen of
the genius of the author," and Mr. Oliphant Smeaton calls it "decidedly
the least popular" of his novels, while Scott astonishes us by preferring
it to "Jonathan Wild."  Certainly it is inferior to "Roderick Random" and
to "Peregrine Pickle," but it cannot be so utterly unreal as "The
Adventures of an Atom."  I, for one, venture to prefer "Sir Launcelot" to
"Ferdinand, Count Fathom."  Smollett was really trying an experiment in
the fantastic.  Just as Mr. Anstey Guthrie transfers the mediaeval myth
of Venus and the Ring, or the Arabian tale of the bottled-up geni (or
djinn) into modern life, so Smollett transferred Don Quixote.  His hero,
a young baronet of wealth, and of a benevolent and generous temper, is
crossed in love.  Though not mad, he is eccentric, and commences knight-
errant.  Scott, and others, object to his armour, and say that, in his
ordinary clothes, and with his well-filled purse, he would have been more
successful in righting wrongs.  Certainly, but then the comic fantasy of
the armed knight arriving at the ale-house, and jangling about the rose-
hung lanes among the astonished folk of town and country, would have been
lost.  Smollett is certainly less unsuccessful in wild fantasy, than in
the ridiculous romantic scenes where the substantial phantom of Monimia
disports itself.  The imitation of the knight by the nautical Captain
Crowe (an excellent Smollettian mariner) is entertaining, and Sir
Launcelot's crusty Sancho is a pleasant variety in squires.  The various
forms of oppression which the knight resists are of historical interest,
as also is the contested election between a rustic Tory and a smooth
Ministerialist: "sincerely attached to the Protestant succession, in
detestation of a popish, an abjured, and an outlawed Pretender."  The
heroine, Aurelia Darrel, is more of a lady, and less of a luxury, than
perhaps any other of Smollett's women.  But how Smollett makes love!  "Tea
was called.  The lovers were seated; he looked and languished; she
flushed and faltered; all was doubt and delirium, fondness and flutter."

"All was gas and gaiters," said the insane lover of Mrs. Nickleby, with
equal delicacy and point.

Scott says that Smollett, when on a visit to Scotland, used to write his
chapter of "copy" in the half-hour before the post went out.  Scott was
very capable of having the same thing happen to himself.  "Sir Launcelot"
is hurriedly, but vigorously written: the fantasy was not understood as
Smollett intended it to be, and the book is blotted, as usual, with
loathsome medical details.  But people in Madame du Deffand's circle used
openly to discuss the same topics, to the confusion of Horace Walpole.  As
the hero of this book is a generous gentleman, as the most of it is kind
and manly, and the humour provocative of an honest laugh, it is by no
means to be despised, while the manners, if caricatured, are based on
fact.

It is curious to note that in "Sir Launcelot Greaves," we find a
character, Ferret, who frankly poses as a _strugforlifeur_.  M. Daudet's
_strugforlifeur_ had heard of Darwin.  Mr. Ferret had read Hobbes,
learned that man was in a state of nature, and inferred that we ought to
prey upon each other, as a pike eats trout.  Miss Burney, too, at Bath,
about 1780, met a perfectly emancipated young "New Woman."  She had read
Bolingbroke and Hume, believed in nothing, and was ready to be a "Woman
who Did."  Our ancestors could be just as advanced as we are.

Smollett went on compiling, and supporting himself by his compilations,
and those of his vassals.  In 1762 he unluckily edited a paper called
_The Briton_ in the interests of Lord Bute.  _The Briton_ was silenced by
Wilkes's _North Briton_.  Smollett lost his last patron; he fell ill; his
daughter died; he travelled angrily in France and Italy.  His "Travels"
show the choleric nature of the man, and he was especially blamed for not
admiring the Venus de Medici.  Modern taste, enlightened by the works of
a better period of Greek art, has come round to Smollett's opinions.  But,
in his own day, he was regarded as a Vandal and a heretic.

In 1764, he visited Scotland, and was warmly welcomed by his kinsman, the
laird of Bonhill.  In 1769, he published "The Adventures of an Atom," a
stupid, foul, and scurrilous political satire, in which Lord Bute, having
been his patron, was "lashed" in Smollett's usual style.  In 1768,
Smollett left England for ever.  He desired a consulship, but no
consulship was found for him, which is not surprising.  He died at Monte
Nova, near Leghorn, in September (others say October) 1771.  He had
finished "Humphrey Clinker," which appeared a day or two before his
death.

Thackeray thought "Humphrey Clinker" the most laughable book that ever
was written.  Certainly nobody is to be envied who does not laugh over
the epistles of Winifred Jenkins.  The book is too well known for
analysis.  The family of Matthew Bramble, Esq., are on their travels,
with his nephew and niece, young Melford and Lydia Melford, with Miss
Jenkins, and the squire's tart, greedy, and amorous old maid of a sister,
Tabitha Bramble.  This lady's persistent amours and mean avarice scarcely
strike modern readers as amusing.  Smollett gave aspects of his own
character in the choleric, kind, benevolent Matthew Bramble, and in the
patriotic and paradoxical Lieutenant Lismahago.  Bramble, a gouty
invalid, is as full of medical abominations as Smollett himself, as ready
to fight, and as generous and open-handed.  Probably the author shared
Lismahago's contempt of trade, his dislike of the Union (1707), his fiery
independence (yet he _does_ marry Tabitha!), and those opinions in which
Lismahago heralds some of the social notions of Mr. Ruskin.

Melford is an honourable kind of "walking gentleman"; Lydia, though
enamoured, is modest and dignified; Clinker is a worthy son of Bramble,
with abundant good humour, and a pleasing vein of Wesleyan Methodism.  But
the grotesque spelling, rural vanity, and _naivete_ of Winifred Jenkins,
with her affection for her kitten, make her the most delightful of this
wandering company.  After beholding the humours and partaking of the
waters of Bath, they follow Smollett's own Scottish tour, and each
character gives his picture of the country which Smollett had left at its
lowest ebb of industry and comfort, and found so much more prosperous.
The book is a mine for the historian of manners and customs: the novel-
reader finds Count Fathom metamorphosed into Mr. Grieve, an exemplary
apothecary, "a sincere convert to virtue," and "unaffectedly pious."

Apparently a wave of good-nature came over Smollett: he forgave
everybody, his own relations even, and he reclaimed his villain.  A
patron might have played with him.  He mellowed in Scotland: Matthew
there became less tart, and more tolerant; an actual English Matthew
would have behaved quite otherwise. "Humphrey Clinker" is an astonishing
book, as the work of an exiled, poor, and dying man.  None of his works
leaves so admirable an impression of Smollett's virtues: none has so few
of his less amiable qualities.

With the cadet of Bonhill, outworn with living, and with labour, died the
burly, brawling, picturesque old English novel of humour and of the road.
We have nothing notable in this manner, before the arrival of Mr.
Pickwick.  An exception will scarcely be made in the interest of Richard
Cumberland, who, as Scott says, "has occasionally . . . become
disgusting, when he meant to be humorous."  Already Walpole had begun the
new "Gothic romance," and the "Castle of Otranto," with Miss Burney's
novels, was to lead up to Mrs. Radcliffe and Scott, to Miss Edgeworth and
Miss Austen.




CHAPTER X: NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE


Sainte-Beuve says somewhere that it is impossible to speak of "The German
Classics."  Perhaps he would not have allowed us to talk of the American
classics.  American literature is too nearly contemporary.  Time has not
tried it.  But, if America possesses a classic author (and I am not
denying that she may have several), that author is decidedly Hawthorne.
His renown is unimpeached: his greatness is probably permanent, because
he is at once such an original and personal genius, and such a judicious
and determined artist.

Hawthorne did not set himself to "compete with life."  He did not make
the effort--the proverbially tedious effort--to say everything.  To his
mind, fiction was not a mirror of commonplace persons, and he was not the
analyst of the minutest among their ordinary emotions.  Nor did he make a
moral, or social, or political purpose the end and aim of his art.  Moral
as many of his pieces naturally are, we cannot call them didactic.  He
did not expect, nor intend, to better people by them.  He drew the Rev.
Arthur Dimmesdale without hoping that his Awful Example would persuade
readers to "make a clean breast" of their iniquities and their secrets.
It was the moral situation that interested him, not the edifying effect
of his picture of that situation upon the minds of novel-readers.

He set himself to write Romance, with a definite idea of what Romance-
writing should be; "to dream strange things, and make them look like
truth."  Nothing can be more remote from the modern system of reporting
commonplace things, in the hope that they will read like truth.  As all
painters must do, according to good traditions, he selected a subject,
and then placed it in a deliberately arranged light--not in the full
glare of the noonday sun, and in the disturbances of wind, and weather,
and cloud.  Moonshine filling a familiar chamber, and making it
unfamiliar, moonshine mixed with the "faint ruddiness on walls and
ceiling" of fire, was the light, or a clear brown twilight was the light
by which he chose to work.  So he tells us in the preface to "The Scarlet
Letter."  The room could be filled with the ghosts of old dwellers in it;
faint, yet distinct, all the life that had passed through it came back,
and spoke with him, and inspired him.  He kept his eyes on these figures,
tangled in some rare knot of Fate, and of Desire: these he painted, not
attending much to the bustle of existence that surrounded them, not
permitting superfluous elements to mingle with them, and to distract him.

The method of Hawthorne can be more easily traced than that of most
artists as great as himself.  Pope's brilliant passages and disconnected
trains of thought are explained when we remember that "paper-sparing," as
he says, he wrote two, or four, or six couplets on odd, stray bits of
casual writing material.  These he had to join together, somehow, and
between his "Orient Pearls at Random Strung" there is occasionally "too
much string," as Dickens once said on another opportunity.  Hawthorne's
method is revealed in his published note-books.  In these he jotted the
germ of an idea, the first notion of a singular, perhaps supernatural
moral situation.  Many of these he never used at all, on others he would
dream, and dream, till the persons in the situations became characters,
and the thing was evolved into a story.  Thus he may have invented such a
problem as this: "The effect of a great, sudden sin on a simple and
joyous nature," and thence came all the substance of "The Marble Faun"
("Transformation").  The original and germinal idea would naturally
divide itself into another, as the protozoa reproduce themselves.  Another
idea was the effect of nearness to the great crime on a pure and spotless
nature: hence the character of Hilda.  In the preface to "The Scarlet
Letter," Hawthorne shows us how he tried, by reflection and dream, to
warm the vague persons of the first mere notion or hint into such life as
characters in romance inherit.  While he was in the Civil Service of his
country, in the Custom House at Salem, he could not do this; he needed
freedom.  He was dismissed by political opponents from office, and
instantly he was himself again, and wrote his most popular and, perhaps,
his best book.  The evolution of his work was from the prime notion
(which he confessed that he loved best when "strange") to the short
story, and thence to the full and rounded novel.  All his work was
leisurely.  All his language was picked, though not with affectation.  He
did not strive to make a style out of the use of odd words, or of
familiar words in odd places.  Almost always he looked for "a kind of
spiritual medium, seen through which" his romances, like the Old Manse in
which he dwelt, "had not quite the aspect of belonging to the material
world."

The spiritual medium which he liked, he was partly born into, and partly
he created it.  The child of a race which came from England, robust and
Puritanic, he had in his veins the blood of judges--of those judges who
burned witches and persecuted Quakers.  His fancy is as much influenced
by the old fanciful traditions of Providence, of Witchcraft, of haunting
Indian magic, as Scott's is influenced by legends of foray and feud, by
ballad, and song, and old wives' tales, and records of conspiracies, fire-
raisings, tragic love-adventures, and border wars.  Like Scott, Hawthorne
lived in phantasy--in phantasy which returned to the romantic past,
wherein his ancestors had been notable men.  It is a commonplace, but an
inevitable commonplace, to add that he was filled with the idea of
Heredity, with the belief that we are all only new combinations of our
fathers that were before us.  This has been made into a kind of pseudo-
scientific doctrine by M. Zola, in the long series of his Rougon-Macquart
novels.  Hawthorne treated it with a more delicate and a serener art in
"The House of the Seven Gables."

It is curious to mark Hawthorne's attempts to break away from
himself--from the man that heredity, and circumstance, and the divine
gift of genius had made him.  He naturally "haunts the mouldering lodges
of the past"; but when he came to England (where such lodges are
abundant), he was ill-pleased and cross-grained.  He knew that a long
past, with mysteries, dark places, malisons, curses, historic wrongs, was
the proper atmosphere of his art.  But a kind of conscientious desire to
be something other than himself--something more ordinary and popular--make
him thank Heaven that his chosen atmosphere was rare in his native land.
He grumbled at it, when he was in the midst of it; he grumbled in
England; and how he grumbled in Rome!  He permitted the American Eagle to
make her nest in his bosom, "with the customary infirmity of temper that
characterises this unhappy fowl," as he says in his essay "The Custom
House."  "The general truculency of her attitude" seems to "threaten
mischief to the inoffensive community" of Europe, and especially of
England and Italy.

Perhaps Hawthorne travelled too late, when his habits were too much
fixed.  It does not become Englishmen to be angry because a voyager is
annoyed at not finding everything familiar and customary in lands which
he only visits because they are strange.  This is an inconsistency to
which English travellers are particularly prone.  But it is, in
Hawthorne's case, perhaps, another instance of his conscientious attempts
to be, what he was not, very much like other people.  His unexpected
explosions of Puritanism, perhaps, are caused by the sense of being too
much himself.  He speaks of "the Squeamish love of the Beautiful" as if
the love of the Beautiful were something unworthy of an able-bodied
citizen.  In some arts, as in painting and sculpture, his taste was very
far from being at home, as his Italian journals especially prove.  In
short, he was an artist in a community for long most inartistic.  He
could not do what many of us find very difficult--he could not take
Beauty with gladness as it comes, neither shrinking from it as immoral,
nor getting girlishly drunk upon it, in the aesthetic fashion, and
screaming over it in an intoxication of surprise.  His tendency was to be
rather shy and afraid of Beauty, as a pleasant but not immaculately
respectable acquaintance.  Or, perhaps, he was merely deferring to Anglo-
Saxon public opinion.

Possibly he was trying to wean himself from himself, and from his own
genius, when he consorted with odd amateur socialists in farm-work, and
when he mixed, at Concord, with the "queer, strangely-dressed,
oddly-behaved mortals, most of whom took upon themselves to be important
agents of the world's destiny, yet were simple bores of a very intense
water."  They haunted Mr. Emerson as they haunted Shelley, and Hawthorne
had to see much of them.  But they neither made a convert of him, nor
irritated him into resentment.  His long-enduring kindness to the
unfortunate Miss Delia Bacon, an early believer in the nonsense about
Bacon and Shakespeare, was a model of manly and generous conduct.  He
was, indeed, an admirable character, and his goodness had the bloom on it
of a courteous and kindly nature that loved the Muses.  But, as one has
ventured to hint, the development of his genius and taste was hampered
now and then, apparently, by a desire to put himself on the level of the
general public, and of their ideas.  This, at least, is how one explains
to oneself various remarks in his prefaces, journals, and note-books.
This may account for the moral allegories which too weirdly haunt some of
his short, early pieces.  Edgar Poe, in a passage full of very honest and
well-chosen praise, found fault with the allegorical business.

Mr. Hutton, from whose "Literary Essays" I borrow Poe's opinion, says:
"Poe boldly asserted that the conspicuously ideal scaffoldings of
Hawthorne's stories were but the monstrous fruits of the bad
transcendental atmosphere which he breathed so long."  But I hope this
way of putting it is not Poe's.  "Ideal scaffoldings," are odd enough,
but when scaffoldings turn out to be "fruits" of an "atmosphere," and
monstrous fruits of a "bad transcendental atmosphere," the brain reels in
the fumes of mixed metaphors.  "Let him mend his pen," cried Poe, "get a
bottle of visible ink, come out from the Old Manse, cut Mr. Alcott," and,
in fact, write about things less impalpable, as Mr. Mallock's heroine
preferred to be loved, "in a more human sort of way."

Hawthorne's way was never too ruddily and robustly human.  Perhaps, even
in "The Scarlet Letter," we feel too distinctly that certain characters
are moral conceptions, not warmed and wakened out of the allegorical into
the real.  The persons in an allegory may be real enough, as Bunyan has
proved by examples.  But that culpable clergyman, Mr. Arthur Dimmesdale,
with his large, white brow, his melancholy eyes, his hand on his heart,
and his general resemblance to the High Church Curate in Thackeray's "Our
Street," is he real?  To me he seems very unworthy to be Hester's lover,
for she is a beautiful woman of flesh and blood.  Mr. Dimmesdale was not
only immoral; he was unsportsmanlike.  He had no more pluck than a church-
mouse.  His miserable passion was degraded by its brevity; how could he
see this woman's disgrace for seven long years, and never pluck up heart
either to share her shame or _peccare forliter_?  He is a lay figure,
very cleverly, but somewhat conventionally made and painted.  The
vengeful husband of Hester, Roger Chillingworth, is a Mr. Casaubon stung
into jealous anger.  But his attitude, watching ever by Dimmesdale,
tormenting him, and yet in his confidence, and ever unsuspected, reminds
one of a conception dear to Dickens.  He uses it in "David Copperfield,"
where Mr. Micawber (of all people!) plays this trick on Uriah Heep; he
uses it in "Hunted Down"; he was about using it in "Edwin Drood"; he used
it (old Martin and Pecksniff) in "Martin Chuzzlewit."  The person of
Roger Chillingworth and his conduct are a little too melodramatic for
Hawthorne's genius.

In Dickens's manner, too, is Hawthorne's long sarcastic address to Judge
Pyncheon (in "The House of the Seven Gables"), as the judge sits dead in
his chair, with his watch ticking in his hand.  Occasionally a chance
remark reminds one of Dickens; this for example: He is talking of large,
black old books of divinity, and of their successors, tiny books,
Elzevirs perhaps.  "These little old volumes impressed me as if they had
been intended for very large ones, but had been unfortunately blighted at
an early stage of their growth."  This might almost deceive the elect as
a piece of the true Boz.  Their widely different talents did really
intersect each other where the perverse, the grotesque, and the terrible
dwell.

To myself "The House of the Seven Gables" has always appeared the most
beautiful and attractive of Hawthorne's novels.  He actually gives us a
love story, and condescends to a pretty heroine.  The curse of "Maule's
Blood" is a good old romantic idea, terribly handled.  There is more of
lightness, and of a cobwebby dusty humour in Hepzibah Pyncheon, the
decayed lady shopkeeper, than Hawthorne commonly cares to display.  Do
you care for the "first lover," the Photographer's Young Man?  It may be
conventional prejudice, but I seem to see him going about on a tricycle,
and I don't think him the right person for Phoebe.  Perhaps it is really
the beautiful, gentle, oppressed Clifford who haunts one's memory most, a
kind of tragic and thwarted Harold Skimpole. "How pleasant, how
delightful," he murmured, but not as if addressing any one.  "Will it
last?  How balmy the atmosphere through that open window!  An open
window!  How beautiful that play of sunshine.  Those flowers, how very
fragrant!  That young girl's face, how cheerful, how blooming.  A flower
with the dew on it, and sunbeams in the dewdrops . . . "  This comparison
with Skimpole may sound like an unkind criticism of Clifford's character
and place in the story--it is only a chance note of a chance resemblance.

Indeed, it may be that Hawthorne himself was aware of the resemblance.
"An individual of Clifford's character," he remarks, "can always be
pricked more acutely through his sense of the beautiful and harmonious
than through his heart."  And he suggests that, if Clifford had not been
so long in prison, his aesthetic zeal "might have eaten out or filed away
his affections."  This was what befell Harold Skimpole--himself "in
prisons often"--at Coavinses!  The Judge Pyncheon of the tale is also a
masterly study of swaggering black-hearted respectability, and then, in
addition to all the poetry of his style, and the charm of his haunted
air, Hawthorne favours us with a brave conclusion of the good sort, the
old sort.  They come into money, they marry, they are happy ever after.
This is doing things handsomely, though some of our modern novelists
think it coarse and degrading.  Hawthorne did not think so, and they are
not exactly better artists than Hawthorne.

Yet he, too, had his economies, which we resent.  I do not mean his not
telling us what it was that Roger Chillingworth saw on Arthur
Dimmesdale's bare breast.  To leave that vague is quite legitimate.  But
what had Miriam and the spectre of the Catacombs done?  Who was the
spectre?  What did he want?  To have told all this would have been better
than to fill the novel with padding about Rome, sculpture, and the Ethics
of Art.  As the silly saying runs: "the people has a right to know" about
Miriam and her ghostly acquaintance. {10}  But the "Marble Faun" is not
of Hawthorne's best period, beautiful as are a hundred passages in the
tale.

Beautiful passages are as common in his prose as gold in the richest
quartz.  How excellent are his words on the first faint but certain
breath of Autumn in the air, felt, perhaps, early in July.  "And then
came Autumn, with his immense burthen of apples, dropping them
continually from his overladen shoulders as he trudged along."  Keats
might have written so of Autumn in the orchards--if Keats had been
writing prose.

There are geniuses more sunny, large, and glad than Hawthorne's, none
more original, more surefooted, in his own realm of moonlight and
twilight.




CHAPTER XI: THE PARADISE OF POETS


We were talking of Love, Constancy, the Ideal.  "Who ever loved like the
poets?" cried Lady Violet Lebas, her pure, pale cheek flushing.  "Ah, if
ever I am to love, he shall be a singer!"

"Tenors are popular, very," said Lord Walter.

"I mean a poet," she answered witheringly.

Near them stood Mr. Witham, the author of "Heart's Chords Tangled."

"Ah," said he, "that reminds me.  I have been trying to catch it all the
morning.  That reminds me of my dream."

"Tell us your dream," murmured Lady Violet Lebas, and he told it.

"It was through an unfortunate but pardonable blunder," said Mr. Witham,
"that I died, and reached the Paradise of Poets.  I had, indeed,
published volumes of verse, but with the most blameless motives.  Other
poets were continually sending me theirs, and, as I could not admire
them, and did not like to reply by critical remarks, I simply printed
some rhymes for the purpose of sending them to the gentlemen who favoured
me with theirs.  I always wrote on the fly-leaf a quotation from the
'Iliad,' about giving copper in exchange for gold; and the few poets who
could read Greek were gratified, while the others, probably, thought a
compliment was intended.  Nothing could be less culpable or pretentious,
but, through some mistake on the part of Charon, I was drafted off to the
Paradise of Poets.

"Outside the Golden Gate a number of Shadows were waiting, in different
attitudes of depression and languor.  Bavius and Maevius were there,
still complaining of 'cliques,' railing at Horace for a mere rhymer of
society, and at Virgil as a plagiarist, 'Take away his cribs from Homer
and Apollonius Rhodius,' quoth honest Maevius, 'and what is there left of
him?'  I also met a society of gentlemen, in Greek costume, of various
ages, from a half-naked minstrel with a tortoiseshell lyre in his hand to
an elegant of the age of Pericles.  They all consorted together, talking
various dialects of Aeolic, Ionian, Attic Greek, and so forth, which were
plainly not intelligible to each other.  I ventured to ask one of the
company who he was, but he, with a sweep of his hand, said, 'We are
Homer!'  When I expressed my regret and surprise that the Golden Gate had
not yet opened for so distinguished, though collective, an artist, my
friend answered that, according to Fick, Peppmuller, and many other
learned men, they were Homer.  'But an impostor from Chios has got in
somehow,' he said; 'they don't pay the least attention to the Germans in
the Paradise of Poets.'

"At this moment the Golden Gates were thrown apart, and a fair lady, in
an early Italian costume, carrying a laurel in her hand, appeared at the
entrance.  All the Shadows looked up with an air of weary expectation,
like people waiting for their turn in a doctor's consulting-room.  She
beckoned to me, however, and I made haste to follow her.  The words
'Charlatan!'  'You a poet!' in a variety of languages, greeted me by way
of farewell from the Shadows.

"'The renowned Laura, if I am not mistaken,' I ventured to remark,
recognising her, indeed, from the miniature in the Laurentian library at
Florence.

"She bowed, and I began to ask for her adorer, Petrarch.

"'Excuse me,' said Laura, as we glided down a mossy path, under the shade
of trees particularly dear to poets, 'excuse me, but the sonneteer of
whom you speak is one whose name I cannot bear to mention.  His conduct
with Burns's Clarinda, his heartless infatuation for Stella--'

"'You astonish me,' I said.  'In the Paradise of Poets--'

"'They are poets still--incorrigible!' answered the lady; then slightly
raising her voice of silver, as a beautiful appearance in a toga drew
near, she cried '_Catullo mio_!'

"The greeting between these accomplished ghosts was too kindly to leave
room for doubt as to the ardour of their affections.

"'Will you, my Catullus,' murmured Laura, 'explain to this poet from the
land of fogs, any matters which, to him, may seem puzzling and unfamiliar
in our Paradise?'

"The Veronese, with a charming smile, took my hand, and led me to a
shadowy arbour, whence we enjoyed a prospect of many rivers and mountains
in the poets' heaven.  Among these I recognised the triple crest of the
Eildons, Grongar Hill, Cithaeron and Etna; while the reed-fringed waters
of the Mincius flowed musically between the banks and braes o' bonny Doon
to join the Tweed.  Blithe ghosts were wandering by, in all varieties of
apparel, and I distinctly observed Dante's Beatrice, leaning loving on
the arm of Sir Philip Sidney, while Dante was closely engaged in
conversation with the lost Lenore, celebrated by Mr. Edgar Allan Poe.

"'In what can my knowledge of the Paradise of Poets be serviceable to
you, sir?' said Catullus, as he flung himself at the feet of Laura, on
the velvet grass.

"'I am disinclined to seem impertinently curious,' I answered, 'but the
ladies in this fair, smiling country--have the gods made them poetical?'

"'Not generally,' replied Catullus.  'Indeed, if you would be well with
them, I may warn you never to mention poetry in their hearing.  They
never cared for it while on earth, and in this place it is a topic which
the prudent carefully avoid among ladies.  To tell the truth, they have
had to listen to far too much poetry, and too many discussions on the
caesura.  There are, indeed, a few lady poets--very few.  Sappho, for
example; indeed I cannot recall any other at this moment.  The result is
that Phaon, of all the shadows here, is the most distinguished by the
fair.  He was not a poet, you know; he got in on account of Sappho, who
adored him.  They are estranged now, of course.'

"'You interest me deeply,' I answered.  'And now, will you kindly tell me
why these ladies are here, if they were not poets?'

"'The women that were our ideals while we dwelt on earth, the women we
loved but never won, or, at all events, never wedded, they for whom we
sighed while in the arms of a recognised and legitimate affection, have
been chosen by the Olympians to keep us company in Paradise!'

"'Then wherefore,' I interrupted, 'do I see Robert Burns loitering with
that lady in a ruff,--Cassandra, I make no doubt--Ronsard's Cassandra?
And why is the incomparable Clarinda inseparable from Petrarch; and Miss
Patty Blount, Pope's flame, from the Syrian Meleager, while _his_
Heliodore is manifestly devoted to Mr. Emerson, whom, by the way, I am
delighted, if rather surprised, to see here?'

"'Ah,' said Catullus, 'you are a new-comer among us.  Poets will be
poets, and no sooner have they attained their desire, and dwelt in the
company of their earthly Ideals, than they feel strangely, yet
irresistibly drawn to Another.  So it was in life, so it will ever be.  No
Ideal can survive a daily companionship, and fortunate is the poet who
did not marry his first love!'

"'As far as that goes,' I answered, 'most of you were highly favoured;
indeed, I do not remember any poet whose Ideal was his wife, or whose
first love led him to the altar.'

"'I was not a marrying man myself,' answered the Veronese; 'few of us
were.  Myself, Horace, Virgil--we were all bachelors.'

"'And Lesbia!'

"I said this in a low voice, for Laura was weaving bay into a chaplet,
and inattentive to our conversation.

"'Poor Lesbia!' said Catullus, with a suppressed sigh.  'How I misjudged
that girl!  How cruel, how causeless were my reproaches,' and wildly
rending his curled locks and laurel crown, he fled into a thicket, whence
there soon arose the melancholy notes of the Ausonian lyre.'

"'He is incorrigible,' said Laura, very coldly; and she deliberately
began to tear and toss away the fragments of the chaplet she had been
weaving.  'I shall never break him of that habit of versifying.  But they
are all alike.'

"'Is there nobody here,' said I, 'who is happy with his Ideal--nobody but
has exchanged Ideals with some other poet?'

"'There is one,' she said.  'He comes of a northern tribe; and in his
life-time he never rhymed upon his unattainable lady, or if rhyme he did,
the accents never carried her name to the ears of the vulgar.  Look
there.'

"She pointed to the river at our feet, and I knew the mounted figure that
was riding the ford, with a green-mantled lady beside him like the Fairy
Queen.

"Surely I had read of her, and knew her--

   "'She whose blue eyes their secret told,
   Though shaded by her locks of gold.'

"'They are different; I know not why.  They are constant,' said Laura,
and rising with an air of chagrin, she disappeared among the boughs of
the trees that bear her name.

"'Unhappy hearts of poets,' I mused.  'Light things and sacred they are,
but even in their Paradise, and among their chosen, with every wish
fulfilled, and united to their beloved, they cannot be at rest!'

"Thus moralising, I wended my way to a crag, whence there was a wide
prospect.  Certain poets were standing there, looking down into an abyss,
and to them I joined myself.

"'Ah, I cannot bear it!' said a voice, and, as he turned away, his brow
already clearing, his pain already forgotten, I beheld the august form of
Shakespeare.

"Marking my curiosity before it was expressed, he answered the unuttered
question.

"'That is a sight for Pagans,' he said, 'and may give them pleasure.  But
my Paradise were embittered if I had to watch the sorrows of others, and
their torments, however well deserved.  The others are gazing on the
purgatory of critics and commentators.'

"He passed from me, and I joined the 'Ionian father of the rest'--Homer,
who, with a countenance of unspeakable majesty, was seated on a throne of
rock, between the Mantuan Virgil of the laurel crown, Hugo, Sophocles,
Milton, Lovelace, Tennyson, and Shelley.

"At their feet I beheld, in a vast and gloomy hall, many an honest
critic, many an erudite commentator, an army of reviewers.  Some were
condemned to roll logs up insuperable heights, whence they descended
thundering to the plain.  Others were set to impositions, and I
particularly observed that the Homeric commentators were obliged to write
out the 'Iliad' and 'Odyssey' in their complete shape, and were always
driven by fiends to the task when they prayed for the bare charity of
being permitted to leave out the 'interpolations.'  Others, fearful to
narrate, were torn into as many fragments as they had made of these
immortal epics.  Others, such as Aristarchus, were spitted on their own
critical signs of disapproval.  Many reviewers were compelled to read the
books which they had criticised without perusal, and it was terrible to
watch the agonies of the worthy pressmen who were set to this unwonted
task.  'May we not be let off with the preface?' they cried in piteous
accents.  'May we not glance at the table of contents and be done with
it?'  But the presiding demons (who had been Examiners in the bodily
life) drove them remorseless to their toils.

"Among the condemned I could not but witness, with sympathy, the
punishment reserved for translators.  The translators of Virgil, in
particular, were a vast and motley assemblage of most respectable men.
Bishops were there, from Gawain Douglas downwards; Judges, in their
ermine; professors, clergymen, civil servants, writhing in all the
tortures that the blank verse, the anapaestic measure, the metre of the
'Lay of the Last Minstrel,' the heroic couplet and similar devices can
inflict.  For all these men had loved Virgil, though not wisely: and now
their penance was to hear each other read their own translations."

"That must have been more than they could bear," said Lady Violet

"Yes," said Mr. Witham; "I should know, for down I fell into Tartarus
with a crash, and writhed among the Translators."

"Why?" asked Lady Violet.

"Because I have translated Theocritus!"

"Mr. Witham," said Lady Violet, "did you meet your ideal woman when you
were in the Paradise of Poets?"

"She yet walks this earth," said the bard, with a too significant bow.

Lady Violet turned coldly away.

* * *

Mr. Witham was never invited to the Blues again--the name of Lord Azure's
place in Kent.

The Poet is shut out of Paradise.




CHAPTER XII: PARIS AND HELEN


The first name in romance, the most ancient and the most enduring, is
that of Argive Helen.  During three thousand years fair women have been
born, have lived, and been loved, "that there might be a song in the ears
of men of later time," but, compared to the renown of Helen, their glory
is dim.  Cleopatra, who held the world's fate in her hands, and lay in
the arms of Caesar; Mary Stuart (_Maria Verticordia_), for whose sake, as
a northern novelist tells, peasants have lain awake, sorrowing that she
is dead; Agnes Sorel, Fair Rosamond, la belle Stuart, "the Pompadour and
the Parabere," can still enchant us from the page of history and
chronicle.  "Zeus gave them beauty, which naturally rules even strength
itself," to quote the Greek orator on the mistress of them all, on her
who, having never lived, can never die, the Daughter of the Swan.

While Helen enjoys this immortality, and is the ideal of beauty upon
earth, it is curious to reflect on the _modernite_ of her story, the
oldest of the love stories of the world.  In Homer we first meet her, the
fairest of women in the song of the greatest of poets.  It might almost
seem as if Homer meant to justify, by his dealing with Helen, some of the
most recent theories of literary art.  In the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" the
tale of Helen is without a beginning and without an end, like a frieze on
a Greek temple.  She crosses the stage as a figure familiar to all, the
poet's audience clearly did not need to be told who Helen was, nor
anything about her youth.

The famous judgment of Paris, the beginning of evil to Achaeans and Ilian
men, is only mentioned once by Homer, late, and in a passage of doubtful
authenticity.  Of her reconciliation to her wedded lord, Menelaus, not a
word is said; of her end we are told no more than that for her and him a
mansion in Elysium is prepared--

   "Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow."

We leave her happy in Argos, a smile on her lips, a gift in her hands, as
we met her in Troy, beautiful, adored despite her guilt, as sweet in her
repentance as in her unvexed Argive home.  Women seldom mention her, in
the epic, but with horror and anger; men never address her but in gentle
courtesy.  What is her secret?  How did she leave her home with
Paris--beguiled by love, by magic, or driven by the implacable Aphrodite?
Homer is silent on all of these things; these things, doubtless, were
known by his audience.  In his poem Helen moves as a thing of simple
grace, courtesy, and kindness, save when she rebels against her doom,
after seeing her lover fly from her husband's spear.  Had we only Homer,
by far our earliest literary source, we should know little of the romance
of Helen; should only know that a lawless love brought ruin on Troy and
sorrow on the Achaeans; and this is thrown out, with no moral comment,
without praise or blame.  The end, we learn, was peace, and beauty was
reconciled to life.  There is no explanation, no _denouement_; and we
know how much _denouement_ and explanations hampered Scott and
Shakespeare.  From these trammels Homer is free, as a god is free from
mortal limitations.

All this manner of telling a tale--a manner so ancient, so original--is
akin, in practice, to recent theories of what art should be, and what art
seldom is, perhaps never is, in modern hands.

Modern enough, again, is the choice of a married woman for the heroine of
the earliest love tale.  Apollonius Rhodius sings (and no man has ever
sung so well) of a maiden's love; Virgil, of a widow's; Homer, of love
that has defied law, blindly obedient to destiny, which dominates even
Zeus.  Once again, Helen is not a very young girl; ungallant
chronologists have attributed to her I know not what age.  We think of
her as about the age of the Venus of Milo; in truth, she was "ageless and
immortal."  Homer never describes her beauty; we only see it reflected in
the eyes of the old men, white and weak, thin-voiced as cicalas: but hers
is a loveliness "to turn an old man young."  "It is no marvel," they say,
"that for her sake Trojans and Achaeans slay each other."

She was embroidering at a vast web, working in gold and scarlet the
sorrows that for her sake befell mankind, when they called her to the
walls to see Paris fight Menelaus, in the last year of the war.  There
she stands, in raiment of silvery white, her heart yearning for her old
love and her own city.  Already her thought is far from Paris.  Was her
heart ever with Paris?  That is her secret.  A very old legend, mentioned
by the Bishop of Thessalonica, Eustathius, tells us that Paris magically
beguiled her, disguised in the form of Menelaus, her lord, as Uther
beguiled Ygerne.  She sees the son of Priam play the dastard in the
fight; she turns in wrath on Aphrodite, who would lure her back to his
arms; but to his arms she must go, "for the daughter of Zeus was afraid."
Violence is put upon beauty; it is soiled, or seems soiled, in its way
through the world.  Helen urges Paris again into the war.  He has a heart
invincibly light and gay; shame does not weigh on him.  "Not every man is
valiant every day," he says; yet once engaged in battle, he bears him
bravely, and his arrows rain death among the mail-clad Achaeans.

What Homer thinks of Paris we can only guess.  His beauty is the bane of
Ilios; but Homer forgives so much to beauty.  In the end of the "Iliad,"
Helen sings the immortal dirge over Hector, the stainless knight, "with
thy loving kindness and thy gentle speech."

In the "Odyssey," she is at home again, playing the gracious part of
hostess to Odysseus's wandering son, pouring into the bowl the magic herb
of Egypt, "which brings forgetfulness of sorrow."  The wandering son of
Odysseus departs with a gift for his bride, "to wear upon the day of her
desire, a memorial of the hands of Helen," the beautiful hands, that in
Troy or Argos were never idle.

Of Helen, from Homer, we know no more.  Grace, penitence in exile, peace
at home, these are the portion of her who set East and West at war and
ruined the city of Priam of the ashen spear.  As in the strange legend
preserved by Servius, the commentator on Virgil, who tells us that Helen
wore a red "star-stone," whence fell gouts of blood that vanished ere
they touched her swan's neck; so all the blood shed for her sake leaves
Helen stainless.  Of Homer's Helen we know no more.

The later Greek fancy, playing about this form of beauty, wove a myriad
of new fancies, or disinterred from legend old beliefs untouched by
Homer.  Helen was the daughter of the Swan--that is, as was later
explained, of Zeus in the shape of a swan.  Her loveliness, even in
childhood, plunged her in many adventures.  Theseus carried her off; her
brothers rescued her.  All the princes of Achaea competed for her hand,
having first taken an oath to avenge whomsoever she might choose for her
husband.  The choice fell on the correct and honourable, but rather
inconspicuous, Menelaus, and they dwelt in Sparta, beside the Eurotas,
"in a hollow of the rifted hills."  Then, from across the sea, came the
beautiful and fatal Paris, son of Priam, King of Troy.  As a child, Paris
had been exposed on the mountains, because his mother dreamed that she
brought forth a firebrand.  He was rescued and fostered by a shepherd; he
tended the flocks; he loved the daughter of a river god, OEnone.  Then
came the naked Goddesses, to seek at the hand of the most beautiful of
mortals the prize of beauty.  Aphrodite won the golden apple from the
queen of heaven, Hera, and from the Goddess of war and wisdom, Athena,
bribing the judge by the promise of the fairest wife in the world.  No
incident is more frequently celebrated in poetry and art, to which it
lends such gracious opportunities.  Paris was later recognised as of the
royal blood of Troy.  He came to Lacedaemon on an embassy, he saw Helen,
and destiny had its way.

Concerning the details in this most ancient love-story, we learn nothing
from Homer, who merely makes Paris remind Helen of their bridal night in
the isle of Cranae.  But from Homer we learn that Paris carried off not
only the wife of Menelaus, but many of his treasures.  To the poet of the
"Iliad," the psychology of the wooing would have seemed a simple matter.
Like the later vase-painters, he would have shown us Paris beside Helen,
Aphrodite standing near, accompanied by the figure of Peitho--Persuasion.

Homer always escapes our psychological problems by throwing the weight of
our deeds and misdeeds on a God or a Goddess, or on destiny.  To have
fled from her lord and her one child, Hermione, was not in keeping with
the character of Helen as Homer draws it.  Her repentance is almost
Christian in its expression, and repentance indicates a consciousness of
sin and of shame, which Helen frequently professes.  Thus she, at least,
does not, like Homer, in his chivalrous way, throw all the blame on the
Immortals and on destiny.  The cheerful acquiescence of Helen in destiny
makes part of the comic element in _La Belle Helene_, but the mirth only
arises out of the incongruity between Parisian ideas and those of ancient
Greece.

Helen is freely and bitterly blamed in the "Odyssey" by Penelope, chiefly
because of the ruinous consequences which followed her flight.  Still,
there is one passage, when Penelope prudently hesitates about recognising
her returned lord, which makes it just possible that a legend chronicled
by Eustathius was known to Homer,--namely, the tale already mentioned,
that Paris beguiled her in the shape of Menelaus.  The incident is very
old, as in the story of Zeus and Amphitryon, and might be used whenever a
lady's character needed to be saved.  But this anecdote, on the whole, is
inconsistent with the repentance of Helen, and is not in Homer's manner.

The early lyric poet, Stesichorus, is said to have written harshly
against Helen.  She punished him by blindness, and he indited a palinode,
explaining that it was not she who went to Troy, but a woman fashioned in
her likeness, by Zeus, out of mist and light.  The real Helen remained
safely and with honour in Egypt.  Euripides has made this idea, which was
calculated to please him, the groundwork of his "Helena," but it never
had a strong hold on the Greek imagination.  Modern fancy is pleased by
the picture of the cloud-bride in Troy, Greeks and Trojans dying for a
phantasm.  "Shadows we are, and shadows we pursue."

Concerning the later feats, and the death of Paris, Homer says very
little.  He slew Achilles by an arrow-shot in the Scaean gate, and
prophecy was fulfilled.  He himself fell by another shaft, perhaps the
poisoned shaft of Philoctetes.  In the fourth or fifth century of our era
a late poet, Quintus Smyrnaeus, described Paris's journey, in quest of a
healing spell, to the forsaken OEnone, and her refusal to aid him; her
death on his funeral pyre.  Quintus is a poet of extraordinary merit for
his age, and scarcely deserves the reproach of laziness affixed on him by
Lord Tennyson.

On the whole, Homer seems to have a kind of half-contemptuous liking for
the beautiful Paris.  Later art represents him as a bowman of girlish
charms, wearing a Phrygian cap.  There is a late legend that he had a
son, Corythus, by OEnone, and that he killed the lad in a moment of
jealousy, finding him with Helen and failing to recognise him.  On the
death of Paris, perhaps by virtue of the custom of the Levirate, Helen
became the wife of his brother, Deiphobus.

How her reconciliation with Menelaus was brought about we do not learn
from Homer, who, in the "Odyssey," accepts it as a fact.  The earliest
traditional hint on the subject is given by the famous "Coffer of
Cypselus," a work of the seventh century, B.C., which Pausanias saw at
Olympia, in A.D. 174.  Here, on a band of ivory, was represented, among
other scenes from the tale of Troy, Menelaus rushing, sword in hand, to
slay Helen.  According to Stesichorus, the army was about to stone her
after the fall of Ilios, but relented, amazed by her beauty.

Of her later life in Lacedaemon, nothing is known on really ancient
authority, and later traditions vary.  The Spartans showed her sepulchre
and her shrine at Therapnae, where she was worshipped.  Herodotus tells
us how Helen, as a Goddess, appeared in her temple and healed a deformed
child, making her the fairest woman in Sparta, in the reign of Ariston.
It may, perhaps, be conjectured that in Sparta, Helen occupied the place
of a local Aphrodite.  In another late story she dwells in the isle of
Leuke, a shadowy bride of the shadowy Achilles.  The mocking Lucian, in
his _Vera Historia_, meets Helen in the Fortunate Islands, whence she
elopes with one of his companions.  Again, the sons of Menelaus, by a
concubine, were said to have driven Helen from Sparta on the death of her
lord, and she was murdered in Rhodes, by the vengeance of Polyxo, whose
husband fell at Troy.  But, among all these inventions, that of Homer
stands out pre-eminent.  Helen and Menelaus do not die, they are too near
akin to Zeus; they dwell immortal, not among the shadows of heroes and of
famous ladies dead and gone, but in Elysium, the paradise at the world's
end, unvisited by storms.

   "Beyond these voices there is peace."

It is plain that, as a love-story, the tale of Paris and Helen must to
modern readers seem meagre.  To Greece, in every age, the main interest
lay not in the passion of the beautiful pair, but in its world-wide
consequences: the clash of Europe and Asia, the deaths of kings, the ruin
wrought in their homes, the consequent fall of the great and ancient
Achaean civilisation.  To the Greeks, the Trojan war was what the
Crusades are in later history.  As in the Crusades, the West assailed the
East for an ideal, not to recover the Holy Sepulchre of our religion, but
to win back the living type of beauty and of charm.  Perhaps, ere the sun
grows cold, men will no more believe in the Crusades, as an historical
fact, than we do in the siege of Troy.  In a sense, a very obvious sense,
the myth of Helen is a parable of Hellenic history.  They sought beauty,
and they found it; they bore it home, and, with beauty, their bane.
Wherever Helen went "she brought calamity," in this a type of all the
famous and peerless ladies of old days, of Cleopatra and of Mary Stuart.
Romance and poetry have nothing less plausible than the part which
Cleopatra actually played in the history of the world, a world well lost
by Mark Antony for her sake.  The flight from Actium might seem as much a
mere poet's dream as the gathering of the Achaeans at Aulis, if we were
not certain that it is truly chronicled.

From the earliest times, even from times before Homer (whose audience is
supposed to know all about Helen), the imagination of Greece, and later,
the imagination of the civilised world, has played around Helen, devising
about her all that possibly could be devised.  She was the daughter of
Zeus by Nemesis, or by Leda; or the daughter of the swan, or a child of
the changeful moon, brooding on "the formless and multi-form waters."  She
could speak in the voices of all women, hence she was named "Echo," and
we might fancy that, like the witch of the Brocken, she could appear to
every man in the likeness of his own first love.  The ancient Egyptians
either knew her, or invented legends of her to amuse the inquiring
Greeks.  She had touched at Sidon, and perhaps Astaroth is only her
Sidonian name.  Whatever could be told of beauty, in its charm, its
perils, the dangers with which it surrounds its lovers, the purity which
it retains, unsmirched by all the sins that are done for beauty's sake,
could be told of Helen.

Like a golden cup, as M. Paul de St. Victor says, she was carried from
lips to lips of heroes, but the gold remains unsullied and unalloyed.  To
heaven she returns again, to heaven which is her own, and looks down
serenely on men slain, and women widowed, and sinking ships, and burning
towns.  Yet with death she gives immortality by her kiss, and Paris and
Menelaus live, because they have touched the lips of Helen.  Through the
grace of Helen, for whom he fell, Sarpedon's memory endures, and Achilles
and Memnon, the son of the Morning, and Troy is more imperishable than
Carthage, or Rome, or Corinth, though Helen

   "Burnt the topless towers of Ilium."

In one brief passage, Marlowe did more than all poets since Stesichorus,
or, at least since the epithalamium of Theocritus, for the glory of
Helen.  Roman poets knew her best as an enemy of their fabulous
ancestors, and in the "AEneid," Virgil's hero draws his sword to slay
her.  Through the Middle Ages, in the romances of Troy, she wanders as a
shining shadow of the ideally fair, like Guinevere, who so often recalls
her in the Arthurian romances.  The chivalrous mediaeval poets and the
Celts could understand better than the Romans the philosophy of "the
world well lost" for love.  Modern poetry, even in Goethe's "Second part
of Faust," has not been very fortunately inspired by Helen, except in the
few lines which she speaks in "The Dream of Fair Women."

   "I had great beauty; ask thou not my name."

Mr. William Morris's Helen, in the "Earthly Paradise," charms at the time
of reading, but, perhaps, leaves little abiding memory.  The Helen of
"Troilus and Cressida" is not one of Shakespeare's immortal women, and
Mr. Rossetti's ballad is fantastic and somewhat false in tone--a romantic
_pastiche_.  Where Euripides twice failed, in the "Troades" and the
"Helena," it can be given to few to succeed.  Helen is best left to her
earliest known minstrel, for who can recapture the grace, the tenderness,
the melancholy, and the charm of the daughter of Zeus in the "Odyssey"
and "Iliad"?  The sightless eyes of Homer saw her clearest, and Helen was
best understood by the wisdom of his unquestioning simplicity.

As if to prove how entirely, though so many hands paltered with her
legend, Helen is Homer's alone, there remains no great or typical work of
Greek art which represents her beauty, and the breasts from which were
modelled cups of gold for the service of the gods.  We have only
paintings on vases, or work on gems, which, though graceful, is
conventional and might represent any other heroine, Polyxena, or
Eriphyle.  No Helen from the hands of Phidias or Scopas has survived to
our time, and the grass may be growing in Therapnae over the shattered
remains of her only statue.

As Stesichorus fabled that only an _eidolon_ of Helen went to Troy, so,
except in the "Iliad" and "Odyssey," we meet but shadows of her
loveliness, phantasms woven out of clouds, and the light of setting suns.




CHAPTER XIII: ENCHANTED CIGARETTES


To dream over literary projects, Balzac says, is like "smoking enchanted
cigarettes," but when we try to tackle our projects, to make them real,
the enchantment disappears.  We have to till the soil, to sow the seed,
to gather the leaves, and then the cigarettes must be manufactured, while
there may be no market for them after all.  Probably most people have
enjoyed the fragrance of these enchanted cigarettes, and have brooded
over much which they will never put on paper.  Here are some of "the
ashes of the weeds of my delight"--memories of romances whereof no single
line is written, or is likely to be written.

Of my earliest novel I remember but little.  I know there had been a
wreck, and that the villain, who was believed to be drowned, came home
and made himself disagreeable.  I know that the heroine's mouth was _not_
"too large for regular beauty."  In that respect she was original.  All
heroines are "muckle-mou'd," I know not why.  It is expected of them.  I
know she was melancholy and merry; it would not surprise me to learn that
she drowned herself from a canoe.  But the villain never descended to
crime, the first lover would not fall in love, the heroine's own
affections were provokingly disengaged, and the whole affair came to a
dead stop for want of a plot.  Perhaps, considering modern canons of
fiction, this might have been a very successful novel.  It was entirely
devoid of incident or interest, and, consequently, was a good deal like
real life, as real life appears to many cultivated authors.  On the other
hand, all the characters were flippant.  This would never have done, and
I do not regret novel No. I., which had not even a name.

The second story had a plot, quantities of plot, nothing but plot.  It
was to have been written in collaboration with a very great novelist,
who, as far as we went, confined himself to making objections.  This
novel was stopped (not that my friend would ever have gone on) by "Called
Back," which anticipated part of the idea.  The story was entitled "Where
is Rose?" and the motto was--

      "_Rosa quo locorum_
   _Sera moratur_."

The characters were--(1) Rose, a young lady of quality.  (2) The Russian
Princess, her friend (need I add that, to meet a public demand, _her_
name was Vera?).  (3) Young man engaged to Rose.  (4) Charles, his
friend.  (5) An enterprising person named "The Whiteley of Crime," the
universal Provider of Iniquity.  In fact, he anticipated Sir Arthur
Doyle's Professor Moriarty.  The rest were detectives, old ladies, mob,
and a wealthy young Colonial larrikin.  Neither my friend nor I was fond
of describing love scenes, so we made the heroine disappear in the second
chapter, and she never turned up again till chapter the last.  After
playing in a comedy at the house of an earl, Rosa and Vera entered her
brougham.  Soon afterwards the brougham drew up, _empty_, at Rose's own
door.  Where _was_ Rose?  Traces of her were found, of all places, in the
Haunted House in Berkeley Square, which is not haunted any longer.  After
that Rose was long sought in vain.

This, briefly, is what had occurred.  A Russian detective "wanted" Vera,
who, to be sure, was a Nihilist.  To catch Vera he made an alliance with
"The Whiteley of Crime."  He was a man who would destroy a parish
register, or forge a will, or crack a crib, or break up a Pro-Boer
meeting, or burn a house, or kidnap a rightful heir, or manage a
personation, or issue amateur bank-notes, or what you please.  Thinking
to kill two birds with one stone, he carried off Rose for her diamonds
and Vera for his friend, the Muscovite police official, lodging them both
in the Haunted House.  But there he and the Russian came to blows, and,
in the confusion, Vera made her escape, while Rose was conveyed, _as
Vera_, to Siberia.  Not knowing how to dispose of her, the Russian police
consigned her to a nunnery at the mouth of the Obi.  Her lover, in a
yacht, found her hiding-place, and got a friendly nun to give her some
narcotic known to the Samoyeds.  It was the old _truc_ of the Friar in
"Romeo and Juliet."  At the mouth of the Obi they do not bury the dead,
but lay them down on platforms in the open air.  Rose was picked up there
by her lover (accompanied by a chaperon, of course), was got on board the
steam yacht, and all went well.  I forget what happened to "The Whiteley
of Crime."  After him I still rather hanker--he was a humorous ruffian.
Something could be made of "The Whiteley of Crime."  Something _has_ been
made, by the author of "Sherlock Holmes."

In yet another romance, a gentleman takes his friend, in a country place,
to see his betrothed.  The friend, who had only come into the
neighbourhood that day, is found dead, next morning, hanging to a tree.
Gipsies and others are suspected.  But the lover was the murderer.  He
had been a priest, in South America, and the lady was a Catholic (who
knew not of his Orders).  Now the friend fell in love with the lady at
first sight, on being introduced to her by the lover.  As the two men
walked home, the friend threatened to reveal the lover's secret--his
tonsure--which would be fatal to his hopes.  They quarrelled, parted, and
the ex-priest lassoed his friend.  The motive, I think, is an original
one, and not likely to occur to the first comer.  The inventor is open to
offers.

The next novel, based on a dream, was called "In Search of Qrart."

What is _Qrart_?  I decline to divulge this secret beyond saying that
_Qrart_ was a product of the civilisation which now sleeps under the
snows of the pole.  It was an article of the utmost value to humanity.
Farther I do not intend to commit myself.  The Bride of a God was one of
the characters.

The next novel is, at present, my favourite cigarette.  The scene is
partly in Greece, partly at the Parthian Court, about 80-60 B.C.  Crassus
is the villain.  The heroine was an actress in one of the wandering Greek
companies, splendid strollers, who played at the Indian and Asiatic
Courts.  The story ends with the representation of the "Bacchae," in
Parthia.  The head of Pentheus is carried by one of the Bacchae in that
drama.  Behold, it is not a mask, but _the head of Crassus_, and thus
conveys the first news of the Roman defeat.  Obviously, this is a novel
that needs a great deal of preliminary study, as much, indeed, as
"Salammbo."

Another story will deal with the Icelandic discoverers of America.  Mr.
Kipling, however, has taken the wind out of its sails with his sketch,
"The Finest Story in the World."  There are all the marvels and portents
of the _Eyrbyggja Saga_ to draw upon, there are Skraelings to fight, and
why should not Karlsefni's son kill the last mastodon, and, as
Quetzalcoatl, be the white-bearded god of the Aztecs?  After that a
romance on the intrigues to make Charles Edward King of Poland sounds
commonplace.  But much might be made of that, too, if the right man took
it in hand.  Believe me, there are plenty of stories left, waiting for
the man who can tell them.  I have said it before, but I say it again, if
I were king I would keep court officials, Mr. Stanley Weyman, Mr. Mason,
Mr. Kipling, and others, to tell me my own stories.  I know the kind of
thing which I like, from the discovery of _Qrart_ to that of the French
gold in the burn at Loch Arkaig, or in "the wood by the lochside" that
Murray of Broughton mentions.

Another cigarette I have, the adventures of a Poet, a Poet born in a
Puritan village of Massachusetts about 1670.  Hawthorne could have told
me my story, and how my friend was driven into the wilderness and lived
among the Red Men.  I think he was killed in an attempt to warn his
countrymen of an Indian raid; I think his MS. poems have a bullet-hole
through them, and blood on the leaves.  They were in Carew's best manner,
these poems.

Another tale Hawthorne might have told me, the tale of an excellent man,
whose very virtues, by some baneful moral chemistry, corrupt and ruin the
people with whom he comes in contact.  I do not mean by goading them into
the opposite extremes, but rather something like a moral _jettatura_.
This needs a great deal of subtlety, and what is to become of the hero?
Is he to plunge into vice till everybody is virtuous again?  It wants
working out.  I have omitted, after all, a schoolboy historical romance,
explaining _why Queen Elizabeth was never married_.  A Scottish paper
offered a prize for a story of Queen Mary Stuart's reign.  I did not get
the prize--perhaps did not deserve it, but my story ran thus: You must
know that Queen Elizabeth was singularly like Darnley in personal
appearance.  What so natural as that, disguised as a page, her Majesty
should come spying about the Court of Holyrood?  Darnley sees her walking
out of Queen Mary's room, he thinks her an hallucination, discovers that
she is real, challenges her, and they fight at Faldonside, by the Tweed,
Shakespeare holding Elizabeth's horse.  Elizabeth is wounded, and is
carried to the Kirk of Field, and laid in Darnley's chamber, while
Darnley goes out and makes love to my rural heroine, the lady of
Fernilee, a Kerr.  That night Bothwell blows up the Kirk of Field,
Elizabeth and all.  Darnley has only one resource.  Borrowing the riding
habit of the rural heroine, the lady of Fernilee, he flees across the
Border, and, for the rest of his life, personates Queen Elizabeth.  That
is why Elizabeth, who was Darnley, hated Mary so bitterly (on account of
the Kirk of Field affair), and _that is why Queen Elizabeth was never
married_.  Side-lights on Shakespeare's Sonnets were obviously cast.  The
young man whom Shakespeare admired so, and urged to marry, was--Darnley.
This romance did not get the prize (the anachronism about Shakespeare is
worthy of Scott), but I am conceited enough to think it deserved an
honourable mention.

Enough of my own cigarettes.  But there are others of a more fragrant
weed.  Who will end for me the novel of which Byron only wrote a chapter;
who, as Bulwer Lytton is dead?  A finer opening, one more mysteriously
stirring, you can nowhere read.  And the novel in letters, which Scott
began in 1819, who shall finish it, or tell us what he did with his fair
Venetian courtezan, a character so much out of Sir Walter's way?  He
tossed it aside--it was but an enchanted cigarette--and gave us "The
Fortunes of Nigel" in its place.  I want both.  We cannot call up those
who "left half told" these stories.  In a happier world we shall listen
to their endings, and all our dreams shall be coherent and concluded.
Meanwhile, without trouble, and expense, and disappointment, and reviews,
we can all smoke our cigarettes of fairyland.  Would that many people
were content to smoke them peacefully, and did not rush on pen, paper,
and ink!




CHAPTER XIV: STORIES AND STORY-TELLING
(From STRATH NAVER)


We have had a drought for three weeks.  During a whole week this northern
strath has been as sunny as the Riviera is expected to be.  The streams
can be crossed dry-shod, kelts are plunging in the pools, but even kelts
will not look at a fly.  Now, by way of a pleasant change, an icy north
wind is blowing, with gusts of snow, not snow enough to swell the loch
that feeds the river, but just enough snow (as the tourist said of the
water in the River Styx) "to swear by," or at!  _The Field_ announces
that a duke, who rents three rods on a neighbouring river, has not yet
caught one salmon.  The acrimoniously democratic mind may take comfort in
that intelligence, but, if the weather will not improve for a duke, it is
not likely to change for a mere person of letters.  Thus the devotee of
the Muses is driven back, by stress of climate, upon literature, and as
there is nothing in the lodge to read he is compelled to write.

Now certainly one would not lack material, if only one were capable of
the art of fiction.  The genesis of novels and stories is a topic little
studied, but I am inclined to believe that, like the pearls in the
mussels of the river, fiction is a beautiful disease of the brain.
Something, an incident or an experience, or a reflection, gets imbedded,
incrusted, in the properly constituted mind, and becomes the nucleus of a
pearl of romance.  Mr. Marion Crawford, in a recent work, describes his
hero, who is a novelist, at work.  This young gentleman, by a series of
faults or misfortunes, has himself become a centre of harrowing emotion.
Two young ladies, to each of whom he has been betrothed, are weeping out
their eyes for him, or are kneeling to heaven with despairing cries, or
are hardening their hearts to marry men for whom they "do not care a
bawbee."  The hero's aunt has committed a crime; everybody, in fact, is
in despair, when an idea occurs to the hero.  Indifferent to the sorrows
of his nearest and dearest, he sits down with his notion and writes a
novel--writes like a person possessed.

He has the proper kind of brain, the nucleus has been dropped into it,
the pearl begins to grow, and to assume prismatic hues.  So he is happy,
and even the frozen-out angler might be happy if he could write a novel
in the absence of salmon.  Unluckily, my brain is not capable of this
aesthetic malady, and to save my life, or to "milk a fine warm cow rain,"
as the Zulus say, I could not write a novel, or even a short story.  About
The Short Story, as they call it, with capital letters, our critical
American cousins have much to say.  Its germ, one fancies, is usually an
incident, or a mere anecdote, according to the nature of the author's
brain; this germ becomes either the pearl of a brief _conte_, or the seed
of a stately tree, in three volumes.  An author of experience soon finds
out how he should treat his material.  One writer informs me that, given
the idea, the germinal idea, it is as easy for him to make a novel out of
it as a tale--as easy, and much more satisfactory and remunerative.
Others, like M. Guy de Maupassant, for example, seem to find their
strength in brevity, in cutting down, not in amplifying; in selecting and
reducing, not in allowing other ideas to group themselves round the
first, other characters to assemble about those who are essential.  That
seems to be really the whole philosophy of this matter, concerning which
so many words are expended.  The growth of the germinal idea depends on
the nature of an author's talent--he may excel in expansion, or in
reduction; he may be economical, and out of an anecdote may spin the
whole cocoon of a romance; or he may be extravagant, and give a capable
idea away in the briefest form possible.

These ideas may come to a man in many ways, as we said, from a dream,
from a fragmentary experience (as most experiences in life are
fragmentary), from a hint in a newspaper, from a tale told in
conversation.  Not long ago, for example, I heard an anecdote out of
which M. Guy de Maupassant could have made the most ghastly, the most
squalid, and the most supernaturally moving of all his _contes_.  Indeed,
that is not saying much, as he did not excel in the supernatural.  Were
it written in French, it might lie in my lady's chamber, and, as times
go, nobody would be shocked.  But, by our curious British conventions,
this tale cannot be told in an English book or magazine.  It was not, in
its tendency, immoral; those terrible tales never are.  The events were
rather calculated to frighten the hearer into the paths of virtue.  When
Mr. Richard Cameron, the founder of the Cameronians, and the godfather of
the Cameronian Regiment, was sent to his parish, he was bidden by Mr.
Peden to "put hell-fire to the tails" of his congregation.  This vigorous
expression was well fitted to describe the _conte_ which I have in my
mind (I rather wish I had it not), and which is not to be narrated here,
nor in English.

For a combination of pity and terror, it seemed to me unmatched in the
works of the modern fancy, or in the horrors of modern experience;
whether in experience or in imagination it had its original source.  But
even the English authors, who plume themselves on their audacity, or
their realism, or their contempt for "the young person," would not
venture this little romance, much less, then, is a timidly uncorrect pen-
man likely to tempt Mr. Mudie with the _conte_.  It is one of two tales,
both told as true, which one would like to be able to narrate in the
language of Moliere.  The other is also very good, and has a wonderful
scene with a corpse and a _chapelle ardente_, and a young lady; it is
historical, and of the last generation but one.

Even our frozen strath here has its modern legend, which may be told in
English, and out of which, I am sure, a novelist could make a good short
story, or a pleasant opening chapter of a romance.  What is the
mysterious art by which these things are done?  What makes the well-told
story seem real, rich with life, actual, engrossing?  It is the secret of
genius, of the novelist's art, and the writer who cannot practise the art
might as well try to discover the Philosopher's Stone, or to "harp fish
out of the water."  However, let me tell the legend as simply as may be,
and as it was told to me.

The strath runs due north, the river flowing from a great loch to the
Northern sea.  All around are low, undulating hills, brown with heather,
and as lonely almost as the Sahara.  On the horizon to the south rise the
mountains, Ben this and Ben that, real mountains of beautiful outline,
though no higher than some three thousand feet.  Before the country was
divided into moors and forests, tenanted by makers of patent corkscrews,
and boilers of patent soap, before the rivers were distributed into
beats, marked off by white and red posts, there lived over to the south,
under the mountains, a sportsman of athletic frame and adventurous
disposition.  His name I have forgotten, but we may call him Dick
Lindsay.  It is told of him that he once found a poacher in the forest,
and, being unable to catch the intruder, fired his rifle, not at him, but
in his neighbourhood, whereon the poacher, deliberately kneeling down,
took a long shot at Dick.  How the duel ended, and whether either party
flew a flag of truce, history does not record.

At all events, one stormy day in late September, Dick had stalked and
wounded a stag on the hills to the south-east of the strath.  Here, if
only one were a novelist, one could weave several pages of valuable copy
out of the stalk.  The stag made for the strath here, and Dick, who had
no gillie, but was an independent sportsman of the old school, pursued on
foot.  Plunging down the low, birch-clad hills, the stag found the
flooded river before him, black and swollen with rain.  He took the
water, crossing by the big pool, which looked almost like a little loch,
tempestuous under a north wind blowing up stream, and covered with small
white, vicious crests.  The stag crossed and staggered up the bank, where
he stood panting.  It is not a humane thing to leave a deer to die slowly
of a rifle bullet, and Dick, reaching the pool, hesitated not, but threw
off his clothes, took his skene between his teeth, plunged in, and swam
the river.

All naked as he was he cut the stag's throat in the usual manner, and
gralloched him with all the skill of Bucklaw.  This was very well, and
very well it would be to add a description of the stag at bay; but as I
never happened to see a stag at bay, I omit all that.  Dick had achieved
success, but his clothes were on one side of a roaring river in spate,
and he and the dead stag were on the other.  There was no chance of
fording the stream, and there was then no bridge.  He did not care to
swim back, for the excitement was out of him.  He was trembling with
cold, and afraid of cramp.  "A mother-naked man," in a wilderness, with a
flood between him and his raiment, was in a pitiable position.  It did
not occur to him to flay the stag, and dress in the hide, and, indeed, he
would have been frozen before he could have accomplished that task.  So
he reconnoitred.

There was nobody within sight but one girl, who was herding cows.  Now
for a naked man, with a knife, and bedabbled with blood, to address a
young woman on a lonely moor is a delicate business.  The chances were
that the girl would flee like a startled fawn, and leave Dick to walk,
just as he was, to the nearest farmhouse, about a mile away.  However,
Dick had to risk it; he lay down so that only his face appeared above the
bank, and he shouted to the maiden.  When he had caught her attention he
briefly explained the unusual situation.  Then the young woman behaved
like a trump, or like a Highland Nausicaa, for students of the "Odyssey"
will remember how Odysseus, simply clad in a leafy bough of a tree, made
supplication to the sea-king's daughter, and how she befriended him.  Even
if Dick had been a reader of Homer, which is not probable, there were no
trees within convenient reach, and he could not adopt the leafy covering
of Odysseus.

"You sit still; if you move an inch before I give you the word, I'll
leave you where you are!" said Miss Mary.  She then cast her plaid over
her face, marched up to the bank where Dick was crouching and shivering,
dropped her ample plaid over him, and sped away towards the farmhouse.
When she had reached its shelter, and was giving an account of the
adventure, Dick set forth, like a primeval Highlander, the covering doing
duty both for plaid and kilt.  Clothes of some kind were provided for him
at the cottage, a rickety old boat was fetched, and he and his stag were
rowed across the river to the place where his clothes lay.

That is all, but if one were a dealer in romance, much play might be made
with the future fortunes of the sportsman and the maiden, happy fortunes
or unhappy.  In real life, the lassie "drew up with" a shepherd lad, as
Miss Jenny Denison has it, married him, and helped to populate the
strath.  As for Dick, history tells no more of his adventures, nor is it
alleged that he ever again visited the distant valley, or beheld the face
of his Highland Nausicaa.

Now, if one were a romancer, this mere anecdote probably would "rest,
lovely pearl, in the brain, and slowly mature in the oyster," till it
became a novel.  Properly handled, the incident would make a very
agreeable first chapter, with the aid of scenery, botany, climate, and
remarks on the manners and customs of the red deer stolen from St. John,
or the Stuarts d'Albanie.  Then, probably, one would reflect on the
characters of Mary and of Richard; Mary must have parents, of course, and
one would make them talk in Scottish.  Probably she already had a lover;
how should she behave to that lover?  There is plenty of room for
speculation in that problem.  As to Dick, is he to be a Lothario, or a
lover _pour le bon motif_?  What are his distinguished family to think of
the love affair, which would certainly ensue in fiction, though in real
life nobody thought of it at all?  Are we to end happily, with a marriage
or marriages, or are we to wind all up in the pleasant, pessimistic,
realistic, fashionable modern way?  Is Mary to drown the baby in the
Muckle Pool?  Is she to suffer the penalty of her crime at Inverness?  Or,
happy thought, shall we not make her discarded rival lover meet Dick in
the hills on a sunny day and then--are they not (taking a hint from
facts) to fight a duel with rifles?  I see Dick lying, with a bullet in
his brow, on the side of a corrie; his blood crimsons the snow, an eagle
stoops from the sky.  That makes a pretty picturesque conclusion to the
unwritten romance of the strath.

Another anecdote occurs to me; good, I think, for a short story, but
capable, also, of being dumped down in the middle of a long novel.  It
was in the old coaching days.  A Border squire was going north, in the
coach, alone.  At a village he was joined by a man and a young lady:
their purpose was manifest, they were a runaway couple, bound for Gretna
Green.  They had not travelled long together before the young lady,
turning to the squire, said, "_Vous parlez francais, Monsieur_?"  He did
speak French--it was plain that the bridegroom did not--and, to the end
of the journey, that remarkable lady conducted a lively and affectionate
conversation with the squire in French!  Manifestly, he had only to ask
and receive, but, alas! he was an unadventurous, plain gentleman; he
alighted at his own village; he drove home in his own dogcart; the
fugitive pair went forward, and the Gretna blacksmith united them in holy
matrimony.  The rest is silence.

I would give much to know what that young person's previous history and
adventures had been, to learn what befell her after her wedding, to
understand, in brief, her conduct and her motives.  Were I a novelist, a
Maupassant, or a Meredith, the Muse, "from whatsoever quarter she chose,"
would enlighten me about all, and I would enlighten you.  But I can only
marvel, only throw out the hint, only deposit the grain of sand, the
nucleus of romance, in some more fertile brain.  Indeed the topic is much
more puzzling than the right conclusion for my Highland romance.  In that
case fancy could find certain obvious channels, into one or other of
which it must flow.  But I see no channels for the lives of these three
queerly met people in the coach.

As a rule, fancies are capable of being arranged in but a few familiar
patterns, so that it seems hardly worth while to make the arrangement.
But he who looks at things thus will never be a writer of stories.  Nay,
even of the slowly unfolding tale of his own existence he may weary, for
the combinations therein have all occurred before; it is in a hackneyed
old story that he is living, and you, and I.  Yet to act on this
knowledge is to make a bad affair of our little life: we must try our
best to take it seriously.  And so of story-writing.  As Mr. Stevenson
says, a man must view "his very trifling enterprise with a gravity that
would befit the cares of empire, and think the smallest improvement worth
accomplishing at any expense of time and industry.  The book, the statue,
the sonata, must be gone upon with the unreasoning good faith and the
unflagging spirit of children at their play."

That is true, that is the worst of it.  The man, the writer, over whom
the irresistible desire to mock at himself, his work, his puppets and
their fortunes has power, will never be a novelist.  The novelist must
"make believe very much"; he must be in earnest with his characters.  But
how to be in earnest, how to keep the note of disbelief and derision "out
of the memorial"?  Ah, there is the difficulty, but it is a difficulty of
which many authors appear to be insensible.  Perhaps they suffer from no
such temptations.




CHAPTER XV: THE SUPERNATURAL IN FICTION


It is a truism that the supernatural in fiction should, as a general
rule, be left in the vague.  In the creepiest tale I ever read, the
horror lay in this--_there was no ghost_!  You may describe a ghost with
all the most hideous features that fancy can suggest--saucer eyes, red
staring hair, a forked tail, and what you please--but the reader only
laughs.  It is wiser to make as if you were going to describe the
spectre, and then break off, exclaiming, "But no!  No pen can describe,
no memory, thank Heaven, can recall, the horror of that hour!"  So
writers, as a rule, prefer to leave their terror (usually styled "The
Thing") entirely in the dark, and to the frightened fancy of the student.
Thus, on the whole, the treatment of the supernaturally terrible in
fiction is achieved in two ways, either by actual description, or by
adroit suggestion, the author saying, like cabmen, "I leave it to
yourself, sir."  There are dangers in both methods; the description, if
attempted, is usually overdone and incredible: the suggestion is apt to
prepare us too anxiously for something that never becomes real, and to
leave us disappointed.

Examples of both methods may be selected from poetry and prose.  The
examples in verse are rare enough; the first and best that occurs in the
way of suggestion is, of course, the mysterious lady in "Christabel."

   "She was most beautiful to see,
   Like a lady of a far countree."

Who was she?  What did she want?  Whence did she come?  What was the
horror she revealed to the night in the bower of Christabel?

   "Then drawing in her breath aloud
   Like one that shuddered, she unbound
   The cincture from beneath her breast.
   Her silken robe and inner vest
   Dropt to her feet, and full in view
   Behold her bosom and half her side--
   A sight to dream of, not to tell!
   O shield her! shield sweet Christabel!"

And then what do her words mean?

   "Thou knowest to-night, and wilt know to-morrow,
   This mark of my shame, this seal of my sorrow."

What was it--the "sight to dream of, not to tell?"

Coleridge never did tell, and, though he and Mr. Gilman said he knew,
Wordsworth thought he did not know.  He raised a spirit that he had not
the spell to lay.  In the Paradise of Poets has he discovered the secret?
We only know that the mischief, whatever it may have been, was wrought.

   "O sorrow and shame!  Can this be she--
   The lady who knelt at the old oak tree?"
   . . .
   "A star hath set, a star hath risen,
      O Geraldine, since arms of thine
   Have been the lovely lady's prison.
      O Geraldine, one hour was thine." {11}

If Coleridge knew, why did he never tell?  And yet he maintains that "in
the very first conception of the tale, I had the whole present to my
mind, with the wholeness no less than with the liveliness of a vision,"
and he expected to finish the three remaining parts within the year.  The
year was 1816, the poem was begun in 1797, and finished, as far as it
goes, in 1800.  If Coleridge ever knew what he meant, he had time to
forget.  The chances are that his indolence, or his forgetfulness, was
the making of "Christabel," which remains a masterpiece of supernatural
suggestion.

For description it suffices to read the "Ancient Mariner."  These
marvels, truly, are _speciosa miracula_, and, unlike Southey, we believe
as we read.  "You have selected a passage fertile in unmeaning miracles,"
Lamb wrote to Southey (1798), "but have passed by fifty passages as
miraculous as the miracles they celebrate."  Lamb appears to have been
almost alone in appreciating this masterpiece of supernatural
description.  Coleridge himself shrank from his own wonders, and wanted
to call the piece "A Poet's Reverie."  "It is as bad as Bottom the
weaver's declaration that he is not a lion, but only the scenical
representation of a lion.  What new idea is gained by this title but one
subversive of all credit--which the tale should force upon us--of its
truth?"  Lamb himself was forced, by the temper of the time, to declare
that he "disliked all the miraculous part of it," as if it were not _all_
miraculous!  Wordsworth wanted the Mariner "to have a character and a
profession," perhaps would have liked him to be a gardener, or a butler,
with "an excellent character!"  In fact, the love of the supernatural was
then at so low an ebb that a certain Mr. Marshall "went to sleep while
the 'Ancient Mariner' was reading," and the book was mainly bought by
seafaring men, deceived by the title, and supposing that the "Ancient
Mariner" was a nautical treatise.

In verse, then, Coleridge succeeds with the supernatural, both by way of
description in detail, and of suggestion.  If you wish to see a failure,
try the ghost, the moral but not affable ghost, in Wordsworth's
"Laodamia."  It is blasphemy to ask the question, but is the ghost in
"Hamlet" quite a success?  Do we not see and hear a little too much of
him?  Macbeth's airy and viewless dagger is really much more successful
by way of suggestion.  The stage makes a ghost visible and familiar, and
this is one great danger of the supernatural in art.  It is apt to insist
on being too conspicuous.  Did the ghost of Darius, in "AEschylus,"
frighten the Athenians?  Probably they smiled at the imperial spectre.
There is more discretion in Caesar's ghost--

   "I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
   That shapes this monstrous apparition,"

says Brutus, and he lays no very great stress on the brief visit of the
appearance.  For want of this discretion, Alexandre Dumas's ghosts, as in
"The Corsican Brothers," are failures.  They make themselves too common
and too cheap, like the spectre in Mrs. Oliphant's novel, "The Wizard's
Son."  This, indeed, is the crux of the whole adventure.  If you paint
your ghost with too heavy a hand, you raise laughter, not fear.  If you
touch him too lightly, you raise unsatisfied curiosity, not fear.  It may
be easy to shudder, but it is difficult to teach shuddering.

In prose, a good example of the over vague is Miriam's mysterious
visitor--the shadow of the catacombs--in "Transformation; or, The Marble
Faun."  Hawthorne should have told us more or less; to be sure his
contemporaries knew what he meant, knew who Miriam and the Spectre were.
The dweller in the catacombs now powerfully excites curiosity, and when
that curiosity is unsatisfied, we feel aggrieved, vexed, and suspect that
Hawthorne himself was puzzled, and knew no more than his readers.  He has
not--as in other tales he has--managed to throw the right atmosphere
about this being.  He is vague in the wrong way, whereas George Sand, in
_Les Dames Vertes_, is vague in the right way.  We are left in _Les Dames
Vertes_ with that kind of curiosity which persons really engaged in the
adventure might have felt, not with the irritation of having a secret
kept from us, as in "Transformation."

In "Wandering Willie's Tale" (in "Redgauntlet"), the right atmosphere is
found, the right note is struck.  All is vividly real, and yet, if you
close the book, all melts into a dream again.  Scott was almost equally
successful with a described horror in "The Tapestried Chamber."  The idea
is the commonplace of haunted houses, the apparition is described as
minutely as a burglar might have been; and yet we do not mock, but
shudder as we read.  Then, on the other side--the side of
anticipation--take the scene outside the closed door of the vanished Dr.
Jekyll, in Mr. Stevenson's well-known apologue:

They are waiting on the threshold of the chamber whence the doctor has
disappeared--the chamber tenanted by what?  A voice comes from the room.
"Sir," said Poole, looking Mr. Utterson in the eyes, "was that my
master's voice?"

A friend, a man of affairs, and a person never accused of being fanciful,
told me that he read through the book to that point in a lonely Highland
chateau, at night, and that he did not think it well to finish the story
till next morning, but rushed to bed.  So the passage seems "well-found"
and successful by dint of suggestion.  On the other side, perhaps, only
Scotsmen brought up in country places, familiar from childhood with the
terrors of Cameronian myth, and from childhood apt to haunt the lonely
churchyards, never stirred since the year of the great Plague choked the
soil with the dead, perhaps _they_ only know how much shudder may be
found in Mr. Stevenson's "Thrawn Janet."  The black smouldering heat in
the hills and glens that are commonly so fresh, the aspect of the Man,
the Tempter of the Brethren, we know them, and we have enough of the old
blood in us to be thrilled by that masterpiece of the described
supernatural.  It may be only a local success, it may not much affect the
English reader, but it is of sure appeal to the lowland Scot.  The
ancestral Covenanter within us awakens, and is terrified by his ancient
fears.

Perhaps it may die out in a positive age--this power of learning to
shudder.  To us it descends from very long ago, from the far-off
forefathers who dreaded the dark, and who, half starved and all untaught,
saw spirits everywhere, and scarce discerned waking experience from
dreams.  When we are all perfect positivist philosophers, when a thousand
generations of nurses that never heard of ghosts have educated the
thousand and first generation of children, then the supernatural may fade
out of fiction.  But has it not grown and increased since Wordsworth
wanted the "Ancient Mariner" to have "a profession and a character,"
since Southey called that poem a Dutch piece of work, since Lamb had to
pretend to dislike its "miracles"?  Why, as science becomes more cock-
sure, have men and women become more and more fond of old follies, and
more pleased with the stirring of ancient dread within their veins?

As the visible world is measured, mapped, tested, weighed, we seem to
hope more and more that a world of invisible romance may not be far from
us, or, at least, we care more and more to follow fancy into these airy
regions, _et inania regna_.  The supernatural has not ceased to tempt
romancers, like Alexandre Dumas, usually to their destruction; more
rarely, as in Mrs. Oliphant's "Beleaguered City," to such success as they
do not find in the world of daily occupation.  The ordinary shilling
tales of "hypnotism" and mesmerism are vulgar trash enough, and yet I can
believe that an impossible romance, if the right man wrote it in the
right mood, might still win us from the newspapers, and the stories of
shabby love, and cheap remorses, and commonplace failures.

   "But it needs Heaven-sent moments for this skill."




CHAPTER XVI: AN OLD SCOTTISH PSYCHICAL RESEARCHER


   ADVERTISEMENT

   "If any Gentlemen, and others, will be pleased to send me any
   relations about Spirits, Witches, and Apparitions, In any part of the
   Kingdom; or any Information about the Second Sight, Charms, Spells,
   Magic, and the like, They shall oblige the Author, and have them
   publisht to their satisfaction.

   "Direct your Relations to Alexander Ogstouns, Shop Stationer, at the
   foot of the Plain-stones, at Edinburgh, on the North-side of the
   Street."

Is this not a pleasing opportunity for Gentlemen, and Others, whose Aunts
have beheld wraiths, doubles, and fetches?  It answers very closely to
the requests of the Society for Psychical Research, who publish, as some
one disparagingly says, "the dreams of the middle classes."  Thanks to
Freedom, Progress, and the decline of Superstition, it is now quite safe
to see apparitions, and even to publish the narrative of their
appearance.

But when Mr. George Sinclair, sometime Professor of Philosophy in
Glasgow, issued the invitation which I have copied, at the end of his
"Satan's Invisible World Discovered," {12} the vocation of a seer was not
so secure from harm.  He, or she, might just as probably be burned as
not, on the charge of sorcery, in the year of grace, 1685.  However,
Professor Sinclair managed to rake together an odd enough set of legends,
"proving clearly that there are Devils," a desirable matter to have
certainty about.  "Satan's Invisible World Discovered" is a very rare
little book; I think Scott says in a MS. note that he had great
difficulty in procuring it, when he was at work on his "infernal
demonology."  As a copy fell in my way, or rather as I fell in its way, a
helpless victim to its charms and its blue morocco binding, I take this
chance of telling again the old tales of 1685.

Mr. Sinclair began with a long dedicatory Epistle about nothing at all,
to the Lord Winton of the period.  The Earl dug coal-mines, and
constructed "a moliminous rampier for a harbour."  A "moliminous rampier"
is a choice phrase, and may be envied by novelists who aim at distinction
of style.  "Your defending the salt pans against the imperious waves of
the raging sea from the NE. is singular," adds the Professor, addressing
"the greatest coal and salt-master in Scotland, who is a nobleman, and
the greatest nobleman who is a Coal and Salt Merchant."  Perhaps it is
already plain to the modern mind that Mr. George Sinclair, though a
Professor of Philosophy, was not a very sagacious character.

Mr. Sinclair professes that his proofs of the existence of Devils "are no
old wife's trattles about the fire, but such as may bide the test."  He
lived, one should remember, in an age when faith was really seeking aid
from ghost stories.  Glanvil's books--and, in America, those of Cotton
Mather--show the hospitality to anecdotes of an edifying sort, which we
admire in Mr. Sinclair.  Indeed, Sinclair borrows from Glanvil and Henry
More, authors who, like himself, wished to establish the existence of the
supernatural on the strange incidents which still perplex us, but which
are scarcely regarded as safe matter to argue upon.  The testimony for a
Ghost would seldom go to a jury in our days, though amply sufficient in
the time of Mr. Sinclair.  About "The Devil of Glenluce" he took
particular care to be well informed, and first gave it to the world in a
volume on--you will never guess what subject--Hydrostatics!  In the
present work he offers us

   "The Devil of Glenluce Enlarged
   With several Remarkable Additions
   from an Eye and Ear Witness,
   A Person of undoubted
   Honesty."

Mr. Sinclair recommends its "usefulness for refuting Atheism."  Probably
Mr. Sinclair got the story, or had it put off on him rather, through one
Campbell, a student of philosophy in Glasgow, the son of Gilbert
Campbell, a weaver of Glenluce, in Galloway; the scene in our own time,
of a mysterious murder.  Campbell had refused alms to Alexander Agnew, a
bold and sturdy beggar, who, when asked by the Judge whether he believed
in a God, answered: "He knew no God but Salt, Meal, and Water."  In
consequence of the refusal of alms, "The Stirs first began."  The "Stirs"
are ghostly disturbances.  They commenced with whistling in the house and
out of it, "such as children use to make with their small, slender glass
whistles."  "About the Middle of November," says Mr. Sinclair, "the Foul
Fiend came on with his extraordinary assaults."  Observe that he takes
the Foul Fiend entirely for granted, and that he never tells us the date
of the original quarrel, and the early agitation.  Stones were thrown
down the chimney and in at the windows, but nobody was hurt.

Naturally Gilbert Campbell carried his tale of sorrow to the parish
Minister.  This did not avail him.  His warp and threads were cut on his
loom, and even the clothes of his family were cut while they were wearing
them.  At night something tugged the blankets off their beds, a favourite
old spiritual trick, which was played, if I remember well, on a Roman
Emperor, according to Suetonius.  Poor Campbell had to remove his stock-
in-trade, and send his children to board out, "to try whom the trouble
did most follow."  After this, all was quiet (as perhaps might be
expected), and quiet all remained, till a son named Thomas was brought
home again.  Then the house was twice set on fire, and it might have been
enough to give Thomas a beating.  On the other hand, Campbell sent Thomas
to stay with the Minister.  But the troubles continued in the old way.  At
last the family became so accustomed to the Devil, "that they were no
more afraid to keep up the Clash" (chatter) "with the Foul Fiend than to
speak to each other."  They were like the Wesleys, who were so familiar
with the fiend Jeffrey, that haunted their home.

The Minister, with a few of the gentry, heard of their unholy friendship,
and paid Campbell a visit.  "At their first coming in the Devil says:
'_Quum Literarum_ is good Latin.'"  These are the first words of the
Latin rudiments which scholars are taught when they go to the Grammar
School.  Then they all prayed, and a Voice came from under the bed:
"Would you know the Witches of Glenluce?"  The Voice named a few,
including one long dead.  But the Minister, with rare good sense,
remarked that what Satan said was not evidence.

Let it be remarked that "the lad Tom" had that very day "come back with
the Minister."  The Fiend then offered terms.  "Give me a spade and
shovel, and depart from the house for seven days, and I will make a
grave, and lie down in it, and trouble you no more."  Hereon Campbell,
with Scottish caution, declined to give the Devil the value of a straw.
The visitors then hunted after the voice, observing that some of the
children were in bed.  They found nothing, and then, as the novelists
say, "a strange thing happened."

There appeared a naked hand and an arm, from the elbow down, beating upon
the floor till the house did shake again.  "The Fiend next exclaimed that
if the candle were put out he would appear in the shape of Fireballs."

Let it be observed that now, for the first time, we learn that all the
scene occurred in candle-light.  The appearance of floating balls of fire
is frequent (if we may believe the current reports) at spiritualistic
seances.  But what a strange, ill-digested tale is Mr. Sinclair's!  He
lets slip an expression which shows that the investigators were in one
room, the But, while the Fiend was diverting himself in the other room,
the Ben!  The Fiend (nobody going Ben) next chaffed a gentleman who wore
a fashionable broad-brimmed hat, "whereupon he presently imagined that he
felt a pair of shears going about his hat," but there was no such matter.
The voice asked for a piece of bread, which the others were eating, and
said the maid gave him a crust in the morning.  This she denied, but
admitted that something had "clicked" a piece of bread out of her hand.

The seance ended, the Devil slapping a safe portion of the children's
bodies, with a sound resembling applause.  After many months of this
really annoying conduct, poor Campbell laid his case before the
Presbyters, in 1655, thirty years before the date of publication.  So a
"solemn humiliation" was actually held all through the bounds of the
synod.  But to little purpose did Glenluce sit in sackcloth and ashes.
The good wife's plate was snatched away before her very eyes, and then
thrown back at her.  In similar "stirs," described by a Catholic
missionary in Peru soon after Pizarro's conquest, the cup of an Indian
chief was lifted up by an invisible hand, and set down empty.  In that
case, too, stones were thrown, as by the Devil of Glenluce.

And what was the end of it all?  Mr. Sinclair has not even taken the
trouble to inquire.  It seems by some conjuration or other, the Devil
suffered himself to be put away, and gave the weaver a habitation.  The
weaver "has been a very Odd man that endured so long these marvellous
disturbances."

This is the tale which Mr. Sinclair offers, without mentioning his
authority.  He complains that Dr. Henry More had plagiarised it, from his
book of Hydrostatics.  Two points may be remarked.  First: modern
Psychical Inquirers are more particular about evidence than Mr. Sinclair.
Not for nothing do we live in an age of science.  Next: the stories of
these "stirs" are always much the same everywhere, in Glenluce, at
Tedworth, where the Drummer came, in Peru, in Wesley's house, in heroic
Iceland, when Glam, the vampire, "rode the roofs."  It is curious to
speculate on how the tradition of making themselves little nuisances in
this particular manner has been handed down among children, if we are to
suppose that children do the trick.  Last autumn a farmer's house in
Scotland was annoyed exactly as the weaver's home was, and that within a
quarter of a mile of a well-known man of science.  The mattress of the
father was tenanted by something that wriggled like a snake.  The
mattress was opened, nothing was found, and the disturbance began again
as soon as the bed was restored to its place.  This occurred when the
farmer's children had been sent to a distance.

One cannot but be perplexed by the problem which these tales suggest.
Almost bare of evidence as they are, their great number, their wide
diffusion, in many countries and in times ancient and modern, may
establish some substratum of truth.  Scott mentions a case in which the
imposture was detected by a sheriff's officer.  But a recent anecdote
makes me almost distrust the detection.

Some English people, having taken a country house in Ireland, were vexed
by the usual rappings, stone-throwings, and all the rest of the business.
They sent to Dublin for two detectives, who arrived.  On their first
night, the lady of the house went into a room, where she found one of the
policemen asleep in his chair.  Being a lively person, she rapped twice
or thrice on the table.  He awakened, and said: "Ah, so I suspected.  It
was hardly worth while, madam, to bring us so far for this."  And next
day the worthy men withdrew in dudgeon, but quite convinced that they had
discovered the agent in the hauntings.

But they had not!

On the other hand, Scott (who had seen one ghost, if not two, and had
heard a "warning") states that Miss Anne Robinson managed the Stockwell
disturbances by tying horsehairs to plates and light articles, which then
demeaned themselves as if possessed.

Here we have _vera causa_, a demonstrable cause of "stirs," and it may be
inferred that all the other historical occurrences had a similar origin.
We have, then, only to be interested in the persistent tradition, in
accordance with which mischievous persons always do exactly the same sort
of thing.  But this is a mere example of the identity of human nature.

It is curious to see how Mr. Sinclair plumes himself on this Devil of
Glenluce as a "moliminous rampier" against irreligion.  "This one
Relation is worth all the price that can be given for the Book."  The
price I have given for the volume is Ten Golden Guineas, and perhaps the
Foul Thief of Glenluce is hardly worth the money.

"I believe if the Obdurest Atheist among men would seriously and in good
earnest consider that relation, and ponder all the circumstances thereof,
he would presently cry out, as a Dr. of Physick did, hearing a story less
considerable, 'I believe I have been in the wrong all the time--if this
be true.'"

Mr. Sinclair is also a believer in the Woodstock devils, on which Scott
founded his novel.  He does not give the explanation that Giles Sharp,
alias Joseph Collins of Oxford, alias Funny Joe, was all the Devil in
that affair.  Scott had read the story of Funny Joe, but could never
remember "whether it exists in a separate collection, or where it is to
be looked for."

Indifferent to evidence, Mr. Sinclair confutes the Obdurest Atheists with
the Pied Piper of Hamelin, with the young lady from Howells' "Letters,"
whose house, like Rahab's, was "on the city wall," and with the ghost of
the Major who appeared to the Captain (as he had promised), and scolded
him for not keeping his sword clean.  He also gives us Major Weir, at
full length, convincing us that, as William Erskine said, "The Major was
a disgusting fellow, a most ungentlemanlike character."  Scott, on the
other hand, remarked, long before "Waverley," "if I ever were to become a
writer of prose romances, I think I would choose Major Weir, if not for
my hero, at least for an agent and a leading one, in my production."  He
admitted that the street where the Major lived was haunted by a woman
"twice the common length," "but why should we set him down for an
ungentlemanly fellow?"  Readers of Mr. Sinclair will understand the
reason very well, and it is not necessary, nor here even possible, to
justify Erskine's opinion by quotations.  Suffice it that, by virtue of
his enchanted staff, which was burned with him, the Major was enabled "to
commit evil not to be named, yea, even to reconcile man and wife when at
variance."  His sister, who was hanged, had Redgauntlet's horse-shoe mark
on her brow, and one may marvel that Scott does not seem to have
remembered this coincidence.  "There was seen an exact Horse-shoe, shaped
for nails, in her wrinkles.  Terrible enough, I assure you, to the
stoutest beholder!"

Most modern readers will believe that both the luckless Major and his
sister were religious maniacs.  Poverty, solitude, and the superstition
of their time were the true demon of Major Weir, burned at the stake in
April 1670.  Perhaps the most singular impression made by "Satan's
Invisible World Discovered" is that in Sinclair's day, people who did not
believe in bogies believed in nothing, while people who shared the common
creed of Christendom were capable of believing in everything.

Atheists are as common as ghosts in his marvellous relations, and the
very wizards themselves were often Atheists.

NOTE.--I have said that Scott himself had seen one ghost, if not two, and
heard a "warning."  The ghost was seen near Ashestiel, on an open spot of
hillside, "please to observe it was before dinner."  The anecdote is in
Gillis's, "Recollections of Sir Walter Scott," p. 170.  The vision of
Lord Byron standing in the great hall of Abbotsford is described in the
"Demonology and Witchcraft ."  Scott alleges that it resolved itself into
"great coats, shawls, and plaids"--a hallucination.  But Lockhart remarks
("Life," ix. p. 141) that he did not care to have the circumstance
discussed in general.  The "stirs" in Abbotsford during the night when
his architect, Bullock, died in London, are in Lockhart, v. pp. 309-315.
"The noise resembled half-a-dozen men hard at work putting up boards and
furniture, and nothing can be more certain than that there was nobody on
the premises at the time."  The noise, unluckily, occurred twice, April
28 and 29, 1818, and Lockhart does not tell us on which of these two
nights Mr. Bullock died.  Such is the casualness of ghost story-tellers.
Lockhart adds that the coincidence made a strong impression on Sir
Walter's mind.  He did not care to ascertain the point in his own mental
constitution "where incredulity began to waver," according to his friend,
Mr. J. L. Adolphus.




CHAPTER XVII: THE BOY


As a humble student of savage life, I have found it necessary to make
researches into the manners and customs of boys.  Boys are not what a
vain people supposes.  If you meet them in the holidays, you find them
affable and full of kindness and good qualities.  They will condescend to
your weakness at lawn-tennis, they will aid you in your selection of fly-
hooks, and, to be brief, will behave with much more than the civility of
tame Zulus or Red Men on a missionary settlement.  But boys at school and
among themselves, left to the wild justice and traditional laws which
many generations of boys have evolved, are entirely different beings.
They resemble that Polynesian prince who had rejected the errors of
polytheism for those of an extreme sect of Primitive Seceders.  For weeks
at a time this prince was known to be "steady," but every month or so he
disappeared, and his subjects said he was "lying off."  To adopt an
American idiom, he "felt like brandy and water"; he also "felt like"
wearing no clothes, and generally rejecting his new conceptions of duty
and decency.  In fact, he had a good bout of savagery, and then he
returned to his tall hat, his varnished boots, his hymn-book, and his
edifying principles.  The life of small boys at school (before they get
into long-tailed coats and the upper-fifth) is often a mere course of
"lying-off"--of relapse into native savagery with its laws and customs.

If any one has so far forgotten his own boyhood as to think this
description exaggerated, let him just fancy what our comfortable
civilised life would be, if we could become boys in character and custom.
Let us suppose that you are elected to a new club, of which most of the
members are strangers to you.  You enter the doors for the first time,
when two older members, who have been gossiping in the hall, pounce upon
you with the exclamation, "Hullo, here's a new fellow!  You fellow,
what's your name?"  You reply, let us say, "Johnson."  "I don't believe
it, it's such a rum name.  What's your father?"  Perhaps you are
constrained to answer "a Duke" or (more probably) "a solicitor."  In the
former case your friends bound up into the smoking-room, howling, "Here's
a new fellow says his father is a Duke.  Let's take the cheek out of
him."  And they "take it out" with umbrellas, slippers, and other
surgical instruments.  Or, in the latter case (your parent being a
solicitor) they reply, "Then your father must be a beastly cad.  All
solicitors are sharks.  _My_ father says so, and he knows.  How many
sisters have you?"  The new member answers, "Four."  "Any of them
married?"  "No."  "How awfully awkward for you."

By this time, perhaps, luncheon is ready, or the evening papers come in,
and you are released for a moment.  You sneak up into the library, where
you naturally expect to be entirely alone, and you settle on a sofa with
a novel.  But an old member bursts into the room, spies a new fellow, and
puts him through the usual catechism.  He ends with, "How much tin have
you got?"  You answer "twenty pounds," or whatever the sum may be, for
perhaps you had contemplated playing whist.  "Very well, fork it out; you
must give a dinner, all new fellows must, and _you_ are not going to
begin by being a stingy beast?"  Thus addressed, as your friend is a big
bald man, who looks mischievous, you do "fork out" all your ready money,
and your new friend goes off to consult the cook.  Meanwhile you "shed a
blooming tear," as Homer says, and go home heart-broken.  Now, does any
grown-up man call this state of society civilisation?  Would life be
worth living (whatever one's religious consolations) on these terms?  Of
course not, and yet this picture is a not overdrawn sketch of the career
of some new boy, at some schools new or old.  The existence of a small
schoolboy is, in other respects, not unlike that of an outsider in a
lawless "Brotherhood," as the Irish playfully call their murder clubs.

The small boy is _in_ the society, but not _of_ it, as far as any
benefits go.  He has to field out (and I admit that the discipline is
salutary) while other boys bat.  Other boys commit the faults, and compel
him to copy out the impositions--say five hundred lines of Virgil--with
which their sins are visited.  Other boys enjoy the pleasures of
football, while the small boy has to run vaguely about, never within five
yards of the ball.  Big boys reap the glories of paperchases, the small
boy gets lost in the bitter weather, on the open moors, or perhaps (as in
one historical case) is frozen to death within a measurable distance of
the school playground.  And the worst of it is that, as a member of the
great school secret society, the small boy can never complain of his
wrongs, or divulge the name of his tormentors.  It is in this respect
that he resembles a harmless fellow, dragged into the coils of an
Anarchist "Inner Brotherhood."  He is exposed to all sorts of wrongs from
his neighbours, and he can only escape by turning "informer," by breaking
the most sacred law of his society, losing all social status, and,
probably, obliging his parents to remove him from school.  Life at
school, as among the Celtic peoples, turns on the belief that law and
authority are natural enemies, against which every one is banded.

The chapter of bullying among boys is one on which a man enters with
reluctance.  Boys are, on the whole, such good fellows, and so full of
fine unsophisticated qualities, that the mature mind would gladly turn
away its eyes from beholding their iniquities.  Even a cruel bully does
not inevitably and invariably develop into a bad man.  He is, let us
hope, only passing through the savage stage, in which the torture of
prisoners is a recognised institution.  He has, perhaps, too little
imagination to understand the pain he causes.  Very often bullying is not
physically cruel, but only a perverted sort of humour, such as Kingsley,
in "Hypatia," recognised among his favourite Goths.  I remember a feeble
foolish boy at school (feeble he certainly was, and was thought foolish)
who became the subject of much humorous bullying.  His companions used to
tie a thin thread round his ear, and attach this to a bar at such a
height that he could only avoid breaking it by standing on tiptoe.  But
he was told that he must not break the thread.  To avoid infringing this
commandment, he put himself to considerable inconvenience and afforded
much enjoyment to the spectators.

Men of middle age, rather early middle age, remember the two following
species of bullying to which they were subjected, and which, perhaps, are
obsolescent.  Tall stools were piled up in a pyramid, and the victim was
seated on the top, near the roof of the room.  The other savages brought
him down from this bad eminence by hurling other stools at those which
supported him.  Or the victim was made to place his hands against the
door, with the fingers outstretched, while the young tormentors played at
the Chinese knife-trick.  They threw knives, that is to say, at the door
between the apertures of the fingers, and, as a rule, they hit the
fingers and not the door.  These diversions I know to be correctly
reported, but the following pretty story is, perhaps, a myth.  At one of
the most famous public schools, a praepostor, or monitor, or sixth-form
boy having authority, heard a pistol-shot in the room above his own.  He
went up and found a big boy and a little boy.  They denied having any
pistol.  The monitor returned to his studies, again was sure he heard a
shot, went up, and found the little boy dead.  The big boy had been
playing the William Tell trick with him, and had hit his head instead of
the apple.  That is the legend.  Whether it be true or false, all boys
will agree that the little victim could not have escaped by complaining
to the monitor.  No.  Death before dishonour.  But the side not so seamy
of this picture of school life is the extraordinary power of honour among
boys.  Of course the laws of the secret society might well terrify a
puerile informer.  But the sentiment of honour is even more strong than
fear, and will probably outlast the very disagreeable circumstances in
which it was developed.

People say bullying is not what it used to be.  The much abused
monitorial system has this in it of good, that it enables a clever and
kindly boy who is high up in the school to stop the cruelties (if he
hears of them) of a much bigger boy who is low in the school.  But he
seldom hears of them.  Habitual bullies are very cunning, and I am
acquainted with instances in which they carry their victims off to lonely
torture cells (so to speak) and deserted places fit for the sport.  Some
years ago a small boy, after a long course of rope's-ending in out-of-the-
way dens, revealed the abominations of some naval cadets.  There was not
much sympathy with him in the public mind, and perhaps his case was not
well managed.  But it was made clear that whereas among men an unpopular
person is only spoken evil of behind his back, an unpopular small boy
among boys is made to suffer in a more direct and very unpleasant way.

Most of us leave school with the impression that there was a good deal of
bullying when we were little, but that the institution has died out.  The
truth is that we have grown too big to be bullied, and too good-natured
to bully ourselves.  When I left school, I thought bullying was an
extinct art, like encaustic painting (before it was rediscovered by Sir
William Richmond).  But a distinguished writer, who was a small boy when
I was a big one, has since revealed to me the most abominable cruelties
which were being practised at the very moment when I supposed bullying to
have had its day and ceased to be.  Now, the small boy need only have
mentioned the circumstances to any one of a score of big boys, and the
tormentor would have been first thrashed, and then, probably, expelled.

A friend of my own was travelling lately in a wild and hilly region on
the other side of the world, let us say in the Mountains of the Moon.  In
a mountain tavern he had thrust upon him the society of the cook, a very
useless young man, who astonished him by references to one of our
universities, and to the enjoyments of that seat of learning.  This youth
(who was made cook, and a very bad cook too, because he could do nothing
else) had been expelled from a large English school.  And he was expelled
because he had felled a bully with a paving-stone, and had expressed his
readiness to do it again.  Now, there was no doubt that this cook in the
mountain inn was a very unserviceable young fellow.  But I wish more boys
who have suffered things literally unspeakable from bullies would try
whether force (in the form of a paving stone) is really no remedy.

The Catholic author of a recent book ("Schools," by Lieut.-Col. Raleigh
Chichester), is very hard on "Protestant Schools," and thinks that the
Catholic system of constant watching is a remedy for bullying and other
evils.  "Swing-doors with their upper half glazed, might have their
uses," he says, and he does not see why a boy should not be permitted to
complain, if he is roasted, like Tom Brown, before a large fire.  The
boys at one Catholic school described by Colonel Raleigh Chichester, "are
never without surveillance of some sort."  This is true of most French
schools, and any one who wishes to understand the consequences (there)
may read the published confessions of a _pion_--an usher, or "spy."  A
more degraded and degrading life than that of the wretched _pion_, it is
impossible to imagine.  In an English private school, the system of
_espionnage_ and tale bearing, when it exists, is probably not unlike
what Mr. Anstey describes in _Vice Versa_.  But in the Catholic schools
spoken of by Colonel Raleigh Chichester, the surveillance may be, as he
says, "that of a parent; an aid to the boys in their games rather than a
check."  The religious question as between Catholics and Protestants has
no essential connection with the subject.  A Protestant school might, and
Grimstone's did, have tale-bearers; possibly a Catholic school might
exist without parental surveillance.  That system is called by its foes a
"police," by its friends a "paternal" system.  But fathers don't exercise
the "paternal" system themselves in this country, and we may take it for
granted that, while English society and religion are as they are,
surveillance at our large schools will be impossible.  If any one regrets
this, let him read the descriptions of French schools and schooldays, in
Balzac's _Louis Lambert_, in the "Memoirs" of M. Maxime du Camp, in any
book where a Frenchman speaks his mind about his youth.  He will find
spying (of course) among the ushers, contempt and hatred on the side of
the boys, unwholesome and cruel punishments, a total lack of healthy
exercise; and he will hear of holidays spent in premature excursions into
forbidden and shady quarters of the town.

No doubt the best security against bullying is in constant occupation.
There can hardly (in spite of Master George Osborne's experience in
"Vanity Fair") be much bullying in an open cricket-field.  Big boys, too,
with good hearts, should not only stop bullying when they come across it,
but make it their business to find out where it exists.  Exist it will,
more or less, despite all precautions, while boys are boys--that is, are
passing through a modified form of the savage state.

There is a curious fact in the boyish character which seems, at first
sight, to make good the opinion that private education, at home, is the
true method.  Before they go out into school life, many little fellows of
nine, or so, are extremely original, imaginative, and almost poetical.
They are fond of books, fond of nature, and, if you can win their
confidence, will tell you all sorts of pretty thoughts and fancies which
lie about them in their infancy.  I have known a little boy who liked to
lie on the grass and to people the alleys and glades of that miniature
forest with fairies and dwarfs, whom he seemed actually to see in a kind
of vision.  But he went to school, he instantly won the hundred yards
race for boys under twelve, and he came back a young barbarian,
interested in "the theory of touch" (at football), curious in the art of
bowling, and no more capable than you or I of seeing fairies in a green
meadow.  He was caught up into the air of the boy's world, and his
imagination was in abeyance for a season.

This is a common enough thing, and rather a melancholy spectacle to
behold.  One is tempted to believe that school causes the loss of a good
deal of genius, and that the small boys who leave home poets, and come
back barbarians, have been wasted.  But, on the other hand, if they had
been kept at home and encouraged, the chances are that they would have
blossomed into infant phenomena and nothing better.  The awful infancy of
Mr. John Stuart Mill is a standing warning.  Mr. Mill would probably have
been a much happier and wiser man if he had not been a precocious
linguist, economist, and philosopher, but had passed through a healthy
stage of indifference to learning and speculation at a public school.
Look again, at the childhood of Bishop Thirlwall.  His _Primitiae_ were
published (by Samuel Tipper, London, 1808), when young Connop was but
eleven years of age.  His indiscreet father "launched this slender bark,"
as he says, and it sailed through three editions between 1808 and 1809.
Young Thirlwall was taught Latin at three years of age, "and at four read
Greek with an ease and fluency which astonished all who heard him."  At
seven he composed an essay, "On the Uncertainty of Human Life," but "his
taste for poetry was not discovered till a later period."  His sermons,
some forty, occupy most of the little volume in which these _Primitiae_
were collected.

He was especially concerned about Sabbath desecration.  "I confess,"
observes this sage of ten, "when I look upon the present and past state
of our public morals, and when I contrast our present luxury,
dissipation, and depravity, with past frugality and virtue, I feel not
merely a sensation of regret, but also of terror, for the result of the
change."  "The late Revolution in France," he adds, "has afforded us a
remarkable lesson how necessary religion is to a State, and that from a
deficiency on that head arise the chief evils which can befall society."
He then bids us "remember that the Nebuchadnezzar who may destroy our
Israel is near at hand," though it might be difficult to show how
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Israel.

As to the uncertainty of life, he remarks that "Edward VI. died in his
minority, and disappointed his subjects, to whom he had promised a happy
reign."  Of this infant's thirty-nine sermons (just as many as the
Articles), it may be said that they are in no way inferior to other
examples of this class of literature.  But sermons are among the least
"scarce" and "rare" of human essays, and many parents would rather see
their boy patiently acquiring the art of wicket-keeping at school than
moralising on the uncertainty of life at home.  Some one "having
presented to the young author a copy of verses on the trite and familiar
subject of the Ploughboy," he replied with an ode on "The Potboy."

   "Bliss is not always join'd to wealth,
      Nor dwells beneath the gilded roof
   For poverty is bliss with health,
      Of that my potboy stands a proof."

The volume ends with this determination,

   "Still shall I seek Apollo's shelt'ring ray,
   To cheer my spirits and inspire my lay."

If any parent or guardian desires any further information about _Les
Enfans devenus celebres par leurs ecrits_, he will find it in a work of
that name, published in Paris in 1688.  The learned Scioppius published
works at sixteen, "which deserved" (and perhaps obtained) "the admiration
of dotards."  M. Du Maurier asserts that, at the age of fifteen, Grotius
pleaded causes at the Bar.  At eleven Meursius made orations and
harangues which were much admired.  At fifteen, Alexandre le Jeune wrote
anacreontic verses, and (less excusably) a commentary on the Institutions
of Gaius.  Grevin published a tragedy and two comedies at the age of
thirteen, and at fifteen Louis Stella was a professor of Greek.  But no
one reads Grevin now, nor Stella, nor Alexandre le Jeune, and perhaps
their time might have been better occupied in being "soaring human boys"
than in composing tragedies and commentaries.  Monsieur le Duc de Maine
published, in 1678, his _OEuvres d'un Auteur de Sept Ans_, a royal
example to be avoided by all boys.  These and several score of other
examples may perhaps reconcile us to the spectacle of puerile genius
fading away in the existence of the common British schoolboy, who is
nothing of a poet, and still less of a jurisconsult.

The British authors who understand boys best are not those who have
written books exclusively about boys.  There is Canon Farrar, for
example, whose romances of boyish life appear to be very popular, but
whose boys, somehow, are not real boys.  They are too good when they are
good, and when they are bad, they are not perhaps too bad (that is
impossible), but they are bad in the wrong way.  They are bad with a
mannish and conscious vice, whereas even bad boys seem to sin less
consciously and after a ferocious fashion of their own.  Of the boys in
"Tom Brown" it is difficult to speak, because the Rugby boy under Arnold
seems to have been of a peculiar species.  A contemporary pupil was
asked, when an undergraduate, what he conceived to be the peculiar
characteristic of Rugby boys.  He said, after mature reflection, that
"the _differentia_ of the Rugby boy was his moral thoughtfulness."  Now
the characteristic of the ordinary boy is his want of what is called
moral thoughtfulness.

He lives in simple obedience to school traditions.  These may compel him,
at one school, to speak in a peculiar language, and to persecute and beat
all boys who are slow at learning this language.  At another school he
may regard dislike of the manly game of football as the sin with which
"heaven heads the count of crimes."  On the whole this notion seems a
useful protest against the prematurely artistic beings who fill their
studies with photographs of Greek fragments, vases, etchings by the
newest etcher, bits of China, Oriental rugs, and very curious old brass
candlesticks.  The "challenge cup" soon passes away from the keeping of
any house in a public school where Bunthorne is a popular and imitated
character.  But when we reach aesthetic boys, we pass out of the savage
stage into hobbledehoyhood.  The bigger boys at public schools are often
terribly "advanced," and when they are not at work or play, they are
vexing themselves with the riddle of the earth, evolution, agnosticism,
and all that kind of thing.  Latin verses may not be what conservatives
fondly deem them, and even cricket may, it is said, become too absorbing
a pursuit, but either or both are better than precocious freethinking and
sacrifice on the altar of the Beautiful.

A big boy who is tackling Haeckel or composing _virelais_ in playtime is
doing himself no good, and is worse than useless to the society of which
he is a member.  The small boys, who are the most ardent of
hero-worshippers, either despise him or they allow him to address them in
_chansons royaux_, and respond with trebles in _triolets_.  At present a
great many boys leave school, pass three years or four at the
universities, and go back as masters to the place where some of their old
schoolfellows are still pupils.  It is through these very young masters,
perhaps, that "advanced" speculations and tastes get into schools, where,
however excellent in themselves, they are rather out of place.  Indeed,
the very young master, though usually earnest in his work, must be a sage
indeed if he can avoid talking to the elder boys about the problems that
interest him, and so forcing their minds into precocious attitudes.  The
advantage of Eton boys used to be, perhaps is still, that they came up to
college absolutely destitute of "ideas," and guiltless of reading
anything more modern than Virgil.  Thus their intellects were quite
fallow, and they made astonishing progress when they bent their fresh and
unwearied minds to study.  But too many boys now leave school with
settled opinions derived from the very latest thing out, from the newest
German pessimist or American socialist.  It may, however, be argued that
ideas of these sorts are like measles, and that it is better to take them
early and be done with them for ever.

While schools are reformed and Latin grammars of the utmost ingenuity and
difficulty are published, boys on the whole change very little.  They
remain the beings whom Thackeray understood better than any other writer:
Thackeray, who liked boys so much and was so little blind to their
defects.  I think he exaggerates their habit of lying to masters, or, if
they lied in his day, their character has altered in that respect, and
they are more truthful than many men find it expedient to be.  And they
have given up fighting; the old battles between Berry and Biggs, or
Dobbin and Cuff (major) are things of the glorious past.  Big boys don't
fight, and there is a whisper that little boys kick each other's shins
when in wrath.  That practice can hardly be called an improvement, even
if we do not care for fisticuffs.  Perhaps the gloves are the best
peacemakers at school.  When all the boys, by practice in boxing, know
pretty well whom they can in a friendly way lick, they are less tempted
to more crucial experiments "without the gloves."

But even the ascertainment of one's relative merits with the gloves hurts
a good deal, and one may thank heaven that the fountain of youth (as
described by Pontus de Tyarde) is not a common beverage.  By drinking
this liquid, says the old Frenchman, one is insensibly brought back from
old to middle age, and to youth and boyhood.  But one would prefer to
stop drinking of the fountain before actually being reduced to boy's
estate, and passing once more through the tumultuous experiences of that
period.  And of these, _not having enough to eat_ is by no means the
least common.  The evidence as to execrable dinners is rather
dispiriting, and one may end by saying that if there is a worse fellow
than a bully, it is a master who does not see that his boys are supplied
with plenty of wholesome food.  He, at least, could not venture, like a
distinguished headmaster, to preach and publish sermons on "Boys' Life:
its Fulness."  A schoolmaster who has boarders is a hotel-keeper, and
thereby makes his income, but he need not keep a hotel which would be
dispraised in guide books.  Dinners are a branch of school economy which
should not be left to the wives of schoolmasters.  _They_ have never been
boys.




FOOTNOTES


{1}  "Mauth" is Manx for dog, I am told.

{2}  It is easy to bear the misfortunes of others.

{3}  In the third volume of his essays.

{4}  "I remember I went into the room where my father's body lay, and my
mother sat weeping alone by it.  I had my battledore in my hand, and fell
a-beating the coffin and calling 'Papa,' for I know not how, I had some
slight idea that he was locked up there."--STEELE, _The Tatler_, June 6,
1710.

{5}  Longmans.

{6}  I like to know what the author got.

{7}  Salmon roe, I am sorry to say.

{8}  "Why and Wherefore," Aytoun.

{9}  _Fersitan legendum_, "Help Thou."

{10}  I know, now, who Miriam was and who was the haunter of the
Catacombs.  But perhaps the people is as well without the knowledge of an
old and "ower true tale" that shook a throne.

{11}  Cannot the reader guess?  I am afraid that I can!

{12}  Edinburgh, 1685.

========================================
========================================

OF CITIES***





Transcribed from the 1912 Longmans, Green, and Co. edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





TALES OF TROY: ULYSSES THE SACKER OF CITIES
by Andrew Lang


Contents:

The Boyhood and Parents of Ulysses
How People Lived in the Time of Ulysses
The Wooing of Helen of the Fair Hands
The Stealing of Helen
Trojan Victories
Battle at the Ships
The Slaying and Avenging of Patroclus
The Cruelty of Achilles, and the Ransoming of Hector
How Ulysses Stole the Luck of Troy
The Battles with the Amazons and Memnon--the Death of Achilles
Ulysses Sails to seek the Son of Achilles.--The Valour of Eurypylus
The Slaying of Paris
How Ulysses Invented the Device of the Horse of Tree
The End of Troy and the Saving of Helen




THE BOYHOOD AND PARENTS OF ULYSSES


Long ago, in a little island called Ithaca, on the west coast of Greece,
there lived a king named Laertes.  His kingdom was small and mountainous.
People used to say that Ithaca "lay like a shield upon the sea," which
sounds as if it were a flat country.  But in those times shields were
very large, and rose at the middle into two peaks with a hollow between
them, so that Ithaca, seen far off in the sea, with her two chief
mountain peaks, and a cloven valley between them, looked exactly like a
shield.  The country was so rough that men kept no horses, for, at that
time, people drove, standing up in little light chariots with two horses;
they never rode, and there was no cavalry in battle: men fought from
chariots.  When Ulysses, the son of Laertes, King of Ithaca grew up, he
never fought from a chariot, for he had none, but always on foot.

If there were no horses in Ithaca, there was plenty of cattle.  The
father of Ulysses had flocks of sheep, and herds of swine, and wild
goats, deer, and hares lived in the hills and in the plains.  The sea was
full of fish of many sorts, which men caught with nets, and with rod and
line and hook.

Thus Ithaca was a good island to live in.  The summer was long, and there
was hardly any winter; only a few cold weeks, and then the swallows came
back, and the plains were like a garden, all covered with wild
flowers--violets, lilies, narcissus, and roses.  With the blue sky and
the blue sea, the island was beautiful.  White temples stood on the
shores; and the Nymphs, a sort of fairies, had their little shrines built
of stone, with wild rose-bushes hanging over them.

Other islands lay within sight, crowned with mountains, stretching away,
one behind the other, into the sunset.  Ulysses in the course of his life
saw many rich countries, and great cities of men, but, wherever he was,
his heart was always in the little isle of Ithaca, where he had learned
how to row, and how to sail a boat, and how to shoot with bow and arrow,
and to hunt boars and stags, and manage his hounds.

The mother of Ulysses was called Anticleia: she was the daughter of King
Autolycus, who lived near Parnassus, a mountain on the mainland.  This
King Autolycus was the most cunning of men.  He was a Master Thief, and
could steal a man's pillow from under his head, but he does not seem to
have been thought worse of for this.  The Greeks had a God of Thieves,
named Hermes, whom Autolycus worshipped, and people thought more good of
his cunning tricks than harm of his dishonesty.  Perhaps these tricks of
his were only practised for amusement; however that may be, Ulysses
became as artful as his grandfather; he was both the bravest and the most
cunning of men, but Ulysses never stole things, except once, as we shall
hear, from the enemy in time of war.  He showed his cunning in stratagems
of war, and in many strange escapes from giants and man-eaters.

Soon after Ulysses was born, his grandfather came to see his mother and
father in Ithaca.  He was sitting at supper when the nurse of Ulysses,
whose name was Eurycleia, brought in the baby, and set him on the knees
of Autolycus, saying, "Find a name for your grandson, for he is a child
of many prayers."

"I am very angry with many men and women in the world," said Autolycus,
"so let the child's name be _A Man of Wrath_," which, in Greek, was
Odysseus.  So the child was called Odysseus by his own people, but the
name was changed into Ulysses, and we shall call him Ulysses.

We do not know much about Ulysses when he was a little boy, except that
he used to run about the garden with his father, asking questions, and
begging that he might have fruit trees "for his very own."  He was a
great pet, for his parents had no other son, so his father gave him
thirteen pear trees, and forty fig trees, and promised him fifty rows of
vines, all covered with grapes, which he could eat when he liked, without
asking leave of the gardener.  So he was not tempted to steal fruit, like
his grandfather.

When Autolycus gave Ulysses his name, he said that he must come to stay
with him, when he was a big boy, and he would get splendid presents.
Ulysses was told about this, so, when he was a tall lad, he crossed the
sea and drove in his chariot to the old man's house on Mount Parnassus.
Everybody welcomed him, and next day his uncles and cousins and he went
out to hunt a fierce wild boar, early in the morning.  Probably Ulysses
took his own dog, named Argos, the best of hounds, of which we shall hear
again, long afterwards, for the dog lived to be very old.  Soon the
hounds came on the scent of a wild boar, and after them the men went,
with spears in their hands, and Ulysses ran foremost, for he was already
the swiftest runner in Greece.

He came on a great boar lying in a tangled thicket of boughs and bracken,
a dark place where the sun never shone, nor could the rain pierce
through.  Then the noise of the men's shouts and the barking of the dogs
awakened the boar, and up he sprang, bristling all over his back, and
with fire shining from his eyes.  In rushed Ulysses first of all, with
his spear raised to strike, but the boar was too quick for him, and ran
in, and drove his sharp tusk sideways, ripping up the thigh of Ulysses.
But the boar's tusk missed the bone, and Ulysses sent his sharp spear
into the beast's right shoulder, and the spear went clean through, and
the boar fell dead, with a loud cry.  The uncles of Ulysses bound up his
wound carefully, and sang a magical song over it, as the French soldiers
wanted to do to Joan of Arc when the arrow pierced her shoulder at the
siege of Orleans.  Then the blood ceased to flow, and soon Ulysses was
quite healed of his wound.  They thought that he would be a good warrior,
and gave him splendid presents, and when he went home again he told all
that had happened to his father and mother, and his nurse, Eurycleia.  But
there was always a long white mark or scar above his left knee, and about
that scar we shall hear again, many years afterwards.




HOW PEOPLE LIVED IN THE TIME OF ULYSSES


When Ulysses was a young man he wished to marry a princess of his own
rank.  Now there were at that time many kings in Greece, and you must be
told how they lived.  Each king had his own little kingdom, with his
chief town, walled with huge walls of enormous stone.  Many of these
walls are still standing, though the grass has grown over the ruins of
most of them, and in later years, men believed that those walls must have
been built by giants, the stones are so enormous.  Each king had nobles
under him, rich men, and all had their palaces, each with its courtyard,
and its long hall, where the fire burned in the midst, and the King and
Queen sat beside it on high thrones, between the four chief carved
pillars that held up the roof.  The thrones were made of cedar wood and
ivory, inlaid with gold, and there were many other chairs and small
tables for guests, and the walls and doors were covered with bronze
plates, and gold and silver, and sheets of blue glass.  Sometimes they
were painted with pictures of bull hunts, and a few of these pictures may
still be seen.  At night torches were lit, and placed in the hands of
golden figures of boys, but all the smoke of fire and torches escaped by
a hole in the roof, and made the ceiling black.  On the walls hung swords
and spears and helmets and shields, which needed to be often cleaned from
the stains of the smoke.  The minstrel or poet sat beside the King and
Queen, and, after supper he struck his harp, and sang stories of old
wars.  At night the King and Queen slept in their own place, and the
women in their own rooms; the princesses had their chambers upstairs, and
the young princes had each his room built separate in the courtyard.

There were bath rooms with polished baths, where guests were taken when
they arrived dirty from a journey.  The guests lay at night on beds in
the portico, for the climate was warm.  There were plenty of servants,
who were usually slaves taken in war, but they were very kindly treated,
and were friendly with their masters.  No coined money was used; people
paid for things in cattle, or in weighed pieces of gold.  Rich men had
plenty of gold cups, and gold-hilted swords, and bracelets, and brooches.
The kings were the leaders in war and judges in peace, and did sacrifices
to the Gods, killing cattle and swine and sheep, on which they afterwards
dined.

They dressed in a simple way, in a long smock of linen or silk, which
fell almost to the feet, but was tucked up into a belt round the waist,
and worn longer or shorter, as they happened to choose.  Where it needed
fastening at the throat, golden brooches were used, beautifully made,
with safety pins.  This garment was much like the plaid that the
Highlanders used to wear, with its belt and brooches.  Over it the Greeks
wore great cloaks of woollen cloth when the weather was cold, but these
they did not use in battle.  They fastened their breastplates, in war,
over their smocks, and had other armour covering the lower parts of the
body, and leg armour called "greaves"; while the great shield which
guarded the whole body from throat to ankles was carried by a broad belt
slung round the neck.  The sword was worn in another belt, crossing the
shield belt.  They had light shoes in peace, and higher and heavier boots
in war, or for walking across country.

The women wore the smock, with more brooches and jewels than the men; and
had head coverings, with veils, and mantles over all, and necklaces of
gold and amber, earrings, and bracelets of gold or of bronze.  The
colours of their dresses were various, chiefly white and purple; and,
when in mourning, they wore very dark blue, not black.  All the armour,
and the sword blades and spearheads were made, not of steel or iron, but
of bronze, a mixture of copper and tin.  The shields were made of several
thicknesses of leather, with a plating of bronze above; tools, such as
axes and ploughshares, were either of iron or bronze; and so were the
blades of knives and daggers.

To us the houses and way of living would have seemed very splendid, and
also, in some ways, rather rough.  The palace floors, at least in the
house of Ulysses, were littered with bones and feet of the oxen slain for
food, but this happened when Ulysses had been long from home.  The floor
of the hall in the house of Ulysses was not boarded with planks, or paved
with stone: it was made of clay; for he was a poor king of small islands.
The cooking was coarse: a pig or sheep was killed, roasted and eaten
immediately.  We never hear of boiling meat, and though people probably
ate fish, we do not hear of their doing so, except when no meat could be
procured.  Still some people must have liked them; for in the pictures
that were painted or cut in precious stones in these times we see the
half-naked fisherman walking home, carrying large fish.

The people were wonderful workers of gold and bronze.  Hundreds of their
golden jewels have been found in their graves, but probably these were
made and buried two or three centuries before the time of Ulysses.  The
dagger blades had pictures of fights with lions, and of flowers, inlaid
on them, in gold of various colours, and in silver; nothing so beautiful
is made now.  There are figures of men hunting bulls on some of the gold
cups, and these are wonderfully life-like.  The vases and pots of
earthenware were painted in charming patterns: in short, it was a
splendid world to live in.

The people believed in many Gods, male and female, under the chief God,
Zeus.  The Gods were thought to be taller than men, and immortal, and to
live in much the same way as men did, eating, drinking, and sleeping in
glorious palaces.  Though they were supposed to reward good men, and to
punish people who broke their oaths and were unkind to strangers, there
were many stories told in which the Gods were fickle, cruel, selfish, and
set very bad examples to men.  How far these stories were believed is not
sure; it is certain that "all men felt a need of the Gods," and thought
that they were pleased by good actions and displeased by evil.  Yet, when
a man felt that his behaviour had been bad, he often threw the blame on
the Gods, and said that they had misled him, which really meant no more
than that "he could not help it."

There was a curious custom by which the princes bought wives from the
fathers of the princesses, giving cattle and gold, and bronze and iron,
but sometimes a prince got a wife as the reward for some very brave
action.  A man would not give his daughter to a wooer whom she did not
love, even if he offered the highest price, at least this must have been
the general rule, for husbands and wives were very fond of each other,
and of their children, and husbands always allowed their wives to rule
the house, and give their advice on everything.  It was thought a very
wicked thing for a woman to like another man better than her husband, and
there were few such wives, but among them was the most beautiful woman
who ever lived.




THE WOOING OF HELEN OF THE FAIR HANDS


This was the way in which people lived when Ulysses was young, and wished
to be married.  The worst thing in the way of life was that the greatest
and most beautiful princesses might be taken prisoners, and carried off
as slaves to the towns of the men who had killed their fathers and
husbands.  Now at that time one lady was far the fairest in the world:
namely, Helen, daughter of King Tyndarus.  Every young prince heard of
her and desired to marry her; so her father invited them all to his
palace, and entertained them, and found out what they would give.  Among
the rest Ulysses went, but his father had a little kingdom, a rough
island, with others near it, and Ulysses had not a good chance.  He was
not tall; though very strong and active, he was a short man with broad
shoulders, but his face was handsome, and, like all the princes, he wore
long yellow hair, clustering like a hyacinth flower.  His manner was
rather hesitating, and he seemed to speak very slowly at first, though
afterwards his words came freely.  He was good at everything a man can
do; he could plough, and build houses, and make ships, and he was the
best archer in Greece, except one, and could bend the great bow of a dead
king, Eurytus, which no other man could string.  But he had no horses,
and had no great train of followers; and, in short, neither Helen nor her
father thought of choosing Ulysses for her husband out of so many tall,
handsome young princes, glittering with gold ornaments.  Still, Helen was
very kind to Ulysses, and there was great friendship between them, which
was fortunate for her in the end.

Tyndarus first made all the princes take an oath that they would stand by
the prince whom he chose, and would fight for him in all his quarrels.
Then he named for her husband Menelaus, King of Lacedaemon.  He was a
very brave man, but not one of the strongest; he was not such a fighter
as the gigantic Aias, the tallest and strongest of men; or as Diomede,
the friend of Ulysses; or as his own brother, Agamemnon, the King of the
rich city of Mycenae, who was chief over all other princes, and general
of the whole army in war.  The great lions carved in stone that seemed to
guard his city are still standing above the gate through which Agamemnon
used to drive his chariot.

The man who proved to be the best fighter of all, Achilles, was not among
the lovers of Helen, for he was still a boy, and his mother, Thetis of
the silver feet, a goddess of the sea, had sent him to be brought up as a
girl, among the daughters of Lycomedes of Scyros, in an island far away.
Thetis did this because Achilles was her only child, and there was a
prophecy that, if he went to the wars, he would win the greatest glory,
but die very young, and never see his mother again.  She thought that if
war broke out he would not be found hiding in girl's dress, among girls,
far away.

So at last, after thinking over the matter for long, Tyndarus gave fair
Helen to Menelaus, the rich King of Lacedaemon; and her twin sister
Clytaemnestra, who was also very beautiful, was given to King Agamemnon,
the chief over all the princes.  They all lived very happily together at
first, but not for long.

In the meantime King Tyndarus spoke to his brother Icarius, who had a
daughter named Penelope.  She also was very pretty, but not nearly so
beautiful as her cousin, fair Helen, and we know that Penelope was not
very fond of her cousin.  Icarius, admiring the strength and wisdom of
Ulysses, gave him his daughter Penelope to be his wife, and Ulysses loved
her very dearly, no man and wife were ever dearer to each other.  They
went away together to rocky Ithaca, and perhaps Penelope was not sorry
that a wide sea lay between her home and that of Helen; for Helen was not
only the fairest woman that ever lived in the world, but she was so kind
and gracious and charming that no man could see her without loving her.
When she was only a child, the famous prince Theseus, who was famous in
Greek Story, carried her away to his own city of Athens, meaning to marry
her when she grew up, and even at that time, there was a war for her
sake, for her brothers followed Theseus with an army, and fought him, and
brought her home.

She had fairy gifts; for instance, she had a great red jewel, called "the
Star," and when she wore it red drops seemed to fall from it and vanished
before they touched and stained her white breast--so white that people
called her "the Daughter of the Swan."  She could speak in the very voice
of any man or woman, so folk also named her Echo, and it was believed
that she could neither grow old nor die, but would at last pass away to
the Elysian plain and the world's end, where life is easiest for men.  No
snow comes thither, nor great storm, nor any rain; but always the river
of Ocean that rings round the whole earth sends forth the west wind to
blow cool on the people of King Rhadamanthus of the fair hair.  These
were some of the stories that men told of fair Helen, but Ulysses was
never sorry that he had not the fortune to marry her, so fond he was of
her cousin, his wife, Penelope, who was very wise and good.

When Ulysses brought his wife home they lived, as the custom was, in the
palace of his father, King Laertes, but Ulysses, with his own hands,
built a chamber for Penelope and himself.  There grew a great olive tree
in the inner court of the palace, and its stem was as large as one of the
tall carved pillars of the hall.  Round about this tree Ulysses built the
chamber, and finished it with close-set stones, and roofed it over, and
made close-fastening doors.  Then he cut off all the branches of the
olive tree, and smoothed the trunk, and shaped it into the bed-post, and
made the bedstead beautiful with inlaid work of gold and silver and
ivory.  There was no such bed in Greece, and no man could move it from
its place, and this bed comes again into the story, at the very end.

Now time went by, and Ulysses and Penelope had one son called Telemachus;
and Eurycleia, who had been his father's nurse, took care of him.  They
were all very happy, and lived in peace in rocky Ithaca, and Ulysses
looked after his lands, and flocks, and herds, and went hunting with his
dog Argos, the swiftest of hounds.




THE STEALING OF HELEN


This happy time did not last long, and Telemachus was still a baby, when
war arose, so great and mighty and marvellous as had never been known in
the world.  Far across the sea that lies on the east of Greece, there
dwelt the rich King Priam.  His town was called Troy, or Ilios, and it
stood on a hill near the seashore, where are the straits of Hellespont,
between Europe and Asia; it was a great city surrounded by strong walls,
and its ruins are still standing.  The kings could make merchants who
passed through the straits pay toll to them, and they had allies in
Thrace, a part of Europe opposite Troy, and Priam was chief of all
princes on his side of the sea, as Agamemnon was chief king in Greece.
Priam had many beautiful things; he had a vine made of gold, with golden
leaves and clusters, and he had the swiftest horses, and many strong and
brave sons; the strongest and bravest was named Hector, and the youngest
and most beautiful was named Paris.

There was a prophecy that Priam's wife would give birth to a burning
torch, so, when Paris was born, Priam sent a servant to carry the baby
into a wild wood on Mount Ida, and leave him to die or be eaten by wolves
and wild cats.  The servant left the child, but a shepherd found him, and
brought him up as his own son.  The boy became as beautiful, for a boy,
as Helen was for a girl, and was the best runner, and hunter, and archer
among the country people.  He was loved by the beautiful OEnone, a
nymph--that is, a kind of fairy--who dwelt in a cave among the woods of
Ida.  The Greeks and Trojans believed in these days that such fair nymphs
haunted all beautiful woodland places, and the mountains, and wells, and
had crystal palaces, like mermaids, beneath the waves of the sea.  These
fairies were not mischievous, but gentle and kind.  Sometimes they
married mortal men, and OEnone was the bride of Paris, and hoped to keep
him for her own all the days of his life.

It was believed that she had the magical power of healing wounded men,
however sorely they were hurt.  Paris and OEnone lived most happily
together in the forest; but one day, when the servants of Priam had
driven off a beautiful bull that was in the herd of Paris, he left the
hills to seek it, and came into the town of Troy.  His mother, Hecuba,
saw him, and looking at him closely, perceived that he wore a ring which
she had tied round her baby's neck when he was taken away from her soon
after his birth.  Then Hecuba, beholding him so beautiful, and knowing
him to be her son, wept for joy, and they all forgot the prophecy that he
would be a burning torch of fire, and Priam gave him a house like those
of his brothers, the Trojan princes.

The fame of beautiful Helen reached Troy, and Paris quite forgot unhappy
OEnone, and must needs go to see Helen for himself.  Perhaps he meant to
try to win her for his wife, before her marriage.  But sailing was little
understood in these times, and the water was wide, and men were often
driven for years out of their course, to Egypt, and Africa, and far away
into the unknown seas, where fairies lived in enchanted islands, and
cannibals dwelt in caves of the hills.

Paris came much too late to have a chance of marrying Helen; however, he
was determined to see her, and he made his way to her palace beneath the
mountain Taygetus, beside the clear swift river Eurotas.  The servants
came out of the hall when they heard the sound of wheels and horses'
feet, and some of them took the horses to the stables, and tilted the
chariots against the gateway, while others led Paris into the hall, which
shone like the sun with gold and silver.  Then Paris and his companions
were led to the baths, where they were bathed, and clad in new clothes,
mantles of white, and robes of purple, and next they were brought before
King Menelaus, and he welcomed them kindly, and meat was set before them,
and wine in cups of gold.  While they were talking, Helen came forth from
her fragrant chamber, like a Goddess, her maidens following her, and
carrying for her an ivory distaff with violet-coloured wool, which she
span as she sat, and heard Paris tell how far he had travelled to see her
who was so famous for her beauty even in countries far away.

Then Paris knew that he had never seen, and never could see, a lady so
lovely and gracious as Helen as she sat and span, while the red drops
fell and vanished from the ruby called the Star; and Helen knew that
among all the princes in the world there was none so beautiful as Paris.
Now some say that Paris, by art magic, put on the appearance of Menelaus,
and asked Helen to come sailing with him, and that she, thinking he was
her husband, followed him, and he carried her across the wide waters of
Troy, away from her lord and her one beautiful little daughter, the child
Hermione.  And others say that the Gods carried Helen herself off to
Egypt, and that they made in her likeness a beautiful ghost, out of
flowers and sunset clouds, whom Paris bore to Troy, and this they did to
cause war between Greeks and Trojans.  Another story is that Helen and
her bower maiden and her jewels were seized by force, when Menelaus was
out hunting.  It is only certain that Paris and Helen did cross the seas
together, and that Menelaus and little Hermione were left alone in the
melancholy palace beside the Eurotas.  Penelope, we know for certain,
made no excuses for her beautiful cousin, but hated her as the cause of
her own sorrows and of the deaths of thousands of men in war, for all the
Greek princes were bound by their oath to fight for Menelaus against any
one who injured him and stole his wife away.  But Helen was very unhappy
in Troy, and blamed herself as bitterly as all the other women blamed
her, and most of all OEnone, who had been the love of Paris.  The men
were much more kind to Helen, and were determined to fight to the death
rather than lose the sight of her beauty among them.

The news of the dishonour done to Menelaus and to all the princes of
Greece ran through the country like fire through a forest.  East and west
and south and north went the news: to kings in their castles on the
hills, and beside the rivers and on cliffs above the sea.  The cry came
to ancient Nestor of the white beard at Pylos, Nestor who had reigned
over two generations of men, who had fought against the wild folk of the
hills, and remembered the strong Heracles, and Eurytus of the black bow
that sang before the day of battle.

The cry came to black-bearded Agamemnon, in his strong town called
"golden Mycenae," because it was so rich; it came to the people in
Thisbe, where the wild doves haunt; and it came to rocky Pytho, where is
the sacred temple of Apollo and the maid who prophesies.  It came to
Aias, the tallest and strongest of men, in his little isle of Salamis;
and to Diomede of the loud war-cry, the bravest of warriors, who held
Argos and Tiryns of the black walls of huge, stones, that are still
standing.  The summons came to the western islands and to Ulysses in
Ithaca, and even far south to the great island of Crete of the hundred
cities, where Idomeneus ruled in Cnossos; Idomeneus, whose ruined palace
may still be seen with the throne of the king, and pictures painted on
the walls, and the King's own draught-board of gold and silver, and
hundreds of tablets of clay, on which are written the lists of royal
treasures.  Far north went the news to Pelasgian Argos, and Hellas, where
the people of Peleus dwelt, the Myrmidons; but Peleus was too old to
fight, and his boy, Achilles, dwelt far away, in the island of Scyros,
dressed as a girl, among the daughters of King Lycomedes.  To many
another town and to a hundred islands went the bitter news of approaching
war, for all princes knew that their honour and their oaths compelled
them to gather their spearmen, and bowmen, and slingers from the fields
and the fishing, and to make ready their ships, and meet King Agamemnon
in the harbour of Aulis, and cross the wide sea to besiege Troy town.

Now the story is told that Ulysses was very unwilling to leave his island
and his wife Penelope, and little Telemachus; while Penelope had no wish
that he should pass into danger, and into the sight of Helen of the fair
hands.  So it is said that when two of the princes came to summon
Ulysses, he pretended to be mad, and went ploughing the sea sand with
oxen, and sowing the sand with salt.  Then the prince Palamedes took the
baby Telemachus from the arms of his nurse, Eurycleia, and laid him in
the line of the furrow, where the ploughshare would strike him and kill
him.  But Ulysses turned the plough aside, and they cried that he was not
mad, but sane, and he must keep his oath, and join the fleet at Aulis, a
long voyage for him to sail, round the stormy southern Cape of Maleia.

Whether this tale be true or not, Ulysses did go, leading twelve black
ships, with high beaks painted red at prow and stern.  The ships had
oars, and the warriors manned the oars, to row when there was no wind.
There was a small raised deck at each end of the ships; on these decks
men stood to fight with sword and spear when there was a battle at sea.
Each ship had but one mast, with a broad lugger sail, and for anchors
they had only heavy stones attached to cables.  They generally landed at
night, and slept on the shore of one of the many islands, when they
could, for they greatly feared to sail out of sight of land.

The fleet consisted of more than a thousand ships, each with fifty
warriors, so the army was of more than fifty thousand men.  Agamemnon had
a hundred ships, Diomede had eighty, Nestor had ninety, the Cretans with
Idomeneus, had eighty, Menelaus had sixty; but Aias and Ulysses, who
lived in small islands, had only twelve ships apiece.  Yet Aias was so
brave and strong, and Ulysses so brave and wise, that they were ranked
among the greatest chiefs and advisers of Agamemnon, with Menelaus,
Diomede, Idomeneus, Nestor, Menestheus of Athens, and two or three
others.  These chiefs were called the Council, and gave advice to
Agamemnon, who was commander-in-chief.  He was a brave fighter, but so
anxious and fearful of losing the lives of his soldiers that Ulysses and
Diomede were often obliged to speak to him very severely.  Agamemnon was
also very insolent and greedy, though, when anybody stood up to him, he
was ready to apologise, for fear the injured chief should renounce his
service and take away his soldiers.

Nestor was much respected because he remained brave, though he was too
old to be very useful in battle.  He generally tried to make peace when
the princes quarrelled with Agamemnon.  He loved to tell long stories
about his great deeds when he was young, and he wished the chiefs to
fight in old-fashioned ways.

For instance, in his time the Greeks had fought in clan regiments, and
the princely men had never dismounted in battle, but had fought in
squadrons of chariots, but now the owners of chariots fought on foot,
each man for himself, while his squire kept the chariot near him to
escape on if he had to retreat.  Nestor wished to go back to the good old
way of chariot charges against the crowds of foot soldiers of the enemy.
In short, he was a fine example of the old-fashioned soldier.

Aias, though so very tall, strong, and brave, was rather stupid.  He
seldom spoke, but he was always ready to fight, and the last to retreat.
Menelaus was weak of body, but as brave as the best, or more brave, for
he had a keen sense of honour, and would attempt what he had not the
strength to do.  Diomede and Ulysses were great friends, and always
fought side by side, when they could, and helped each other in the most
dangerous adventures.

These were the chiefs who led the great Greek armada from the harbour of
Aulis.  A long time had passed, after the flight of Helen, before the
large fleet could be collected, and more time went by in the attempt to
cross the sea to Troy.  There were tempests that scattered the ships, so
they were driven back to Aulis to refit; and they fought, as they went
out again, with the peoples of unfriendly islands, and besieged their
towns.  What they wanted most of all was to have Achilles with them, for
he was the leader of fifty ships and 2,500 men, and he had magical armour
made, men said, for his father, by Hephaestus, the God of armour-making
and smithy work.

At last the fleet came to the Isle of Scyros, where they suspected that
Achilles was concealed.  King Lycomedes received the chiefs kindly, and
they saw all his beautiful daughters dancing and playing at ball, but
Achilles was still so young and slim and so beautiful that they did not
know him among the others.  There was a prophecy that they could not take
Troy without him, and yet they could not find him out.  Then Ulysses had
a plan.  He blackened his eyebrows and beard and put on the dress of a
Phoenician merchant.  The Phoenicians were a people who lived near the
Jews, and were of the same race, and spoke much the same language, but,
unlike the Jews, who, at that time were farmers in Palestine, tilling the
ground, and keeping flocks and herds, the Phoenicians were the greatest
of traders and sailors, and stealers of slaves.  They carried cargoes of
beautiful cloths, and embroideries, and jewels of gold, and necklaces of
amber, and sold these everywhere about the shores of Greece and the
islands.

Ulysses then dressed himself like a Phoenician pedlar, with his pack on
his back: he only took a stick in his hand, his long hair was turned up,
and hidden under a red sailor's cap, and in this figure he came, stooping
beneath his pack, into the courtyard of King Lycomedes.  The girls heard
that a pedlar had come, and out they all ran, Achilles with the rest to
watch the pedlar undo his pack.  Each chose what she liked best: one took
a wreath of gold; another a necklace of gold and amber; another earrings;
a fourth a set of brooches, another a dress of embroidered scarlet cloth;
another a veil; another a pair of bracelets; but at the bottom of the
pack lay a great sword of bronze, the hilt studded with golden nails.
Achilles seized the sword.  "This is for me!" he said, and drew the sword
from the gilded sheath, and made it whistle round his head.

"You are Achilles, Peleus' son!" said Ulysses; "and you are to be the
chief warrior of the Achaeans," for the Greeks then called themselves
Achaeans.  Achilles was only too glad to hear these words, for he was
quite tired of living among maidens.  Ulysses led him into the hall where
the chiefs were sitting at their wine, and Achilles was blushing like any
girl.

"Here is the Queen of the Amazons," said Ulysses--for the Amazons were a
race of warlike maidens--"or rather here is Achilles, Peleus' son, with
sword in hand."  Then they all took his hand, and welcomed him, and he
was clothed in man's dress, with the sword by his side, and presently
they sent him back with ten ships to his home.  There his mother, Thetis,
of the silver feet, the goddess of the sea, wept over him, saying, "My
child, thou hast the choice of a long and happy and peaceful life here
with me, or of a brief time of war and undying renown.  Never shall I see
thee again in Argos if thy choice is for war."  But Achilles chose to die
young, and to be famous as long as the world stands.  So his father gave
him fifty ships, with Patroclus, who was older than he, to be his friend,
and with an old man, Phoenix, to advise him; and his mother gave him the
glorious armour that the God had made for his father, and the heavy ashen
spear that none but he could wield, and he sailed to join the host of the
Achaeans, who all praised and thanked Ulysses that had found for them
such a prince.  For Achilles was the fiercest fighter of them all, and
the swiftest-footed man, and the most courteous prince, and the gentlest
with women and children, but he was proud and high of heart, and when he
was angered his anger was terrible.

The Trojans would have had no chance against the Greeks if only the men
of the city of Troy had fought to keep Helen of the fair hands.  But they
had allies, who spoke different languages, and came to fight for them
both from Europe and from Asia.  On the Trojan as well as on the Greek
side were people called Pelasgians, who seem to have lived on both shores
of the sea.  There were Thracians, too, who dwelt much further north than
Achilles, in Europe and beside the strait of Hellespont, where the narrow
sea runs like a river.  There were warriors of Lycia, led by Sarpedon and
Glaucus; there were Carians, who spoke in a strange tongue; there were
Mysians and men from Alybe, which was called "the birthplace of silver,"
and many other peoples sent their armies, so that the war was between
Eastern Europe, on one side, and Western Asia Minor on the other.  The
people of Egypt took no part in the war: the Greeks and Islesmen used to
come down in their ships and attack the Egyptians as the Danes used to
invade England.  You may see the warriors from the islands, with their
horned helmets, in old Egyptian pictures.

The commander-in-chief, as we say now, of the Trojans was Hector, the son
of Priam.  He was thought a match for any one of the Greeks, and was
brave and good.  His brothers also were leaders, but Paris preferred to
fight from a distance with bow and arrows.  He and Pandarus, who dwelt on
the slopes of Mount Ida, were the best archers in the Trojan army.  The
princes usually fought with heavy spears, which they threw at each other,
and with swords, leaving archery to the common soldiers who had no armour
of bronze.  But Teucer, Meriones, and Ulysses were the best archers of
the Achaeans.  People called Dardanians were led by Aeneas, who was said
to be the son of the most beautiful of the goddesses.  These, with
Sarpedon and Glaucus, were the most famous of the men who fought for
Troy.

Troy was a strong town on a hill.  Mount Ida lay behind it, and in front
was a plain sloping to the sea shore.  Through this plain ran two
beautiful clear rivers, and there were scattered here and there what you
would have taken for steep knolls, but they were really mounds piled up
over the ashes of warriors who had died long ago.  On these mounds
sentinels used to stand and look across the water to give warning if the
Greek fleet drew near, for the Trojans had heard that it was on its way.
At last the fleet came in view, and the sea was black with ships, the
oarsmen pulling with all their might for the honour of being the first to
land.  The race was won by the ship of the prince Protesilaus, who was
first of all to leap on shore, but as he leaped he was struck to the
heart by an arrow from the bow of Paris.  This must have seemed a good
omen to the Trojans, and to the Greeks evil, but we do not hear that the
landing was resisted in great force, any more than that of Norman William
was, when he invaded England.

The Greeks drew up all their ships on shore, and the men camped in huts
built in front of the ships.  There was thus a long row of huts with the
ships behind them, and in these huts the Greeks lived all through the ten
years that the siege of Troy lasted.  In these days they do not seem to
have understood how to conduct a siege.  You would have expected the
Greeks to build towers and dig trenches all round Troy, and from the
towers watch the roads, so that provisions might not be brought in from
the country.  This is called "investing" a town, but the Greeks never
invested Troy.  Perhaps they had not men enough; at all events the place
remained open, and cattle could always be driven in to feed the warriors
and the women and children.

Moreover, the Greeks for long never seem to have tried to break down one
of the gates, nor to scale the walls, which were very high, with ladders.
On the other hand, the Trojans and allies never ventured to drive the
Greeks into the sea; they commonly remained within the walls or
skirmished just beneath them.  The older men insisted on this way of
fighting, in spite of Hector, who always wished to attack and storm the
camp of the Greeks.  Neither side had machines for throwing heavy stones,
such as the Romans used later, and the most that the Greeks did was to
follow Achilles and capture small neighbouring cities, and take the women
for slaves, and drive the cattle.  They got provisions and wine from the
Phoenicians, who came in ships, and made much profit out of the war.

It was not till the tenth year that the war began in real earnest, and
scarcely any of the chief leaders had fallen.  Fever came upon the
Greeks, and all day the camp was black with smoke, and all night shone
with fire from the great piles of burning wood, on which the Greeks
burned their dead, whose bones they then buried under hillocks of earth.
Many of these hillocks are still standing on the plain of Troy.  When the
plague had raged for ten days, Achilles called an assembly of the whole
army, to try to find out why the Gods were angry.  They thought that the
beautiful God Apollo (who took the Trojan side) was shooting invisible
arrows at them from his silver bow, though fevers in armies are usually
caused by dirt and drinking bad water.  The great heat of the sun, too,
may have helped to cause the disease; but we must tell the story as the
Greeks told it themselves.  So Achilles spoke in the assembly, and
proposed to ask some prophet why Apollo was angry.  The chief prophet was
Calchas.  He rose and said that he would declare the truth if Achilles
would promise to protect him from the anger of any prince whom the truth
might offend.

Achilles knew well whom Calchas meant.  Ten days before, a priest of
Apollo had come to the camp and offered ransom for his daughter Chryseis,
a beautiful girl, whom Achilles had taken prisoner, with many others,
when he captured a small town.  Chryseis had been given as a slave to
Agamemnon, who always got the best of the plunder because he was chief
king, whether he had taken part in the fighting or not.  As a rule he did
not.  To Achilles had been given another girl, Briseis, of whom he was
very fond.  Now when Achilles had promised to protect Calchas, the
prophet spoke out, and boldly said, what all men knew already, that
Apollo caused the plague because Agamemnon would not return Chryseis, and
had insulted her father, the priest of the God.

On hearing this, Agamemnon was very angry.  He said that he would send
Chryseis home, but that he would take Briseis away from Achilles.  Then
Achilles was drawing his great sword from the sheath to kill Agamemnon,
but even in his anger he knew that this was wrong, so he merely called
Agamemnon a greedy coward, "with face of dog and heart of deer," and he
swore that he and his men would fight no more against the Trojans.  Old
Nestor tried to make peace, and swords were not drawn, but Briseis was
taken away from Achilles, and Ulysses put Chryseis on board of his ship
and sailed away with her to her father's town, and gave her up to her
father.  Then her father prayed to Apollo that the plague might cease,
and it did cease--when the Greeks had cleansed their camp, and purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea.

We know how fierce and brave Achilles was, and we may wonder that he did
not challenge Agamemnon to fight a duel.  But the Greeks never fought
duels, and Agamemnon was believed to be chief king by right divine.
Achilles went alone to the sea shore when his dear Briseis was led away,
and he wept, and called to his mother, the silver-footed lady of the
waters.  Then she arose from the grey sea, like a mist, and sat down
beside her son, and stroked his hair with her hand, and he told her all
his sorrows.  So she said that she would go up to the dwelling of the
Gods, and pray Zeus, the chief of them all, to make the Trojans win a
great battle, so that Agamemnon should feel his need of Achilles, and
make amends for his insolence, and do him honour.

Thetis kept her promise, and Zeus gave his word that the Trojans should
defeat the Greeks.  That night Zeus sent a deceitful dream to Agamemnon.
The dream took the shape of old Nestor, and said that Zeus would give him
victory that day.  While he was still asleep, Agamemnon was fun of hope
that he would instantly take Troy, but, when he woke, he seems not to
have been nearly so confident, for in place of putting on his armour, and
bidding the Greeks arm themselves, he merely dressed in his robe and
mantle, took his sceptre, and went and told the chiefs about his dream.
They did not feel much encouraged, so he said that he would try the
temper of the army.  He would call them together, and propose to return
to Greece; but, if the soldiers took him at his word, the other chiefs
were to stop them.  This was a foolish plan, for the soldiers were
wearying for beautiful Greece, and their homes, and wives and children.
Therefore, when Agamemnon did as he had said, the whole army rose, like
the sea under the west wind, and, with a shout, they rushed to the ships,
while the dust blew in clouds from under their feet.  Then they began to
launch their ships, and it seems that the princes were carried away in
the rush, and were as eager as the rest to go home.

But Ulysses only stood in sorrow and anger beside his ship, and never put
hand to it, for he felt how disgraceful it was to run away.  At last he
threw down his mantle, which his herald Eurybates of Ithaca, a
round-shouldered, brown, curly-haired man, picked up, and he ran to find
Agamemnon, and took his sceptre, a gold-studded staff, like a marshal's
baton, and he gently told the chiefs whom he met that they were doing a
shameful thing; but he drove the common soldiers back to the place of
meeting with the sceptre.  They all returned, puzzled and chattering, but
one lame, bandy-legged, bald, round-shouldered, impudent fellow, named
Thersites, jumped up and made an insolent speech, insulting the princes,
and advising the army to run away.  Then Ulysses took him and beat him
till the blood came, and he sat down, wiping away his tears, and looking
so foolish that the whole army laughed at him, and cheered Ulysses when
he and Nestor bade them arm and fight.  Agamemnon still believed a good
deal in his dream, and prayed that he might take Troy that very day, and
kill Hector.  Thus Ulysses alone saved the army from a cowardly retreat;
but for him the ships would have been launched in an hour.  But the
Greeks armed and advanced in full force, all except Achilles and his
friend Patroclus with their two or three thousand men.  The Trojans also
took heart, knowing that Achilles would not fight, and the armies
approached each other.  Paris himself, with two spears and a bow, and
without armour, walked into the space between the hosts, and challenged
any Greek prince to single combat.  Menelaus, whose wife Paris had
carried away, was as glad as a hungry lion when he finds a stag or a
goat, and leaped in armour from his chariot, but Paris turned and slunk
away, like a man when he meets a great serpent on a narrow path in the
hills.  Then Hector rebuked Paris for his cowardice, and Paris was
ashamed and offered to end the war by fighting Menelaus.  If he himself
fell, the Trojans must give up Helen and all her jewels; if Menelaus
fell, the Greeks were to return without fair Helen.  The Greeks accepted
this plan, and both sides disarmed themselves to look on at the fight in
comfort, and they meant to take the most solemn oaths to keep peace till
the combat was lost and won, and the quarrel settled.  Hector sent into
Troy for two lambs, which were to be sacrificed when the oaths were
taken.

In the meantime Helen of the fair hands was at home working at a great
purple tapestry on which she embroidered the battles of the Greeks and
Trojans.  It was just like the tapestry at Bayeux on which Norman ladies
embroidered the battles in the Norman Conquest of England.  Helen was
very fond of embroidering, like poor Mary, Queen of Scots, when a
prisoner in Loch Leven Castle.  Probably the work kept both Helen and
Mary from thinking of their past lives and their sorrows.

When Helen heard that her husband was to fight Paris, she wept, and threw
a shining veil over her head, and with her two bower maidens went to the
roof of the gate tower, where king Priam was sitting with the old Trojan
chiefs.  They saw her and said that it was small blame to fight for so
beautiful a lady, and Priam called her "dear child," and said, "I do not
blame you, I blame the Gods who brought about this war."  But Helen said
that she wished she had died before she left her little daughter and her
husband, and her home: "Alas! shameless me!"  Then she told Priam the
names of the chief Greek warriors, and of Ulysses, who was shorter by a
head than Agamemnon, but broader in chest and shoulders.  She wondered
that she could not see her own two brothers, Castor and Polydeuces, and
thought that they kept aloof in shame for her sin; but the green grass
covered their graves, for they had both died in battle, far away in
Lacedaemon, their own country.

Then the lambs were sacrificed, and the oaths were taken, and Paris put
on his brother's armour, helmet, breastplate, shield, and leg-armour.
Lots were drawn to decide whether Paris or Menelaus should throw his
spear first, and, as Paris won, he threw his spear, but the point was
blunted against the shield of Menelaus.  But when Menelaus threw his
spear it went clean through the shield of Paris, and through the side of
his breastplate, but only grazed his robe.  Menelaus drew his sword, and
rushed in, and smote at the crest of the helmet of Paris, but his bronze
blade broke into four pieces.  Menelaus caught Paris by the horsehair
crest of his helmet, and dragged him towards the Greeks, but the chin-
strap broke, and Menelaus turning round threw the helmet into the ranks
of the Greeks.  But when Menelaus looked again for Paris, with a spear in
his hand, he could see him nowhere!  The Greeks believed that the
beautiful goddess Aphrodite, whom the Romans called Venus, hid him in a
thick cloud of darkness and carried him to his own house, where Helen of
the fair hands found him and said to him, "Would that thou hadst
perished, conquered by that great warrior who was my lord!  Go forth
again and challenge him to fight thee face to face."  But Paris had no
more desire to fight, and the Goddess threatened Helen, and compelled her
to remain with him in Troy, coward as he had proved himself.  Yet on
other days Paris fought well; it seems that he was afraid of Menelaus
because, in his heart, he was ashamed of himself.

Meanwhile Menelaus was seeking for Paris everywhere, and the Trojans, who
hated him, would have shown his hiding place.  But they knew not where he
was, and the Greeks claimed the victory, and thought that, as Paris had
the worst of the fight, Helen would be restored to them, and they would
all sail home.




TROJAN VICTORIES


The war might now have ended, but an evil and foolish thought came to
Pandarus, a prince of Ida, who fought for the Trojans.  He chose to shoot
an arrow at Menelaus, contrary to the sworn vows of peace, and the arrow
pierced the breastplate of Menelaus through the place where the clasped
plates meet, and drew his blood.  Then Agamemnon, who loved his brother
dearly, began to lament, saying that if he died, the army would all go
home and Trojans would dance on the grave of Menelaus.  "Do not alarm all
our army," said Menelaus, "the arrow has done me little harm;" and so it
proved, for the surgeon easily drew the arrow out of the wound.

Then Agamemnon hastened here and there, bidding the Greeks arm and attack
the Trojans, who would certainly be defeated, for they had broken the
oaths of peace.  But with his usual insolence he chose to accuse Ulysses
and Diomede of cowardice, though Diomede was as brave as any man, and
Ulysses had just prevented the whole army from launching their ships and
going home.  Ulysses answered him with spirit, but Diomede said nothing
at the moment; later he spoke his mind.  He leaped from his chariot, and
all the chiefs leaped down and advanced in line, the chariots following
them, while the spearmen and bowmen followed the chariots.  The Trojan
army advanced, all shouting in their different languages, but the Greeks
came on silently.  Then the two front lines clashed, shield against
shield, and the noise was like the roaring of many flooded torrents among
the hills.  When a man fell he who had slain him tried to strip off his
armour, and his friends fought over his body to save the dead from this
dishonour.

Ulysses fought above a wounded friend, and drove his spear through head
and helmet of a Trojan prince, and everywhere men were falling beneath
spears and arrows and heavy stones which the warriors threw.  Here
Menelaus speared the man who built the ships with which Paris had sailed
to Greece; and the dust rose like a cloud, and a mist went up from the
fighting men, while Diomede stormed across the plain like a river in
flood, leaving dead bodies behind him as the river leaves boughs of trees
and grass to mark its course.  Pandarus wounded Diomede with an arrow,
but Diomede slew him, and the Trojans were being driven in flight, when
Sarpedon and Hector turned and hurled themselves on the Greeks; and even
Diomede shuddered when Hector came on, and charged at Ulysses, who was
slaying Trojans as he went, and the battle swayed this way and that, and
the arrows fell like rain.

But Hector was sent into the city to bid the women pray to the goddess
Athene for help, and he went to the house of Paris, whom Helen was
imploring to go and fight like a man, saying: "Would that the winds had
wafted me away, and the tides drowned me, shameless that I am, before
these things came to pass!"

Then Hector went to see his dear wife, Andromache, whose father had been
slain by Achilles early in the siege, and he found her and her nurse
carrying her little boy, Hector's son, and like a star upon her bosom lay
his beautiful and shining golden head.  Now, while Helen urged Paris to
go into the fight, Andromache prayed Hector to stay with her in the town,
and fight no more lest he should be slain and leave her a widow, and the
boy an orphan, with none to protect him.  The army she said, should come
back within the walls, where they had so long been safe, not fight in the
open plain.  But Hector answered that he would never shrink from battle,
"yet I know this in my heart, the day shall come for holy Troy to be laid
low, and Priam and the people of Priam.  But this and my own death do not
trouble me so much as the thought of you, when you shall be carried as a
slave to Greece, to spin at another woman's bidding, and bear water from
a Grecian well.  May the heaped up earth of my tomb cover me ere I hear
thy cries and the tale of thy captivity."

Then Hector stretched out his hands to his little boy, but the child was
afraid when he saw the great glittering helmet of his father and the
nodding horsehair crest.  So Hector laid his helmet on the ground and
dandled the child in his arms, and tried to comfort his wife, and said
good-bye for the last time, for he never came back to Troy alive.  He
went on his way back to the battle, and Paris went with him, in glorious
armour, and soon they were slaying the princes of the Greeks.

The battle raged till nightfall, and in the night the Greeks and Trojans
burned their dead; and the Greeks made a trench and wall round their
camp, which they needed for safety now that the Trojans came from their
town and fought in the open plain.

Next day the Trojans were so successful that they did not retreat behind
their walls at night, but lit great fires on the plain: a thousand fires,
with fifty men taking supper round each of them, and drinking their wine
to the music of flutes.  But the Greeks were much discouraged, and
Agamemnon called the whole army together, and proposed that they should
launch their ships in the night and sail away home.  Then Diomede stood
up, and said: "You called me a coward lately.  You are the coward!  Sail
away if you are afraid to remain here, but all the rest of us will fight
till we take Troy town."

Then all shouted in praise of Diomede, and Nestor advised them to send
five hundred young men, under his own son, Thrasymedes, to watch the
Trojans, and guard the new wall and the ditch, in case the Trojans
attacked them in the darkness.  Next Nestor counselled Agamemnon to send
Ulysses and Aias to Achilles, and promise to give back Briseis, and rich
presents of gold, and beg pardon for his insolence.  If Achilles would be
friends again with Agamemnon, and fight as he used to fight, the Trojans
would soon be driven back into the town.

Agamemnon was very ready to beg pardon, for he feared that the whole army
would be defeated, and cut off from their ships, and killed or kept as
slaves.  So Ulysses and Aias and the old tutor of Achilles, Phoenix, went
to Achilles and argued with him, praying him to accept the rich presents,
and help the Greeks.  But Achilles answered that he did not believe a
word that Agamemnon said; Agamemnon had always hated him, and always
would hate him.  No; he would not cease to be angry, he would sail away
next day with all his men, and he advised the rest to come with him.  "Why
be so fierce?" said tall Aias, who seldom spoke.  "Why make so much
trouble about one girl?  We offer you seven girls, and plenty of other
gifts."

Then Achilles said that he would not sail away next day, but he would not
fight till the Trojans tried to burn his own ships, and there he thought
that Hector would find work enough to do.  This was the most that
Achilles would promise, and all the Greeks were silent when Ulysses
delivered his message.  But Diomede arose and said that, with or without
Achilles, fight they must; and all men, heavy at heart, went to sleep in
their huts or in the open air at their doors.

Agamemnon was much too anxious to sleep.  He saw the glow of the thousand
fires of the Trojans in the dark, and heard their merry flutes, and he
groaned and pulled out his long hair by handfuls.  When he was tired of
crying and groaning and tearing his hair, he thought that he would go for
advice to old Nestor.  He threw a lion skin, the coverlet of his bed,
over his shoulder, took his spear, went out and met Menelaus--for he,
too, could not sleep--and Menelaus proposed to send a spy among the
Trojans, if any man were brave enough to go, for the Trojan camp was all
alight with fires, and the adventure was dangerous.  Therefore the two
wakened Nestor and the other chiefs, who came just as they were, wrapped
in the fur coverlets of their beds, without any armour.  First they
visited the five hundred young men set to watch the wall, and then they
crossed the ditch and sat down outside and considered what might be done.
"Will nobody go as a spy among the Trojans?" said Nestor; he meant would
none of the young men go.  Diomede said that he would take the risk if
any other man would share it with him, and, if he might choose a
companion, he would take Ulysses.

"Come, then, let us be going," said Ulysses, "for the night is late, and
the dawn is near."  As these two chiefs had no armour on, they borrowed
shields and leather caps from the young men of the guard, for leather
would not shine as bronze helmets shine in the firelight.  The cap lent
to Ulysses was strengthened outside with rows of boars' tusks.  Many of
these tusks, shaped for this purpose, have been found, with swords and
armour, in a tomb in Mycenae, the town of Agamemnon.  This cap which was
lent to Ulysses had once been stolen by his grandfather, Autolycus, who
was a Master Thief, and he gave it as a present to a friend, and so,
through several hands, it had come to young Meriones of Crete, one of the
five hundred guards, who now lent it to Ulysses.  So the two princes set
forth in the dark, so dark it was that though they heard a heron cry,
they could not see it as it flew away.

While Ulysses and Diomede stole through the night silently, like two
wolves among the bodies of dead men, the Trojan leaders met and
considered what they ought to do.  They did not know whether the Greeks
had set sentinels and outposts, as usual, to give warning if the enemy
were approaching; or whether they were too weary to keep a good watch; or
whether perhaps they were getting ready their ships to sail homewards in
the dawn.  So Hector offered a reward to any man who would creep through
the night and spy on the Greeks; he said he would give the spy the two
best horses in the Greek camp.

Now among the Trojans there was a young man named Dolon, the son of a
rich father, and he was the only boy in a family of five sisters.  He was
ugly, but a very swift runner, and he cared for horses more than for
anything else in the world.  Dolon arose and said, "If you will swear to
give me the horses and chariot of Achilles, son of Peleus, I will steal
to the hut of Agamemnon and listen and find out whether the Greeks mean
to fight or flee."  Hector swore to give these horses, which were the
best in the world, to Dolon, so he took his bow and threw a grey wolf's
hide over his shoulders, and ran towards the ships of the Greeks.

Now Ulysses saw Dolon as he came, and said to Diomede, "Let us suffer him
to pass us, and then do you keep driving him with your spear towards the
ships, and away from Troy."  So Ulysses and Diomede lay down among the
dead men who had fallen in the battle, and Dolon ran on past them towards
the Greeks.  Then they rose and chased him as two greyhounds course a
hare, and, when Dolon was near the sentinels, Diomede cried "Stand, or I
will slay you with my spear!" and he threw his spear just over Dolon's
shoulder.  So Dolon stood still, green with fear, and with his teeth
chattering.  When the two came up, he cried, and said that his father was
a rich man, who would pay much gold, and bronze, and iron for his ransom.

Ulysses said, "Take heart, and put death out of your mind, and tell us
what you are doing here."  Dolon said that Hector had promised him the
horses of Achilles if he would go and spy on the Greeks.  "You set your
hopes high," said Ulysses, "for the horses of Achilles are not earthly
steeds, but divine; a gift of the Gods, and Achilles alone can drive
them.  But, tell me, do the Trojans keep good watch, and where is Hector
with his horses?" for Ulysses thought that it would be a great adventure
to drive away the horses of Hector.

"Hector is with the chiefs, holding council at the tomb of Ilus," said
Dolon; "but no regular guard is set.  The people of Troy, indeed, are
round their watch fires, for they have to think of the safety of their
wives and children; but the allies from far lands keep no watch, for
their wives and children are safe at home."  Then he told where all the
different peoples who fought for Priam had their stations; but, said he,
"if you want to steal horses, the best are those of Rhesus, King of the
Thracians, who has only joined us to-night.  He and his men are asleep at
the furthest end of the line, and his horses are the best and greatest
that ever I saw: tall, white as snow, and swift as the wind, and his
chariot is adorned with gold and silver, and golden is his armour.  Now
take me prisoner to the ships, or bind me and leave me here while you go
and try whether I have told you truth or lies."

"No," said Diomede, "if I spare your life you may come spying again," and
he drew his sword and smote off the head of Dolon.  They hid his cap and
bow and spear where they could find them easily, and marked the spot, and
went through the night to the dark camp of King Rhesus, who had no watch-
fire and no guards.  Then Diomede silently stabbed each sleeping man to
the heart, and Ulysses seized the dead by the feet and threw them aside
lest they should frighten the horses, which had never been in battle, and
would shy if they were led over the bodies of dead men.  Last of all
Diomede killed King Rhesus, and Ulysses led forth his horses, beating
them with his bow, for he had forgotten to take the whip from the
chariot.  Then Ulysses and Diomede leaped on the backs of the horses, as
they had not time to bring away the chariot, and they galloped to the
ships, stopping to pick up the spear, and bow, and cap of Dolon.  They
rode to the princes, who welcomed them, and all laughed for glee when
they saw the white horses and heard that King Rhesus was dead, for they
guessed that all his army would now go home to Thrace.  This they must
have done, for we never hear of them in the battles that followed, so
Ulysses and Diomede deprived the Trojans of thousands of men.  The other
princes went to bed in good spirits, but Ulysses and Diomede took a swim
in the sea, and then went into hot baths, and so to breakfast, for rosy-
fingered Dawn was coming up the sky.




BATTLE AT THE SHIPS


With dawn Agamemnon awoke, and fear had gone out of his heart.  He put on
his armour, and arrayed the chiefs on foot in front of their chariots,
and behind them came the spearmen, with the bowmen and slingers on the
wings of the army.  Then a great black cloud spread over the sky, and red
was the rain that fell from it.  The Trojans gathered on a height in the
plain, and Hector, shining in armour, went here and there, in front and
rear, like a star that now gleams forth and now is hidden in a cloud.

The armies rushed on each other and hewed each other down, as reapers cut
their way through a field of tall corn.  Neither side gave ground, though
the helmets of the bravest Trojans might be seen deep in the ranks of the
Greeks; and the swords of the bravest Greeks rose and fell in the ranks
of the Trojans, and all the while the arrows showered like rain.  But at
noon-day, when the weary woodman rests from cutting trees, and takes his
dinner in the quiet hills, the Greeks of the first line made a charge,
Agamemnon running in front of them, and he speared two Trojans, and took
their breastplates, which he laid in his chariot, and then he speared one
brother of Hector and struck another down with his sword, and killed two
more who vainly asked to be made prisoners of war.  Footmen slew footmen,
and chariot men slew chariot men, and they broke into the Trojan line as
fire falls on a forest in a windy day, leaping and roaring and racing
through the trees.  Many an empty chariot did the horses hurry madly
through the field, for the charioteers were lying dead, with the greedy
vultures hovering above them, flapping their wide wings.  Still Agamemnon
followed and slew the hindmost Trojans, but the rest fled till they came
to the gates, and the oak tree that grew outside the gates, and there
they stopped.

But Hector held his hands from fighting, for in the meantime he was
making his men face the enemy and form up in line and take breath, and
was encouraging them, for they had retreated from the wall of the Greeks
across the whole plain, past the hill that was the tomb of Ilus, a king
of old, and past the place of the wild fig-tree.  Much ado had Hector to
rally the Trojans, but he knew that when men do turn again they are hard
to beat.  So it proved, for when the Trojans had rallied and formed in
line, Agamemnon slew a Thracian chief who had come to fight for Troy
before King Rhesus came.  But the eldest brother of the slain man smote
Agamemnon through the arm with his spear, and, though Agamemnon slew him
in turn, his wound bled much and he was in great pain, so he leaped into
his chariot and was driven back to the ships.

Then Hector gave the word to charge, as a huntsman cries on his hounds
against a lion, and he rushed forward at the head of the Trojan line,
slaying as he went.  Nine chiefs of the Greeks he slew, and fell upon the
spearmen and scattered them, as the spray of the waves is scattered by
the wandering wind.

Now the ranks of the Greeks were broken, and they would have been driven
among their ships and killed without mercy, had not Ulysses and Diomede
stood firm in the centre, and slain four Trojan leaders.  The Greeks
began to come back and face their enemies in line of battle again, though
Hector, who had been fighting on the Trojan right, rushed against them.
But Diomede took good aim with his spear at the helmet of Hector, and
struck it fairly.  The spear-point did not go through the helmet, but
Hector was stunned and fell; and, when he came to himself, he leaped into
his chariot, and his squire drove him against the Pylians and Cretans,
under Nestor and Idomeneus, who were on the left wing of the Greek army.
Then Diomede fought on till Paris, who stood beside the pillar on the
hillock that was the tomb of old King Ilus, sent an arrow clean through
his foot.  Ulysses went and stood in front of Diomede, who sat down, and
Ulysses drew the arrow from his foot, and Diomede stepped into his
chariot and was driven back to the ships.

Ulysses was now the only Greek chief that still fought in the centre.  The
Greeks all fled, and he was alone in the crowd of Trojans, who rushed on
him as hounds and hunters press round a wild boar that stands at bay in a
wood.  "They are cowards that flee from the fight," said Ulysses to
himself; "but I will stand here, one man against a multitude."  He
covered the front of his body with his great shield, that hung by a belt
round his neck, and he smote four Trojans and wounded a fifth.  But the
brother of the wounded man drove a spear through the shield and
breastplate of Ulysses, and tore clean through his side.  Then Ulysses
turned on this Trojan, and he fled, and Ulysses sent a spear through his
shoulder and out at his breast, and he died.  Ulysses dragged from his
own side the spear that had wounded him, and called thrice with a great
voice to the other Greeks, and Menelaus and Aias rushed to rescue him,
for many Trojans were round him, like jackals round a wounded stag that a
man has struck with an arrow.  But Aias ran and covered the wounded
Ulysses with his huge shield till he could climb into the chariot of
Menelaus, who drove him back to the ships.

Meanwhile, Hector was slaying the Greeks on the left of their battle, and
Paris struck the Greek surgeon, Machaon, with an arrow; and Idomeneus
bade Nestor put Machaon in his chariot and drive him to Nestor's hut,
where his wound might be tended.  Meanwhile, Hector sped to the centre of
the line, where Aias was slaying the Trojans; but Eurypylus, a Greek
chief, was wounded by an arrow from the bow of Paris, and his friends
guarded him with their shields and spears.

Thus the best of the Greeks were wounded and out of the battle, save
Aias, and the spearmen were in flight.  Meanwhile Achilles was standing
by the stern of his ship watching the defeat of the Greeks, but when he
saw Machaon being carried past, sorely wounded, in the chariot of Nestor,
he bade his friend Patroclus, whom he loved better than all the rest, to
go and ask how Machaon did.  He was sitting drinking wine with Nestor
when Patroclus came, and Nestor told Patroclus how many of the chiefs
were wounded, and though Patroclus was in a hurry Nestor began a very
long story about his own great deeds of war, done when he was a young
man.  At last he bade Patroclus tell Achilles that, if he would not fight
himself, he should at least send out his men under Patroclus, who should
wear the splendid armour of Achilles.  Then the Trojans would think that
Achilles himself had returned to the battle, and they would be afraid,
for none of them dared to meet Achilles hand to hand.

So Patroclus ran off to Achilles; but, on his way, he met the wounded
Eurypylus, and he took him to his hut and cut the arrow out of his thigh
with a knife, and washed the wound with warm water, and rubbed over it a
bitter root to take the pain away.  Thus he waited for some time with
Eurypylus, but the advice of Nestor was in the end to cause the death of
Patroclus.  The battle now raged more fiercely, while Agamemnon and
Diomede and Ulysses could only limp about leaning on their spears; and
again Agamemnon wished to moor the ships near shore, and embark in the
night and run away.  But Ulysses was very angry with him, and said: "You
should lead some other inglorious army, not us, who will fight on till
every soul of us perish, rather than flee like cowards!  Be silent, lest
the soldiers hear you speaking of flight, such words as no man should
utter.  I wholly scorn your counsel, for the Greeks will lose heart if,
in the midst of battle, you bid them launch the ships."

Agamemnon was ashamed, and, by Diomede's advice, the wounded kings went
down to the verge of the war to encourage the others, though they were
themselves unable to fight.  They rallied the Greeks, and Aias led them
and struck Hector full in the breast with a great rock, so that his
friends carried him out of the battle to the river side, where they
poured water over him, but he lay fainting on the ground, the black blood
gushing up from his mouth.  While Hector lay there, and all men thought
that he would die, Aias and Idomeneus were driving back the Trojans, and
it seemed that, even without Achilles and his men, the Greeks were able
to hold their own against the Trojans.  But the battle was never lost
while Hector lived.  People in those days believed in "omens:" they
thought that the appearance of birds on the right or left hand meant good
or bad luck.  Once during the battle a Trojan showed Hector an unlucky
bird, and wanted him to retreat into the town.  But Hector said, "One
omen is the best: to fight for our own country."  While Hector lay
between death and life the Greeks were winning, for the Trojans had no
other great chief to lead them.  But Hector awoke from his faint, and
leaped to his feet and ran here and there, encouraging the men of Troy.
Then the most of the Greeks fled when they saw him; but Aias and
Idomeneus, and the rest of the bravest, formed in a square between the
Trojans and the ships, and down on them came Hector and Aeneas and Paris,
throwing their spears, and slaying on every hand.  The Greeks turned and
ran, and the Trojans would have stopped to strip the armour from the
slain men, but Hector cried: "Haste to the ships and leave the spoils of
war.  I will slay any man who lags behind!"

On this, all the Trojans drove their chariots down into the ditch that
guarded the ships of the Greeks, as when a great wave sweeps at sea over
the side of a vessel; and the Greeks were on the ship decks, thrusting
with very long spears, used in sea fights, and the Trojans were boarding
the ships, and striking with swords and axes.  Hector had a lighted torch
and tried to set fire to the ship of Aias; but Aias kept him back with
the long spear, and slew a Trojan, whose lighted torch fell from his
hand.  And Aias kept shouting: "Come on, and drive away Hector; it is not
to a dance that he is calling his men, but to battle."

The dead fell in heaps, and the living ran over them to mount the heaps
of slain and climb the ships.  Hector rushed forward like a sea wave
against a great steep rock, but like the rock stood the Greeks; still the
Trojans charged past the beaks of the foremost ships, while Aias,
thrusting with a spear more than twenty feet long, leaped from deck to
deck like a man that drives four horses abreast, and leaps from the back
of one to the back of another.  Hector seized with his hand the stern of
the ship of Protesilaus, the prince whom Paris shot when he leaped ashore
on the day when the Greeks first landed; and Hector kept calling: "Bring
fire!" and even Aias, in this strange sea fight on land, left the decks
and went below, thrusting with his spear through the portholes.  Twelve
men lay dead who had brought fire against the ship which Aias guarded.




THE SLAYING AND AVENGING OF PATROCLUS


At this moment, when torches were blazing round the ships, and all seemed
lost, Patroclus came out of the hut of Eurypylus, whose wound he had been
tending, and he saw that the Greeks were in great danger, and ran weeping
to Achilles.  "Why do you weep," said Achilles, "like a little girl that
runs by her mother's side, and plucks at her gown and looks at her with
tears in her eyes, till her mother takes her up in her arms?  Is there
bad news from home that your father is dead, or mine; or are you sorry
that the Greeks are getting what they deserve for their folly?"  Then
Patroclus told Achilles how Ulysses and many other princes were wounded
and could not fight, and begged to be allowed to put on Achilles' armour
and lead his men, who were all fresh and unwearied, into the battle, for
a charge of two thousand fresh warriors might turn the fortune of the
day.

Then Achilles was sorry that he had sworn not to fight himself till
Hector brought fire to his own ships.  He would lend Patroclus his
armour, and his horses, and his men; but Patroclus must only drive the
Trojans from the ships, and not pursue them.  At this moment Aias was
weary, so many spears smote his armour, and he could hardly hold up his
great shield, and Hector cut off his spear-head with the sword; the
bronze head fell ringing on the ground, and Aias brandished only the
pointless shaft.  So he shrank back and fire blazed all over his ship;
and Achilles saw it, and smote his thigh, and bade Patroclus make haste.
Patroclus armed himself in the shining armour of Achilles, which all
Trojans feared, and leaped into the chariot where Automedon, the squire,
had harnessed Xanthus and Balius, two horses that were the children, men
said, of the West Wind, and a led horse was harnessed beside them in the
side traces.  Meanwhile the two thousand men of Achilles, who were called
Myrmidons, had met in armour, five companies of four hundred apiece,
under five chiefs of noble names.  Forth they came, as eager as a pack of
wolves that have eaten a great red deer and run to slake their thirst
with the dark water of a well in the hills.

So all in close array, helmet touching helmet and shield touching shield,
like a moving wall of shining bronze, the men of Achilles charged, and
Patroclus, in the chariot led the way.  Down they came at full speed on
the flank of the Trojans, who saw the leader, and knew the bright armour
and the horses of the terrible Achilles, and thought that he had returned
to the war.  Then each Trojan looked round to see by what way he could
escape, and when men do that in battle they soon run by the way they have
chosen.  Patroclus rushed to the ship of Protesilaus, and slew the leader
of the Trojans there, and drove them out, and quenched the fire; while
they of Troy drew back from the ships, and Aias and the other unwounded
Greek princes leaped among them, smiting with sword and spear.  Well did
Hector know that the break in the battle had come again; but even so he
stood, and did what he might, while the Trojans were driven back in
disorder across the ditch, where the poles of many chariots were broken
and the horses fled loose across the plain.

The horses of Achilles cleared the ditch, and Patroclus drove them
between the Trojans and the wall of their own town, slaying many men,
and, chief of all, Sarpedon, king of the Lycians; and round the body of
Sarpedon the Trojans rallied under Hector, and the fight swayed this way
and that, and there was such a noise of spears and swords smiting shields
and helmets as when many woodcutters fell trees in a glen of the hills.
At last the Trojans gave way, and the Greeks stripped the armour from the
body of brave Sarpedon; but men say that Sleep and Death, like two winged
angels, bore his body away to his own country.  Now Patroclus forgot how
Achilles had told him not to pursue the Trojans across the plain, but to
return when he had driven them from the ships.  On he raced, slaying as
he went, even till he reached the foot of the wall of Troy.  Thrice he
tried to climb it, but thrice he fell back.

Hector was in his chariot in the gateway, and he bade his squire lash his
horses into the war, and struck at no other man, great or small, but
drove straight against Patroclus, who stood and threw a heavy stone at
Hector; which missed him, but killed his charioteer.  Then Patroclus
leaped on the charioteer to strip his armour, but Hector stood over the
body, grasping it by the head, while Patroclus dragged at the feet, and
spears and arrows flew in clouds around the fallen man.  At last, towards
sunset, the Greeks drew him out of the war, and Patroclus thrice charged
into the thick of the Trojans.  But the helmet of Achilles was loosened
in the fight, and fell from the head of Patroclus, and he was wounded
from behind, and Hector, in front, drove his spear clean through his
body.  With his last breath Patroclus prophesied: "Death stands near
thee, Hector, at the hands of noble Achilles."  But Automedon was driving
back the swift horses, carrying to Achilles the news that his dearest
friend was slain.

After Ulysses was wounded, early in this great battle, he was not able to
fight for several days, and, as the story is about Ulysses, we must tell
quite shortly how Achilles returned to the war to take vengeance for
Patroclus, and how he slew Hector.  When Patroclus fell, Hector seized
the armour which the Gods had given to Peleus, and Peleus to his son
Achilles, while Achilles had lent it to Patroclus that he might terrify
the Trojans.  Retiring out of reach of spears, Hector took off his own
armour and put on that of Achilles, and Greeks and Trojans fought for the
dead body of Patroclus.  Then Zeus, the chief of the Gods, looked down
and said that Hector should never come home out of the battle to his
wife, Andromache.  But Hector returned into the fight around the dead
Patroclus, and here all the best men fought, and even Automedon, who had
been driving the chariot of Patroclus.  Now when the Trojans seemed to
have the better of the fight, the Greeks sent Antilochus, a son of old
Nestor, to tell Achilles that his friend was slain, and Antilochus ran,
and Aias and his brother protected the Greeks who were trying to carry
the body of Patroclus back to the ships.

Swiftly Antilochus came running to Achilles, saying: "Fallen is
Patroclus, and they are fighting round his naked body, for Hector has his
armour."  Then Achilles said never a word, but fell on the floor of his
hut, and threw black ashes on his yellow hair, till Antilochus seized his
hands, fearing that he would cut his own throat with his dagger, for very
sorrow.  His mother, Thetis, arose from the sea to comfort him, but he
said that he desired to die if he could not slay Hector, who had slain
his friend.  Then Thetis told him that he could not fight without armour,
and now he had none; but she would go to the God of armour-making and
bring from him such a shield and helmet and breastplate as had never been
seen by men.

Meanwhile the fight raged round the dead body of Patroclus, which was
defiled with blood and dust, near the ships, and was being dragged this
way and that, and torn and wounded.  Achilles could not bear this sight,
yet his mother had warned him not to enter without armour the battle
where stones and arrows and spears were flying like hail; and he was so
tall and broad that he could put on the arms of no other man.  So he went
down to the ditch as he was, unarmed, and as he stood high above it,
against the red sunset, fire seemed to flow from his golden hair like the
beacon blaze that soars into the dark sky when an island town is attacked
at night, and men light beacons that their neighbours may see them and
come to their help from other isles.  There Achilles stood in a splendour
of fire, and he shouted aloud, as clear as a clarion rings when men fall
on to attack a besieged city wall.  Thrice Achilles shouted mightily, and
thrice the horses of the Trojans shuddered for fear and turned back from
the onslaught,--and thrice the men of Troy were confounded and shaken
with terror.  Then the Greeks drew the body of Patroclus out of the dust
and the arrows, and laid him on a bier, and Achilles followed, weeping,
for he had sent his friend with chariot and horses to the war; but home
again he welcomed him never more.  Then the sun set and it was night.

Now one of the Trojans wished Hector to retire within the walls of Troy,
for certainly Achilles would to-morrow be foremost in the war.  But
Hector said, "Have ye not had your fill of being shut up behind walls?
Let Achilles fight; I will meet him in the open field."  The Trojans
cheered, and they camped in the plain, while in the hut of Achilles women
washed the dead body of Patroclus, and Achilles swore that he would slay
Hector.

In the dawn came Thetis, bearing to Achilles the new splendid armour that
the God had made for him.  Then Achilles put on that armour, and roused
his men; but Ulysses, who knew all the rules of honour, would not let him
fight till peace had been made, with a sacrifice and other ceremonies,
between him and Agamemnon, and till Agamemnon had given him all the
presents which Achilles had before refused.  Achilles did not want them;
he wanted only to fight, but Ulysses made him obey, and do what was
usual.  Then the gifts were brought, and Agamemnon stood up, and said
that he was sorry for his insolence, and the men took breakfast, but
Achilles would neither eat nor drink.  He mounted his chariot, but the
horse Xanthus bowed his head till his long mane touched the ground, and,
being a fairy horse, the child of the West Wind, he spoke (or so men
said), and these were his words: "We shall bear thee swiftly and
speedily, but thou shalt be slain in fight, and thy dying day is near at
hand."  "Well I know it," said Achilles, "but I will not cease from
fighting till I have given the Trojans their fill of war."

So all that day he chased and slew the Trojans.  He drove them into the
river, and, though the river came down in a red flood, he crossed, and
slew them on the plain.  The plain caught fire, the bushes and long dry
grass blazed round him, but he fought his way through the fire, and drove
the Trojans to their walls.  The gates were thrown open, and the Trojans
rushed through like frightened fawns, and then they climbed to the
battlements, and looked down in safety, while the whole Greek army
advanced in line under their shields.

But Hector stood still, alone, in front of the gate, and old Priam, who
saw Achilles rushing on, shining like a star in his new armour, called
with tears to Hector, "Come within the gate!  This man has slain many of
my sons, and if he slays thee whom have I to help me in my old age?"  His
mother also called to Hector, but he stood firm, waiting for Achilles.
Now the story says that he was afraid, and ran thrice in full armour
round Troy, with Achilles in pursuit.  But this cannot be true, for no
mortal men could run thrice, in heavy armour, with great shields that
clanked against their ankles, round the town of Troy: moreover Hector was
the bravest of men, and all the Trojan women were looking down at him
from the walls.

We cannot believe that he ran away, and the story goes on to tell that he
asked Achilles to make an agreement with him.  The conqueror in the fight
should give back the body of the fallen to be buried by his friends, but
should keep his armour.  But Achilles said that he could make no
agreement with Hector, and threw his spear, which flew over Hector's
shoulder.  Then Hector threw his spear, but it could not pierce the
shield which the God had made for Achilles.  Hector had no other spear,
and Achilles had one, so Hector cried, "Let me not die without honour!"
and drew his sword, and rushed at Achilles, who sprang to meet him, but
before Hector could come within a sword-stroke Achilles had sent his
spear clean through the neck of Hector.  He fell in the dust and Achilles
said, "Dogs and birds shall tear your flesh unburied."  With his dying
breath Hector prayed him to take gold from Priam, and give back his body
to be burned in Troy.  But Achilles said, "Hound! would that I could
bring myself to carve and eat thy raw flesh, but dogs shall devour it,
even if thy father offered me thy weight in gold."  With his last words
Hector prophesied and said, "Remember me in the day when Paris shall slay
thee in the Scaean gate."  Then his brave soul went to the land of the
Dead, which the Greeks called Hades.  To that land Ulysses sailed while
he was still a living man, as the story tells later.

Then Achilles did a dreadful deed; he slit the feet of dead Hector from
heel to ankle, and thrust thongs through, and bound him by the thongs to
his chariot and trailed the body in the dust.  All the women of Troy who
were on the walls raised a shriek, and Hector's wife, Andromache, heard
the sound.  She had been in an inner room of her house, weaving a purple
web, and embroidering flowers on it, and she was calling her bower
maidens to make ready a bath for Hector when he should come back tired
from battle.  But when she heard the cry from the wall she trembled, and
the shuttle with which she was weaving fell from her hands.  "Surely I
heard the cry of my husband's mother," she said, and she bade two of her
maidens come with her to see why the people lamented.

She ran swiftly, and reached the battlements, and thence she saw her dear
husband's body being whirled through the dust towards the ships, behind
the chariot of Achilles.  Then night came over her eyes and she fainted.
But when she returned to herself she cried out that now none would defend
her little boy, and other children would push him away from feasts,
saying, "Out with you; no father of thine is at our table," and his
father, Hector, would lie naked at the ships, unclad, unburned,
unlamented.  To be unburned and unburied was thought the greatest of
misfortunes, because the dead man unburned could not go into the House of
Hades, God of the Dead, but must always wander, alone and comfortless, in
the dark borderland between the dead and the living.




THE CRUELTY OF ACHILLES, AND THE RANSOMING OF HECTOR


When Achilles was asleep that night the ghost of Patroclus came, saying,
"Why dost thou not burn and bury me? for the other shadows of dead men
suffer me not to come near them, and lonely I wander along the dark
dwelling of Hades."  Then Achilles awoke, and he sent men to cut down
trees, and make a huge pile of fagots and logs.  On this they laid
Patroclus, covered with white linen, and then they slew many cattle, and
Achilles cut the throats of twelve Trojan prisoners of war, meaning to
burn them with Patroclus to do him honour.  This was a deed of shame, for
Achilles was mad with sorrow and anger for the death of his friend.  Then
they drenched with wine the great pile of wood, which was thirty yards
long and broad, and set fire to it, and the fire blazed all through the
night and died down in the morning.  They put the white bones of
Patroclus in a golden casket, and laid it in the hut of Achilles, who
said that, when he died, they must burn his body, and mix the ashes with
the ashes of his friend, and build over it a chamber of stone, and cover
the chamber with a great hill of earth, and set a pillar of stone above
it.  This is one of the hills on the plain of Troy, but the pillar has
fallen from the tomb, long ago.

Then, as the custom was, Achilles held games--chariot races, foot races,
boxing, wrestling, and archery--in honour of Patroclus.  Ulysses won the
prize for the foot race, and for the wrestling, so now his wound must
have been healed.

But Achilles still kept trailing Hector's dead body each day round the
hill that had been raised for the tomb of Patroclus, till the Gods in
heaven were angry, and bade Thetis tell her son that he must give back
the dead body to Priam, and take ransom for it, and they sent a messenger
to Priam to bid him redeem the body of his son.  It was terrible for
Priam to have to go and humble himself before Achilles, whose hands had
been red with the blood of his sons, but he did not disobey the Gods.  He
opened his chests, and took out twenty-four beautiful embroidered changes
of raiment; and he weighed out ten heavy bars, or talents, of gold, and
chose a beautiful golden cup, and he called nine of his sons, Paris, and
Helenus, and Deiphobus, and the rest, saying, "Go, ye bad sons, my shame;
would that Hector lived and all of you were dead!" for sorrow made him
angry; "go, and get ready for me a wain, and lay on it these treasures."
So they harnessed mules to the wain, and placed in it the treasures, and,
after praying, Priam drove through the night to the hut of Achilles.  In
he went, when no man looked for him, and kneeled to Achilles, and kissed
his terrible death-dealing hands.  "Have pity on me, and fear the Gods,
and give me back my dead son," he said, "and remember thine own father.
Have pity on me, who have endured to do what no man born has ever done
before, to kiss the hands that slew my sons."

Then Achilles remembered his own father, far away, who now was old and
weak: and he wept, and Priam wept with him, and then Achilles raised
Priam from his knees and spoke kindly to him, admiring how beautiful he
still was in his old age, and Priam himself wondered at the beauty of
Achilles.  And Achilles thought how Priam had long been rich and happy,
like his own father, Peleus, and now old age and weakness and sorrow were
laid upon both of them, for Achilles knew that his own day of death was
at hand, even at the doors.  So Achilles bade the women make ready the
body of Hector for burial, and they clothed him in a white mantle that
Priam had brought, and laid him in the wain; and supper was made ready,
and Priam and Achilles ate and drank together, and the women spread a bed
for Priam, who would not stay long, but stole away back to Troy while
Achilles was asleep.

All the women came out to meet him, and to lament for Hector.  They
carried the body into the house of Andromache and laid it on a bed, and
the women gathered around, and each in turn sang her song over the great
dead warrior.  His mother bewailed him, and his wife, and Helen of the
fair hands, clad in dark mourning raiment, lifted up her white arms, and
said: "Hector, of all my brethren in Troy thou wert the dearest, since
Paris brought me hither.  Would that ere that day I had died!  For this
is now the twentieth year since I came, and in all these twenty years
never heard I a word from thee that was bitter and unkind; others might
upbraid me, thy sisters or thy mother, for thy father was good to me as
if he had been my own; but then thou wouldst restrain them that spoke
evil by the courtesy of thy heart and thy gentle words.  Ah! woe for
thee, and woe for me, whom all men shudder at, for there is now none in
wide Troyland to be my friend like thee, my brother and my friend!"

So Helen lamented, but now was done all that men might do; a great pile
of wood was raised, and Hector was burned, and his ashes were placed in a
golden urn, in a dark chamber of stone, within a hollow hill.




HOW ULYSSES STOLE THE LUCK OF TROY


After Hector was buried, the siege went on slowly, as it had done during
the first nine years of the war.  The Greeks did not know at that time
how to besiege a city, as we saw, by way of digging trenches and building
towers, and battering the walls with machines that threw heavy stones.
The Trojans had lost courage, and dared not go into the open plain, and
they were waiting for the coming up of new armies of allies--the Amazons,
who were girl warriors from far away, and an Eastern people called the
Khita, whose king was Memnon, the son of the Bright Dawn.

Now everyone knew that, in the temple of the Goddess Pallas Athene, in
Troy, was a sacred image, which fell from heaven, called the Palladium,
and this very ancient image was the Luck of Troy.  While it remained safe
in the temple people believed that Troy could never be taken, but as it
was in a guarded temple in the middle of the town, and was watched by
priestesses day and night, it seemed impossible that the Greeks should
ever enter the city secretly and steal the Luck away.

As Ulysses was the grandson of Autolycus, the Master Thief, he often
wished that the old man was with the Greeks, for if there was a thing to
steal Autolycus could steal it.  But by this time Autolycus was dead, and
so Ulysses could only puzzle over the way to steal the Luck of Troy, and
wonder how his grandfather would have set about it.  He prayed for help
secretly to Hermes, the God of Thieves, when he sacrificed goats to him,
and at last he had a plan.

There was a story that Anius, the King of the Isle of Delos, had three
daughters, named OEno, Spermo, and Elais, and that OEno could turn water
into wine, while Spermo could turn stones into bread, and Elais could
change mud into olive oil.  Those fairy gifts, people said, were given to
the maidens by the Wine God, Dionysus, and by the Goddess of Corn,
Demeter.  Now corn, and wine, and oil were sorely needed by the Greeks,
who were tired of paying much gold and bronze to the Phoenician merchants
for their supplies.  Ulysses therefore went to Agamemnon one day, and
asked leave to take his ship and voyage to Delos, to bring, if he could,
the three maidens to the camp, if indeed they could do these miracles.  As
no fighting was going on, Agamemnon gave Ulysses leave to depart, so he
went on board his ship, with a crew of fifty men of Ithaca, and away they
sailed, promising to return in a month.

Two or three days after that, a dirty old beggar man began to be seen in
the Greek camp.  He had crawled in late one evening, dressed in a dirty
smock and a very dirty old cloak, full of holes, and stained with smoke.
Over everything he wore the skin of a stag, with half the hair worn off,
and he carried a staff, and a filthy tattered wallet, to put food in,
which swung from his neck by a cord.  He came crouching and smiling up to
the door of the hut of Diomede, and sat down just within the doorway,
where beggars still sit in the East.  Diomede saw him, and sent him a
loaf and two handfuls of flesh, which the beggar laid on his wallet,
between his feet, and he made his supper greedily, gnawing a bone like a
dog.

After supper Diomede asked him who he was and whence he came, and he told
a long story about how he had been a Cretan pirate, and had been taken
prisoner by the Egyptians when he was robbing there, and how he had
worked for many years in their stone quarries, where the sun had burned
him brown, and had escaped by hiding among the great stones, carried down
the Nile in a raft, for building a temple on the seashore.  The raft
arrived at night, and the beggar said that he stole out from it in the
dark and found a Phoenician ship in the harbour, and the Phoenicians took
him on board, meaning to sell him somewhere as a slave.  But a tempest
came on and wrecked the ship off the Isle of Tenedos, which is near Troy,
and the beggar alone escaped to the island on a plank of the ship.  From
Tenedos he had come to Troy in a fisher's boat, hoping to make himself
useful in the camp, and earn enough to keep body and soul together till
he could find a ship sailing to Crete.

He made his story rather amusing, describing the strange ways of the
Egyptians; how they worshipped cats and bulls, and did everything in just
the opposite of the Greek way of doing things.  So Diomede let him have a
rug and blankets to sleep on in the portico of the hut, and next day the
old wretch went begging about the camp and talking with the soldiers.  Now
he was a most impudent and annoying old vagabond, and was always in
quarrels.  If there was a disagreeable story about the father or
grandfather of any of the princes, he knew it and told it, so that he got
a blow from the baton of Agamemnon, and Aias gave him a kick, and
Idomeneus drubbed him with the butt of his spear for a tale about his
grandmother, and everybody hated him and called him a nuisance.  He was
for ever jeering at Ulysses, who was far away, and telling tales about
Autolycus, and at last he stole a gold cup, a very large cup, with two
handles, and a dove sitting on each handle, from the hut of Nestor.  The
old chief was fond of this cup, which he had brought from home, and, when
it was found in the beggar's dirty wallet, everybody cried that he must
be driven out of the camp and well whipped.  So Nestor's son, young
Thrasymedes, with other young men, laughing and shouting, pushed and
dragged the beggar close up to the Scaean gate of Troy, where Thrasymedes
called with a loud voice, "O Trojans, we are sick of this shameless
beggar.  First we shall whip him well, and if he comes back we shall put
out his eyes and cut off his hands and feet, and give him to the dogs to
eat.  He may go to you, if he likes; if not, he must wander till he dies
of hunger."

The young men of Troy heard this and laughed, and a crowd gathered on the
wall to see the beggar punished.  So Thrasymedes whipped him with his
bowstring till he was tired, and they did not leave off beating the
beggar till he ceased howling and fell, all bleeding, and lay still.  Then
Thrasymedes gave him a parting kick, and went away with his friends.  The
beggar lay quiet for some time, then he began to stir, and sat up, wiping
the tears from his eyes, and shouting curses and bad words after the
Greeks, praying that they might be speared in the back, and eaten by
dogs.

At last he tried to stand up, but fell down again, and began to crawl on
hands and knees towards the Scaean gate.  There he sat down, within the
two side walls of the gate, where he cried and lamented.  Now Helen of
the fair hands came down from the gate tower, being sorry to see any man
treated so much worse than a beast, and she spoke to the beggar and asked
him why he had been used in this cruel way?

At first he only moaned, and rubbed his sore sides, but at last he said
that he was an unhappy man, who had been shipwrecked, and was begging his
way home, and that the Greeks suspected him of being a spy sent out by
the Trojans.  But he had been in Lacedaemon, her own country, he said,
and could tell her about her father, if she were, as he supposed, the
beautiful Helen, and about her brothers, Castor and Polydeuces, and her
little daughter, Hermione.

"But perhaps," he said, "you are no mortal woman, but some goddess who
favours the Trojans, and if indeed you are a goddess then I liken you to
Aphrodite, for beauty, and stature, and shapeliness."  Then Helen wept;
for many a year had passed since she had heard any word of her father,
and daughter, and her brothers, who were dead, though she knew it not.  So
she stretched out her white hand, and raised the beggar, who was kneeling
at her feet, and bade him follow her to her own house, within the palace
garden of King Priam.

Helen walked forward, with a bower maiden at either side, and the beggar
crawling after her.  When she had entered her house, Paris was not there,
so she ordered the bath to be filled with warm water, and new clothes to
be brought, and she herself washed the old beggar and anointed him with
oil.  This appears very strange to us, for though Saint Elizabeth of
Hungary used to wash and clothe beggars, we are surprised that Helen
should do so, who was not a saint.  But long afterwards she herself told
the son of Ulysses, Telemachus, that she had washed his father when he
came into Troy disguised as a beggar who had been sorely beaten.

You must have guessed that the beggar was Ulysses, who had not gone to
Delos in his ship, but stolen back in a boat, and appeared disguised
among the Greeks.  He did all this to make sure that nobody could
recognise him, and he behaved so as to deserve a whipping that he might
not be suspected as a Greek spy by the Trojans, but rather be pitied by
them.  Certainly he deserved his name of "the much-enduring Ulysses."

Meanwhile he sat in his bath and Helen washed his feet.  But when she had
done, and had anointed his wounds with olive oil, and when she had
clothed him in a white tunic and a purple mantle, then she opened her
lips to cry out with amazement, for she knew Ulysses; but he laid his
finger on her lips, saying "Hush!"  Then she remembered how great danger
he was in, for the Trojans, if they found him, would put him to some
cruel death, and she sat down, trembling and weeping, while he watched
her.

"Oh thou strange one," she said, "how enduring is thy heart and how
cunning beyond measure!  How hast thou borne to be thus beaten and
disgraced, and to come within the walls of Troy?  Well it is for thee
that Paris, my lord, is far from home, having gone to guide Penthesilea,
the Queen of the warrior maids whom men call Amazons, who is on her way
to help the Trojans."

Then Ulysses smiled, and Helen saw that she had said a word which she
ought not to have spoken, and had revealed the secret hope of the
Trojans.  Then she wept, and said, "Oh cruel and cunning!  You have made
me betray the people with whom I live, though woe is me that ever I left
my own people, and my husband dear, and my child!  And now if you escape
alive out of Troy, you will tell the Greeks, and they will lie in ambush
by night for the Amazons on the way to Troy and will slay them all.  If
you and I were not friends long ago, I would tell the Trojans that you
are here, and they would give your body to the dogs to eat, and fix your
head on the palisade above the wall.  Woe is me that ever I was born."

Ulysses answered, "Lady, as you have said, we two are friends from of
old, and your friend I will be till the last, when the Greeks break into
Troy, and slay the men, and carry the women captives.  If I live till
that hour no man shall harm you, but safely and in honour you shall come
to your palace in Lacedaemon of the rifted hills.  Moreover, I swear to
you a great oath, by Zeus above, and by Them that under earth punish the
souls of men who swear falsely, that I shall tell no man the thing which
you have spoken."

So when he had sworn and done that oath, Helen was comforted and dried
her tears.  Then she told him how unhappy she was, and how she had lost
her last comfort when Hector died.  "Always am I wretched," she said,
"save when sweet sleep falls on me.  Now the wife of Thon, King of Egypt,
gave me this gift when we were in Egypt, on our way to Troy, namely, a
drug that brings sleep even to the most unhappy, and it is pressed from
the poppy heads of the garland of the God of Sleep."  Then she showed him
strange phials of gold, full of this drug: phials wrought by the
Egyptians, and covered with magic spells and shapes of beasts and
flowers.  "One of these I will give you," she said, "that even from Troy
town you may not go without a gift in memory of the hands of Helen."  So
Ulysses took the phial of gold, and was glad in his heart, and Helen set
before him meat and wine.  When he had eaten and drunk, and his strength
had come back to him, he said:

"Now I must dress me again in my old rags, and take my wallet, and my
staff, and go forth, and beg through Troy town.  For here I must abide
for some days as a beggar man, lest if I now escape from your house in
the night the Trojans may think that you have told me the secrets of
their counsel, which I am carrying to the Greeks, and may be angry with
you."  So he clothed himself again as a beggar, and took his staff, and
hid the phial of gold with the Egyptian drug in his rags, and in his
wallet also he put the new clothes that Helen had given him, and a sword,
and he took farewell, saying, "Be of good heart, for the end of your
sorrows is at hand.  But if you see me among the beggars in the street,
or by the well, take no heed of me, only I will salute you as a beggar
who has been kindly treated by a Queen."

So they parted, and Ulysses went out, and when it was day he was with the
beggars in the streets, but by night he commonly slept near the fire of a
smithy forge, as is the way of beggars.  So for some days he begged,
saying that he was gathering food to eat while he walked to some town far
away that was at peace, where he might find work to do.  He was not
impudent now, and did not go to rich men's houses or tell evil tales, or
laugh, but he was much in the temples, praying to the Gods, and above all
in the temple of Pallas Athene.  The Trojans thought that he was a pious
man for a beggar.

Now there was a custom in these times that men and women who were sick or
in distress, should sleep at night on the floors of the temples.  They
did this hoping that the God would send them a dream to show them how
their diseases might be cured, or how they might find what they had lost,
or might escape from their distresses.

Ulysses slept in more than one temple, and once in that of Pallas Athene,
and the priests and priestesses were kind to him, and gave him food in
the morning when the gates of the temple were opened.

In the temple of Pallas Athene, where the Luck of Troy lay always on her
altar, the custom was that priestesses kept watch, each for two hours,
all through the night, and soldiers kept guard within call.  So one night
Ulysses slept there, on the floor, with other distressed people, seeking
for dreams from the Gods.  He lay still all through the night till the
turn of the last priestess came to watch.  The priestess used to walk up
and down with bare feet among the dreaming people, having a torch in her
hand, and muttering hymns to the Goddess.  Then Ulysses, when her back
was turned, slipped the gold phial out of his rags, and let it lie on the
polished floor beside him.  When the priestess came back again, the light
from her torch fell on the glittering phial, and she stooped and picked
it up, and looked at it curiously.  There came from it a sweet fragrance,
and she opened it, and tasted the drug.  It seemed to her the sweetest
thing that ever she had tasted, and she took more and more, and then
closed the phial and laid it down, and went along murmuring her hymn.

But soon a great drowsiness came over her, and she sat down on the step
of the altar, and fell sound asleep, and the torch sunk in her hand, and
went out, and all was dark.  Then Ulysses put the phial in his wallet,
and crept very cautiously to the altar, in the dark, and stole the Luck
of Troy.  It was only a small black mass of what is now called meteoric
iron, which sometimes comes down with meteorites from the sky, but it was
shaped like a shield, and the people thought it an image of the warlike
shielded Goddess, fallen from Heaven.  Such sacred shields, made of glass
and ivory, are found deep in the earth in the ruined cities of Ulysses'
time.  Swiftly Ulysses hid the Luck in his rags and left in its place on
the altar a copy of the Luck, which he had made of blackened clay.  Then
he stole back to the place where he had lain, and remained there till
dawn appeared, and the sleepers who sought for dreams awoke, and the
temple gates were opened, and Ulysses walked out with the rest of them.

He stole down a lane, where as yet no people were stirring, and crept
along, leaning on his staff, till he came to the eastern gate, at the
back of the city, which the Greeks never attacked, for they had never
drawn their army in a circle round the town.  There Ulysses explained to
the sentinels that he had gathered food enough to last for a long journey
to some other town, and opened his bag, which seemed full of bread and
broken meat.  The soldiers said he was a lucky beggar, and let him out.
He walked slowly along the waggon road by which wood was brought into
Troy from the forests on Mount Ida, and when he found that nobody was
within sight he slipped into the forest, and stole into a dark thicket,
hiding beneath the tangled boughs.  Here he lay and slept till evening,
and then took the new clothes which Helen had given him out of his
wallet, and put them on, and threw the belt of the sword over his
shoulder, and hid the Luck of Troy in his bosom.  He washed himself clean
in a mountain brook, and now all who saw him must have known that he was
no beggar, but Ulysses of Ithaca, Laertes' son.

So he walked cautiously down the side of the brook which ran between high
banks deep in trees, and followed it till it reached the river Xanthus,
on the left of the Greek lines.  Here he found Greek sentinels set to
guard the camp, who cried aloud in joy and surprise, for his ship had not
yet returned from Delos, and they could not guess how Ulysses had come
back alone across the sea.  So two of the sentinels guarded Ulysses to
the hut of Agamemnon, where he and Achilles and all the chiefs were
sitting at a feast.  They all leaped up, but when Ulysses took the Luck
of Troy from within his mantle, they cried that this was the bravest deed
that had been done in the war, and they sacrificed ten oxen to Zeus.

"So you were the old beggar," said young Thrasymedes.

"Yes," said Ulysses, "and when next you beat a beggar, Thrasymedes, do
not strike so hard and so long."

That night all the Greeks were full of hope, for now they had the Luck of
Troy, but the Trojans were in despair, and guessed that the beggar was
the thief, and that Ulysses had been the beggar.  The priestess, Theano,
could tell them nothing; they found her, with the extinguished torch
drooping in her hand, asleep, as she sat on the step of the altar, and
she never woke again.




THE BATTLES WITH THE AMAZONS AND MEMNON--THE DEATH OF ACHILLES


Ulysses thought much and often of Helen, without whose kindness he could
not have saved the Greeks by stealing the Luck of Troy.  He saw that,
though she remained as beautiful as when the princes all sought her hand,
she was most unhappy, knowing herself to be the cause of so much misery,
and fearing what the future might bring.  Ulysses told nobody about the
secret which she had let fall, the coming of the Amazons.

The Amazons were a race of warlike maids, who lived far away on the banks
of the river Thermodon.  They had fought against Troy in former times,
and one of the great hill-graves on the plain of Troy covered the ashes
of an Amazon, swift-footed Myrine.  People believed that they were the
daughters of the God of War, and they were reckoned equal in battle to
the bravest men.  Their young Queen, Penthesilea, had two reasons for
coming to fight at Troy: one was her ambition to win renown, and the
other her sleepless sorrow for having accidentally killed her sister,
Hippolyte, when hunting.  The spear which she threw at a stag struck
Hippolyte and slew her, and Penthesilea cared no longer for her own life,
and desired to fall gloriously in battle.  So Penthesilea and her
bodyguard of twelve Amazons set forth from the wide streams of Thermodon,
and rode into Troy.  The story says that they did not drive in chariots,
like all the Greek and Trojan chiefs, but rode horses, which must have
been the manner of their country.

Penthesilea was the tallest and most beautiful of the Amazons, and shone
among her twelve maidens like the moon among the stars, or the bright
Dawn among the Hours which follow her chariot wheels.  The Trojans
rejoiced when they beheld her, for she looked both terrible and
beautiful, with a frown on her brow, and fair shining eyes, and a blush
on her cheeks.  To the Trojans she came like Iris, the Rainbow, after a
storm, and they gathered round her cheering, and throwing flowers and
kissing her stirrup, as the people of Orleans welcomed Joan of Arc when
she came to deliver them.  Even Priam was glad, as is a man long blind,
when he has been healed, and again looks upon the light of the sun.  Priam
held a great feast, and gave to Penthesilea many beautiful gifts: cups of
gold, and embroideries, and a sword with a hilt of silver, and she vowed
that she would slay Achilles.  But when Andromache, the wife of Hector,
heard her she said within herself, "Ah, unhappy girl, what is this boast
of thine!  Thou hast not the strength to fight the unconquerable son of
Peleus, for if Hector could not slay him, what chance hast thou?  But the
piled-up earth covers Hector!"

In the morning Penthesilea sprang up from sleep and put on her glorious
armour, with spear in hand, and sword at side, and bow and quiver hung
behind her back, and her great shield covering her side from neck to
stirrup, and mounted her horse, and galloped to the plain.  Beside her
charged the twelve maidens of her bodyguard, and all the company of
Hector's brothers and kinsfolk.  These headed the Trojan lines, and they
rushed towards the ships of the Greeks.

Then the Greeks asked each other, "Who is this that leads the Trojans as
Hector led them, surely some God rides in the van of the charioteers!"
Ulysses could have told them who the new leader of the Trojans was, but
it seems that he had not the heart to fight against women, for his name
is not mentioned in this day's battle.  So the two lines clashed, and the
plain of Troy ran red with blood, for Penthesilea slew Molios, and
Persinoos, and Eilissos, and Antiphates, and Lernos high of heart, and
Hippalmos of the loud warcry, and Haemonides, and strong Elasippus, while
her maidens Derinoe and Clonie slew each a chief of the Greeks.  But
Clonie fell beneath the spear of Podarkes, whose hand Penthesilea cut off
with the sword, while Idomeneus speared the Amazon Bremousa, and Meriones
of Crete slew Evadre, and Diomede killed Alcibie and Derimacheia in close
fight with the sword, so the company of the Twelve were thinned, the
bodyguard of Penthesilea.

The Trojans and Greeks kept slaying each other, but Penthesilea avenged
her maidens, driving the ranks of Greece as a lioness drives the cattle
on the hills, for they could not stand before her.  Then she shouted,
"Dogs! to-day shall you pay for the sorrows of Priam!  Where is Diomede,
where is Achilles, where is Aias, that, men say, are your bravest?  Will
none of them stand before my spear?"  Then she charged again, at the head
of the Household of Priam, brothers and kinsmen of Hector, and where they
came the Greeks fell like yellow leaves before the wind of autumn.  The
white horse that Penthesilea rode, a gift from the wife of the North
Wind, flashed like lightning through a dark cloud among the companies of
the Greeks, and the chariots that followed the charge of the Amazon
rocked as they swept over the bodies of the slain.  Then the old Trojans,
watching from the walls, cried: "This is no mortal maiden but a Goddess,
and to-day she will burn the ships of the Greeks, and they will all
perish in Troyland, and see Greece never more again."

Now it so was that Aias and Achilles had not heard the din and the cry of
war, for both had gone to weep over the great new grave of Patroclus.
Penthesilea and the Trojans had driven back the Greeks within their
ditch, and they were hiding here and there among the ships, and torches
were blazing in men's hands to burn the ships, as in the day of the
valour of Hector: when Aias heard the din of battle, and called to
Achilles to make speed towards the ships.

So they ran swiftly to their huts, and armed themselves, and Aias fell
smiting and slaying upon the Trojans, but Achilles slew five of the
bodyguard of Penthesilea.  She, beholding her maidens fallen, rode
straight against Aias and Achilles, like a dove defying two falcons, and
cast her spear, but it fell back blunted from the glorious shield that
the God had made for the son of Peleus.  Then she threw another spear at
Aias, crying, "I am the daughter of the God of War," but his armour kept
out the spear, and he and Achilles laughed aloud.  Aias paid no more heed
to the Amazon, but rushed against the Trojan men; while Achilles raised
the heavy spear that none but he could throw, and drove it down through
breastplate and breast of Penthesilea, yet still her hand grasped her
sword-hilt.  But, ere she could draw her sword, Achilles speared her
horse, and horse and rider fell, and died in their fall.

There lay fair Penthesilea in the dust, like a tall poplar tree that the
wind has overthrown, and her helmet fell, and the Greeks who gathered
round marvelled to see her lie so beautiful in death, like Artemis, the
Goddess of the Woods, when she sleeps alone, weary with hunting on the
hills.  Then the heart of Achilles was pierced with pity and sorrow,
thinking how she might have been his wife in his own country, had he
spared her, but he was never to see pleasant Phthia, his native land,
again.  So Achilles stood and wept over Penthesilea dead.

Now the Greeks, in pity and sorrow, held their hands, and did not pursue
the Trojans who had fled, nor did they strip the armour from Penthesilea
and her twelve maidens, but laid the bodies on biers, and sent them back
in peace to Priam.  Then the Trojans burned Penthesilea in the midst of
her dead maidens, on a great pile of dry wood, and placed their ashes in
a golden casket, and buried them all in the great hill-grave of Laomedon,
an ancient King of Troy, while the Greeks with lamentation buried them
whom the Amazon had slain.

The old men of Troy and the chiefs now held a council, and Priam said
that they must not yet despair, for, if they had lost many of their
bravest warriors, many of the Greeks had also fallen.  Their best plan
was to fight only with arrows from the walls and towers, till King Memnon
came to their rescue with a great army of Aethiopes.  Now Memnon was the
son of the bright Dawn, a beautiful Goddess who had loved and married a
mortal man, Tithonus.  She had asked Zeus, the chief of the Gods, to make
her lover immortal, and her prayer was granted.  Tithonus could not die,
but he began to grow grey, and then white haired, with a long white
beard, and very weak, till nothing of him seemed to be left but his
voice, always feebly chattering like the grasshoppers on a summer day.

Memnon was the most beautiful of men, except Paris and Achilles, and his
home was in a country that borders on the land of sunrising.  There he
was reared by the lily maidens called Hesperides, till he came to his
full strength, and commanded the whole army of the Aethiopes.  For their
arrival Priam wished to wait, but Polydamas advised that the Trojans
should give back Helen to the Greeks, with jewels twice as valuable as
those which she had brought from the house of Menelaus.  Then Paris was
very angry, and said that Polydamas was a coward, for it was little to
Paris that Troy should be taken and burned in a month if for a month he
could keep Helen of the fair hands.

At length Memnon came, leading a great army of men who had nothing white
about them but the teeth, so fiercely the sun burned on them in their own
country.  The Trojans had all the more hopes of Memnon because, on his
long journey from the land of sunrising, and the river Oceanus that
girdles the round world, he had been obliged to cross the country of the
Solymi.  Now the Solymi were the fiercest of men and rose up against
Memnon, but he and his army fought them for a whole day, and defeated
them, and drove them to the hills.  When Memnon came, Priam gave him a
great cup of gold, full of wine to the brim, and Memnon drank the wine at
one draught.  But he did not make great boasts of what he could do, like
poor Penthesilea, "for," said he, "whether I am a good man at arms will
be known in battle, where the strength of men is tried.  So now let us
turn to sleep, for to wake and drink wine all through the night is an ill
beginning of war."

Then Priam praised his wisdom, and all men betook them to bed, but the
bright Dawn rose unwillingly next day, to throw light on the battle where
her son was to risk his fife.  Then Memnon led out the dark clouds of his
men into the plain, and the Greeks foreboded evil when they saw so great
a new army of fresh and unwearied warriors, but Achilles, leading them in
his shining armour, gave them courage.  Memnon fell upon the left wing of
the Greeks, and on the men of Nestor, and first he slew Ereuthus, and
then attacked Nestor's young son, Antilochus, who, now that Patroclus had
fallen, was the dearest friend of Achilles.  On him Memnon leaped, like a
lion on a kid, but Antilochus lifted a huge stone from the plain, a
pillar that had been set on the tomb of some great warrior long ago, and
the stone smote full on the helmet of Memnon, who reeled beneath the
stroke.  But Memnon seized his heavy spear, and drove it through shield
and corselet of Antilochus, even into his heart, and he fell and died
beneath his father's eyes.  Then Nestor in great sorrow and anger strode
across the body of Antilochus and called to his other son, Thrasymedes,
"Come and drive afar this man that has slain thy brother, for if fear be
in thy heart thou art no son of mine, nor of the race of Periclymenus,
who stood up in battle even against the strong man Heracles!"

But Memnon was too strong for Thrasymedes, and drove him off, while old
Nestor himself charged sword in hand, though Memnon bade him begone, for
he was not minded to strike so aged a man, and Nestor drew back, for he
was weak with age.  Then Memnon and his army charged the Greeks, slaying
and stripping the dead.  But Nestor had mounted his chariot and driven to
Achilles, weeping, and imploring him to come swiftly and save the body of
Antilochus, and he sped to meet Memnon, who lifted a great stone, the
landmark of a field, and drove it against the shield of the son of
Peleus.  But Achilles was not shaken by the blow; he ran forward, and
wounded Memnon over the rim of his shield.  Yet wounded as he was Memnon
fought on and struck his spear through the arm of Achilles, for the
Greeks fought with no sleeves of bronze to protect their arms.

Then Achilles drew his great sword, and flew on Memnon, and with sword-
strokes they lashed at each other on shield and helmet, and the long
horsehair crests of the helmets were shorn off, and flew down the wind,
and their shields rang terribly beneath the sword strokes.  They thrust
at each others' throats between shield and visor of the helmet, they
smote at knee, and thrust at breast, and the armour rang about their
bodies, and the dust from beneath their feet rose up in a cloud around
them, like mist round the falls of a great river in flood.  So they
fought, neither of them yielding a step, till Achilles made so rapid a
thrust that Memnon could not parry it, and the bronze sword passed clean
through his body beneath the breast-bone, and he fell, and his armour
clashed as he fell.

Then Achilles, wounded as he was and weak from loss of blood, did not
stay to strip the golden armour of Memnon, but shouted his warcry, and
pressed on, for he hoped to enter the gate of Troy with the fleeing
Trojans, and all the Greeks followed after him.  So they pursued, slaying
as they went, and the Scaean gate was choked with the crowd of men,
pursuing and pursued.  In that hour would the Greeks have entered Troy,
and burned the city, and taken the women captive, but Paris stood on the
tower above the gate, and in his mind was anger for the death of his
brother Hector.  He tried the string of his bow, and found it frayed, for
all day he had showered his arrows on the Greeks; so he chose a new
bowstring, and fitted it, and strung the bow, and chose an arrow from his
quiver, and aimed at the ankle of Achilles, where it was bare beneath the
greave, or leg-guard of metal, that the God had fashioned for him.
Through the ankle flew the arrow, and Achilles wheeled round, weak as he
was, and stumbled, and fell, and the armour that the God had wrought was
defiled with dust and blood.

Then Achilles rose again, and cried: "What coward has smitten me with a
secret arrow from afar?  Let him stand forth and meet me with sword and
spear!"  So speaking he seized the shaft with his strong hands and tore
it out of the wound, and much blood gushed, and darkness came over his
eyes.  Yet he staggered forward, striking blindly, and smote Orythaon, a
dear friend of Hector, through the helmet, and others he smote, but now
his force failed him, and he leaned on his spear, and cried his warcry,
and said, "Cowards of Troy, ye shall not all escape my spear, dying as I
am."  But as he spoke he fell, and all his armour rang around him, yet
the Trojans stood apart and watched; and as hunters watch a dying lion
not daring to go nigh him, so the Trojans stood in fear till Achilles
drew his latest breath.  Then from the wall the Trojan women raised a
great cry of joy over him who had slain the noble Hector: and thus was
fulfilled the prophecy of Hector, that Achilles should fall in the Scaean
gateway, by the hand of Paris.

Then the best of the Trojans rushed forth from the gate to seize the body
of Achilles, and his glorious armour, but the Greeks were as eager to
carry the body to the ships that it might have due burial.  Round the
dead Achilles men fought long and sore, and both sides were mixed, Greeks
and Trojans, so that men dared not shoot arrows from the walls of Troy
lest they should kill their own friends.  Paris, and Aeneas, and Glaucus,
who had been the friend of Sarpedon, led the Trojans, and Aias and
Ulysses led the Greeks, for we are not told that Agamemnon was fighting
in this great battle of the war.  Now as angry wild bees flock round a
man who is taking their honeycombs, so the Trojans gathered round Aias,
striving to stab him, but he set his great shield in front, and smote and
slew all that came within reach of his spear.  Ulysses, too, struck down
many, and though a spear was thrown and pierced his leg near the knee he
stood firm, protecting the body of Achilles.  At last Ulysses caught the
body of Achilles by the hands, and heaved it upon his back, and so limped
towards the ships, but Aias and the men of Aias followed, turning round
if ever the Trojans ventured to come near, and charging into the midst of
them.  Thus very slowly they bore the dead Achilles across the plain,
through the bodies of the fallen and the blood, till they met Nestor in
his chariot and placed Achilles therein, and swiftly Nestor drove to the
ships.

There the women, weeping, washed Achilles' comely body, and laid him on a
bier with a great white mantle over him, and all the women lamented and
sang dirges, and the first was Briseis, who loved Achilles better than
her own country, and her father, and her brothers whom he had slain in
war.  The Greek princes, too, stood round the body, weeping and cutting
off their long locks of yellow hair, a token of grief and an offering to
the dead.

Men say that forth from the sea came Thetis of the silver feet, the
mother of Achilles, with her ladies, the deathless maidens of the waters.
They rose up from their glassy chambers below the sea, moving on, many
and beautiful, like the waves on a summer day, and their sweet song
echoed along the shores, and fear came upon the Greeks.  Then they would
have fled, but Nestor cried: "Hold, flee not, young lords of the
Achaeans!  Lo, she that comes from the sea is his mother, with the
deathless maidens of the waters, to look on the face of her dead son."
Then the sea nymphs stood around the dead Achilles and clothed him in the
garments of the Gods, fragrant raiment, and all the Nine Muses, one to
the other replying with sweet voices, began their lament.

Next the Greeks made a great pile of dry wood, and laid Achilles on it,
and set fire to it, till the flames had consumed his body except the
white ashes.  These they placed in a great golden cup and mingled with
them the ashes of Patroclus, and above all they built a tomb like a hill,
high on a headland above the sea, that men for all time may see it as
they go sailing by, and may remember Achilles.  Next they held in his
honour foot races and chariot races, and other games, and Thetis gave
splendid prizes.  Last of all, when the games were ended, Thetis placed
before the chiefs the glorious armour that the God had made for her son
on the night after the slaying of Patroclus by Hector.  "Let these arms
be the prize of the best of the Greeks," she said, "and of him that saved
the body of Achilles out of the hands of the Trojans."

Then stood up on one side Aias and on the other Ulysses, for these two
had rescued the body, and neither thought himself a worse warrior than
the other.  Both were the bravest of the brave, and if Aias was the
taller and stronger, and upheld the fight at the ships on the day of the
valour of Hector; Ulysses had alone withstood the Trojans, and refused to
retreat even when wounded, and his courage and cunning had won for the
Greeks the Luck of Troy.  Therefore old Nestor arose and said: "This is a
luckless day, when the best of the Greeks are rivals for such a prize.  He
who is not the winner will be heavy at heart, and will not stand firm by
us in battle, as of old, and hence will come great loss to the Greeks.
Who can be a just judge in this question, for some men will love Aias
better, and some will prefer Ulysses, and thus will arise disputes among
ourselves.  Lo! have we not here among us many Trojan prisoners, waiting
till their friends pay their ransom in cattle and gold and bronze and
iron?  These hate all the Greeks alike, and will favour neither Aias nor
Ulysses.  Let _them_ be the judges, and decide who is the best of the
Greeks, and the man who has done most harm to the Trojans."

Agamemnon said that Nestor had spoken wisely.  The Trojans were then made
to sit as judges in the midst of the Assembly, and Aias and Ulysses
spoke, and told the stories of their own great deeds, of which we have
heard already, but Aias spoke roughly and discourteously, calling Ulysses
a coward and a weakling.  "Perhaps the Trojans know," said Ulysses
quietly, "whether they think that I deserve what Aias has said about me,
that I am a coward; and perhaps Aias may remember that he did not find me
so weak when we wrestled for a prize at the funeral of Patroclus."

Then the Trojans all with one voice said that Ulysses was the best man
among the Greeks, and the most feared by them, both for his courage and
his skill in stratagems of war.  On this, the blood of Aias flew into his
face, and he stood silent and unmoving, and could not speak a word, till
his friends came round him and led him away to his hut, and there he sat
down and would not eat or drink, and the night fell.

Long he sat, musing in his mind, and then rose and put on all his armour,
and seized a sword that Hector had given him one day when they two fought
in a gentle passage of arms, and took courteous farewell of each other,
and Aias had given Hector a broad sword-belt, wrought with gold.  This
sword, Hector's gift, Aias took, and went towards the hut of Ulysses,
meaning to carve him limb from limb, for madness had come upon him in his
great grief.  Rushing through the night to slay Ulysses he fell upon the
flock of sheep that the Greeks kept for their meat.  And up and down
among them he went, smiting blindly till the dawn came, and, lo! his
senses returned to him, and he saw that he had not smitten Ulysses, but
stood in a pool of blood among the sheep that he had slain.  He could not
endure the disgrace of his madness, and he fixed the sword, Hector's
gift, with its hilt firmly in the ground, and went back a little way, and
ran and fell upon the sword, which pierced his heart, and so died the
great Aias, choosing death before a dishonoured life.




ULYSSES SAILS TO SEEK THE SON OF ACHILLES.--THE VALOUR OF EURYPYLUS


When the Greeks found Aias lying dead, slain by his own hand, they made
great lament, and above all the brother of Aias, and his wife Tecmessa
bewailed him, and the shores of the sea rang with their sorrow.  But of
all no man was more grieved than Ulysses, and he stood up and said:
"Would that the sons of the Trojans had never awarded to me the arms of
Achilles, for far rather would I have given them to Aias than that this
loss should have befallen the whole army of the Greeks.  Let no man blame
me, or be angry with me, for I have not sought for wealth, to enrich
myself, but for honour only, and to win a name that will be remembered
among men in times to come."  Then they made a great fire of wood, and
burned the body of Aias, lamenting him as they had sorrowed for Achilles.

Now it seemed that though the Greeks had won the Luck of Troy and had
defeated the Amazons and the army of Memnon, they were no nearer taking
Troy than ever.  They had slain Hector, indeed, and many other Trojans,
but they had lost the great Achilles, and Aias, and Patroclus, and
Antilochus, with the princes whom Penthesilea and Memnon slew, and the
bands of the dead chiefs were weary of fighting, and eager to go home.
The chiefs met in council, and Menelaus arose and said that his heart was
wasted with sorrow for the death of so many brave men who had sailed to
Troy for his sake.  "Would that death had come upon me before I gathered
this host," he said, "but come, let the rest of us launch our swift
ships, and return each to our own country."

He spoke thus to try the Greeks, and see of what courage they were, for
his desire was still to burn Troy town and to slay Paris with his own
hand.  Then up rose Diomede, and swore that never would the Greeks turn
cowards.  No! he bade them sharpen their swords, and make ready for
battle.  The prophet Calchas, too, arose and reminded the Greeks how he
had always foretold that they would take Troy in the tenth year of the
siege, and how the tenth year had come, and victory was almost in their
hands.  Next Ulysses stood up and said that, though Achilles was dead,
and there was no prince to lead his men, yet a son had been born to
Achilles, while he was in the isle of Scyros, and that son he would bring
to fill his father's place.

"Surely he will come, and for a token I will carry to him those unhappy
arms of the great Achilles.  Unworthy am I to wear them, and they bring
back to my mind our sorrow for Aias.  But his son will wear them, in the
front of the spearmen of Greece and in the thickest ranks of Troy shall
the helmet of Achilles shine, as it was wont to do, for always he fought
among the foremost."  Thus Ulysses spoke, and he and Diomede, with fifty
oarsmen, went on board a swift ship, and sitting all in order on the
benches they smote the grey sea into foam, and Ulysses held the helm and
steered them towards the isle of Scyros.

Now the Trojans had rest from war for a while, and Priam, with a heavy
heart, bade men take his chief treasure, the great golden vine, with
leaves and clusters of gold, and carry it to the mother of Eurypylus, the
king of the people who dwell where the wide marshlands of the river
Cayster clang with the cries of the cranes and herons and wild swans.  For
the mother of Eurypylus had sworn that never would she let her son go to
the war unless Priam sent her the vine of gold, a gift of the gods to an
ancient King of Troy.

With a heavy heart, then, Priam sent the golden vine, but Eurypylus was
glad when he saw it, and bade all his men arm, and harness the horses to
the chariots, and glad were the Trojans when the long line of the new
army wound along the road and into the town.  Then Paris welcomed
Eurypylus who was his nephew, son of his sister Astyoche, a daughter of
Priam; but the grandfather of Eurypylus was the famous Heracles, the
strongest man who ever lived on earth.  So Paris brought Eurypylus to his
house, where Helen sat working at her embroideries with her four bower
maidens, and Eurypylus marvelled when he saw her, she was so beautiful.
But the Khita, the people of Eurypylus, feasted in the open air among the
Trojans, by the light of great fires burning, and to the music of pipes
and flutes.  The Greeks saw the fires, and heard the merry music, and
they watched all night lest the Trojans should attack the ships before
the dawn.  But in the dawn Eurypylus rose from sleep and put on his
armour, and hung from his neck by the belt the great shield on which were
fashioned, in gold of many colours and in silver, the Twelve Adventures
of Heracles, his grandfather; strange deeds that he did, fighting with
monsters and giants and with the Hound of Hades, who guards the dwellings
of the dead.  Then Eurypylus led on his whole army, and with the brothers
of Hector he charged against the Greeks, who were led by Agamemnon.

In that battle Eurypylus first smote Nireus, who was the most beautiful
of the Greeks now that Achilles had fallen.  There lay Nireus, like an
apple tree, all covered with blossoms red and white, that the wind has
overthrown in a rich man's orchard.  Then Eurypylus would have stripped
off his armour, but Machaon rushed in, Machaon who had been wounded and
taken to the tent of Nestor, on the day of the Valour of Hector, when he
brought fire against the ships.  Machaon drove his spear through the left
shoulder of Eurypylus, but Eurypylus struck at his shoulder with his
sword, and the blood flowed; nevertheless, Machaon stooped, and grasped a
great stone, and sent it against the helmet of Eurypylus.  He was shaken,
but he did not fall, he drove his spear through breastplate and breast of
Machaon, who fell and died.  With his last breath he said, "Thou, too,
shalt fall," but Eurypylus made answer, "So let it be!  Men cannot live
for ever, and such is the fortune of war."

Thus the battle rang, and shone, and shifted, till few of the Greeks kept
steadfast, except those with Menelaus and Agamemnon, for Diomede and
Ulysses were far away upon the sea, bringing from Scyros the son of
Achilles.  But Teucer slew Polydamas, who had warned Hector to come
within the walls of Troy; and Menelaus wounded Deiphobus, the bravest of
the sons of Priam who were still in arms, for many had fallen; and
Agamemnon slew certain spearmen of the Trojans.  Round Eurypylus fought
Paris, and Aeneas, who wounded Teucer with a great stone, breaking in his
helmet, but he drove back in his chariot to the ships.  Menelaus and
Agamemnon stood alone and fought in the crowd of Trojans, like two wild
boars that a circle of hunters surrounds with spears, so fiercely they
stood at bay.  There they would both have fallen, but Idomeneus, and
Meriones of Crete, and Thrasymedes, Nestor's son, ran to their rescue,
and fiercer grew the fighting.  Eurypylus desired to slay Agamemnon and
Menelaus, and end the war, but, as the spears of the Scots encompassed
King James at Flodden Field till he ran forward, and fell within a
lance's length of the English general, so the men of Crete and Pylos
guarded the two princes with their spears.

There Paris was wounded in the thigh with a spear, and he retreated a
little way, and showered his arrows among the Greeks; and Idomeneus
lifted and hurled a great stone at Eurypylus which struck his spear out
of his hand, and he went back to find it, and Menelaus and Agamemnon had
a breathing space in the battle.  But soon Eurypylus returned, crying on
his men, and they drove back foot by foot the ring of spears round
Agamemnon, and Aeneas and Paris slew men of Crete and of Mycenae till the
Greeks were pushed to the ditch round the camp; and then great stones and
spears and arrows rained down on the Trojans and the people of Eurypylus
from the battlements and towers of the Grecian wall.  Now night fell, and
Eurypylus knew that he could not win the wall in the dark, so he withdrew
his men, and they built great fires, and camped upon the plain.

The case of the Greeks was now like that of the Trojans after the death
of Hector.  They buried Machaon and the other chiefs who had fallen, and
they remained within their ditch and their wall, for they dared not come
out into the open plain.  They knew not whether Ulysses and Diomede had
come safely to Scyros, or whether their ship had been wrecked or driven
into unknown seas.  So they sent a herald to Eurypylus, asking for a
truce, that they might gather their dead and burn them, and the Trojans
and Khita also buried their dead.

Meanwhile the swift ship of Ulysses had swept through the sea to Scyros,
and to the palace of King Lycomedes.  There they found Neoptolemus, the
son of Achilles, in the court before the doors.  He was as tall as his
father, and very like him in face and shape, and he was practising the
throwing of the spear at a mark.  Right glad were Ulysses and Diomede to
behold him, and Ulysses told Neoptolemus who they were, and why they
came, and implored him to take pity on the Greeks and help them.

"My friend is Diomede, Prince of Argos," said Ulysses, "and I am Ulysses
of Ithaca.  Come with us, and we Greeks will give you countless gifts,
and I myself will present you with the armour of your father, such as it
is not lawful for any other mortal man to wear, seeing that it is golden,
and wrought by the hands of a God.  Moreover, when we have taken Troy,
and gone home, Menelaus will give you his daughter, the beautiful
Hermione, to be your wife, with gold in great plenty."

Then Neoptolemus answered: "It is enough that the Greeks need my sword.
To-morrow we shall sail for Troy."  He led them into the palace to dine,
and there they found his mother, beautiful Deidamia, in mourning raiment,
and she wept when she heard that they had come to take her son away.  But
Neoptolemus comforted her, promising to return safely with the spoils of
Troy, "or, even if I fall," he said, "it will be after doing deeds worthy
of my father's name."  So next day they sailed, leaving Deidamia
mournful, like a swallow whose nest a serpent has found, and has killed
her young ones; even so she wailed, and went up and down in the house.
But the ship ran swiftly on her way, cleaving the dark waves till Ulysses
showed Neoptolemus the far off snowy crest of Mount Ida; and Tenedos, the
island near Troy; and they passed the plain where the tomb of Achilles
stands, but Ulysses did not tell the son that it was his father's tomb.

Now all this time the Greeks, shut up within their wall and fighting from
their towers, were looking back across the sea, eager to spy the ship of
Ulysses, like men wrecked on a desert island, who keep watch every day
for a sail afar off, hoping that the seamen will touch at their isle and
have pity upon them, and carry them home, so the Greeks kept watch for
the ship bearing Neoptolemus.

Diomede, too, had been watching the shore, and when they came in sight of
the ships of the Greeks, he saw that they were being besieged by the
Trojans, and that all the Greek army was penned up within the wall, and
was fighting from the towers.  Then he cried aloud to Ulysses and
Neoptolemus, "Make haste, friends, let us arm before we land, for some
great evil has fallen upon the Greeks.  The Trojans are attacking our
wall, and soon they will burn our ships, and for us there will be no
return."

Then all the men on the ship of Ulysses armed themselves, and
Neoptolemus, in the splendid armour of his father, was the first to leap
ashore.  The Greeks could not come from the wall to welcome him, for they
were fighting hard and hand-to-hand with Eurypylus and his men.  But they
glanced back over their shoulders and it seemed to them that they saw
Achilles himself, spear and sword in hand, rushing to help them.  They
raised a great battle-cry, and, when Neoptolemus reached the battlements,
he and Ulysses, and Diomede leaped down to the plain, the Greeks
following them, and they all charged at once on the men of Eurypylus,
with levelled spears, and drove them from the wall.

Then the Trojans trembled, for they knew the shields of Diomede and
Ulysses, and they thought that the tall chief in the armour of Achilles
was Achilles himself, come back from the land of the dead to take
vengeance for Antilochus.  The Trojans fled, and gathered round
Eurypylus, as in a thunderstorm little children, afraid of the lightning
and the noise, run and cluster round their father, and hide their faces
on his knees.

But Neoptolemus was spearing the Trojans, as a man who carries at night a
beacon of fire in his boat on the sea spears the fishes that flock
around, drawn by the blaze of the flame.  Cruelly he avenged his father's
death on many a Trojan, and the men whom Achilles had led followed
Achilles' son, slaying to right and left, and smiting the Trojans, as
they ran, between the shoulders with the spear.  Thus they fought and
followed while daylight lasted, but when night fell, they led Neoptolemus
to his father's hut, where the women washed him in the bath, and then he
was taken to feast with Agamemnon and Menelaus and the princes.  They all
welcomed him, and gave him glorious gifts, swords with silver hilts, and
cups of gold and silver, and they were glad, for they had driven the
Trojans from their wall, and hoped that to-morrow they would slay
Eurypylus, and take Troy town.

But their hope was not to be fulfilled, for though next day Eurypylus met
Neoptolemus in the battle, and was slain by him, when the Greeks chased
the Trojans into their city so great a storm of lightning and thunder and
rain fell upon them that they retreated again to their camp.  They
believed that Zeus, the chief of the Gods, was angry with them, and the
days went by, and Troy still stood unconquered.




THE SLAYING OF PARIS


When the Greeks were disheartened, as they often were, they consulted
Calchas the prophet.  He usually found that they must do something, or
send for somebody, and in doing so they diverted their minds from their
many misfortunes.  Now, as the Trojans were fighting more bravely than
before, under Deiphobus, a brother of Hector, the Greeks went to Calchas
for advice, and he told them that they must send Ulysses and Diomede to
bring Philoctetes the bowman from the isle of Lemnos.  This was an
unhappy deserted island, in which the married women, some years before,
had murdered all their husbands, out of jealousy, in a single night.  The
Greeks had landed in Lemnos, on their way to Troy, and there Philoctetes
had shot an arrow at a great water dragon which lived in a well within a
cave in the lonely hills.  But when he entered the cave the dragon bit
him, and, though he killed it at last, its poisonous teeth wounded his
foot.  The wound never healed, but dripped with venom, and Philoctetes,
in terrible pain, kept all the camp awake at night by his cries.

The Greeks were sorry for him, but he was not a pleasant companion,
shrieking as he did, and exuding poison wherever he came.  So they left
him on the lonely island, and did not know whether he was alive or dead.
Calchas ought to have told the Greeks not to desert Philoctetes at the
time, if he was so important that Troy, as the prophet now said, could
not be taken without him.  But now, as he must give some advice, Calchas
said that Philoctetes must be brought back, so Ulysses and Diomede went
to bring him.  They sailed to Lemnos, a melancholy place they found it,
with no smoke rising from the ruinous houses along the shore.  As they
were landing they learned that Philoctetes was not dead, for his dismal
old cries of pain, _ototototoi, ai, ai; pheu, pheu; ototototoi_, came
echoing from a cave on the beach.  To this cave the princes went, and
found a terrible-looking man, with long, dirty, dry hair and beard; he
was worn to a skeleton, with hollow eyes, and lay moaning in a mass of
the feathers of sea birds.  His great bow and his arrows lay ready to his
hand: with these he used to shoot the sea birds, which were all that he
had to eat, and their feathers littered all the floor of his cave, and
they were none the better for the poison that dripped from his wounded
foot.

When this horrible creature saw Ulysses and Diomede coming near, he
seized his bow and fitted a poisonous arrow to the string, for he hated
the Greeks, because they had left him in the desert isle.  But the
princes held up their hands in sign of peace, and cried out that they had
come to do him kindness, so he laid down his bow, and they came in and
sat on the rocks, and promised that his wound should be healed, for the
Greeks were very much ashamed of having deserted him.  It was difficult
to resist Ulysses when he wished to persuade any one, and at last
Philoctetes consented to sail with them to Troy.  The oarsmen carried him
down to the ship on a litter, and there his dreadful wound was washed
with warm water, and oil was poured into it, and it was bound up with
soft linen, so that his pain grew less fierce, and they gave him a good
supper and wine enough, which he had not tasted for many years.

Next morning they sailed, and had a fair west wind, so that they soon
landed among the Greeks and carried Philoctetes on shore.  Here
Podaleirius, the brother of Machaon, being a physician, did all that
could be done to heal the wound, and the pain left Philoctetes.  He was
taken to the hut of Agamemnon, who welcomed him, and said that the Greeks
repented of their cruelty.  They gave him seven female slaves to take
care of him, and twenty swift horses, and twelve great vessels of bronze,
and told him that he was always to live with the greatest chiefs and feed
at their table.  So he was bathed, and his hair was cut and combed and
anointed with oil, and soon he was eager and ready to fight, and to use
his great bow and poisoned arrows on the Trojans.  The use of poisoned
arrow-tips was thought unfair, but Philoctetes had no scruples.

Now in the next battle Paris was shooting down the Greeks with his
arrows, when Philoctetes saw him, and cried: "Dog, you are proud of your
archery and of the arrow that slew the great Achilles.  But, behold, I am
a better bowman than you, by far, and the bow in my hands was borne by
the strong man Heracles!"  So he cried and drew the bowstring to his
breast and the poisoned arrowhead to the bow, and the bowstring rang, and
the arrow flew, and did but graze the hand of Paris.  Then the bitter
pain of the poison came upon him, and the Trojans carried him into their
city, where the physicians tended him all night.  But he never slept, and
lay tossing in agony till dawn, when he said: "There is but one hope.
Take me to OEnone, the nymph of Mount Ida!"

Then his friends laid Paris on a litter, and bore him up the steep path
to Mount Ida.  Often had he climbed it swiftly, when he was young, and
went to see the nymph who loved him; but for many a day he had not trod
the path where he was now carried in great pain and fear, for the poison
turned his blood to fire.  Little hope he had, for he knew how cruelly he
had deserted OEnone, and he saw that all the birds which were disturbed
in the wood flew away to the left hand, an omen of evil.

At last the bearers reached the cave where the nymph OEnone lived, and
they smelled the sweet fragrance of the cedar fire that burned on the
floor of the cave, and they heard the nymph singing a melancholy song.
Then Paris called to her in the voice which she had once loved to hear,
and she grew very pale, and rose up, saying to herself, "The day has come
for which I have prayed.  He is sore hurt, and has come to bid me heal
his wound."  So she came and stood in the doorway of the dark cave, white
against the darkness, and the bearers laid Paris on the litter at the
feet of OEnone, and he stretched forth his hands to touch her knees, as
was the manner of suppliants.  But she drew back and gathered her robe
about her, that he might not touch it with his hands.

Then he said: "Lady, despise me not, and hate me not, for my pain is more
than I can bear.  Truly it was by no will of mine that I left you lonely
here, for the Fates that no man may escape led me to Helen.  Would that I
had died in your arms before I saw her face!  But now I beseech you in
the name of the Gods, and for the memory of our love, that you will have
pity on me and heal my hurt, and not refuse your grace and let me die
here at your feet."

Then OEnone answered scornfully: "Why have you come here to me?  Surely
for years you have not come this way, where the path was once worn with
your feet.  But long ago you left me lonely and lamenting, for the love
of Helen of the fair hands.  Surely she is much more beautiful than the
love of your youth, and far more able to help you, for men say that she
can never know old age and death.  Go home to Helen and let her take away
your pain."

Thus OEnone spoke, and went within the cave, where she threw herself down
among the ashes of the hearth and sobbed for anger and sorrow.  In a
little while she rose and went to the door of the cave, thinking that
Paris had not been borne away back to Troy, but she found him not; for
his bearers had carried him by another path, till he died beneath the
boughs of the oak trees.  Then his bearers carried him swiftly down to
Troy, where his mother bewailed him, and Helen sang over him as she had
sung over Hector, remembering many things, and fearing to think of what
her own end might be.  But the Trojans hastily built a great pile of dry
wood, and thereon laid the body of Paris and set fire to it, and the
flame went up through the darkness, for now night had fallen.

But OEnone was roaming in the dark woods, crying and calling after Paris,
like a lioness whose cubs the hunters have carried away.  The moon rose
to give her light, and the flame of the funeral fire shone against the
sky, and then OEnone knew that Paris had died--beautiful Paris--and that
the Trojans were burning his body on the plain at the foot of Mount Ida.
Then she cried that now Paris was all her own, and that Helen had no more
hold on him: "And though when he was living he left me, in death we shall
not be divided," she said, and she sped down the hill, and through the
thickets where the wood nymphs were wailing for Paris, and she reached
the plain, and, covering her head with her veil like a bride, she rushed
through the throng of Trojans.  She leaped upon the burning pile of wood,
she clasped the body of Paris in her arms, and the flame of fire consumed
the bridegroom and the bride, and their ashes mingled.  No man could
divide them any more, and the ashes were placed in a golden cup, within a
chamber of stone, and the earth was mounded above them.  On that grave
the wood nymphs planted two rose trees, and their branches met and
plaited together.

This was the end of Paris and OEnone.




HOW ULYSSES INVENTED THE DEVICE OF THE HORSE OF TREE


After Paris died, Helen was not given back to Menelaus.  We are often
told that only fear of the anger of Paris had prevented the Trojans from
surrendering Helen and making peace.  Now Paris could not terrify them,
yet for all that the men of the town would not part with Helen, whether
because she was so beautiful, or because they thought it dishonourable to
yield her to the Greeks, who might put her to a cruel death.  So Helen
was taken by Deiphobus, the brother of Paris, to live in his own house,
and Deiphobus was at this time the best warrior and the chief captain of
the men of Troy.

Meanwhile, the Greeks made an assault against the Trojan walls and fought
long and hardily; but, being safe behind the battlements, and shooting
through loopholes, the Trojans drove them back with loss of many of their
men.  It was in vain that Philoctetes shot his poisoned arrows, they fell
back from the stone walls, or stuck in the palisades of wood above the
walls, and the Greeks who tried to climb over were speared, or crushed
with heavy stones.  When night fell, they retreated to the ships and held
a council, and, as usual, they asked the advice of the prophet Calchas.
It was the business of Calchas to go about looking at birds, and taking
omens from what he saw them doing, a way of prophesying which the Romans
also used, and some savages do the same to this day.  Calchas said that
yesterday he had seen a hawk pursuing a dove, which hid herself in a hole
in a rocky cliff.  For a long while the hawk tried to find the hole, and
follow the dove into it, but he could not reach her.  So he flew away for
a short distance and hid himself; then the dove fluttered out into the
sunlight, and the hawk swooped on her and killed her.

The Greeks, said Calchas, ought to learn a lesson from the hawk, and take
Troy by cunning, as by force they could do nothing.  Then Ulysses stood
up and described a trick which it is not easy to understand.  The Greeks,
he said, ought to make an enormous hollow horse of wood, and place the
bravest men in the horse.  Then all the rest of the Greeks should embark
in their ships and sail to the Isle of Tenedos, and lie hidden behind the
island.  The Trojans would then come out of the city, like the dove out
of her hole in the rock, and would wander about the Greek camp, and
wonder why the great horse of tree had been made, and why it had been
left behind.  Lest they should set fire to the horse, when they would
soon have found out the warriors hidden in it, a cunning Greek, whom the
Trojans did not know by sight, should be left in the camp or near it.  He
would tell the Trojans that the Greeks had given up all hope and gone
home, and he was to say that they feared the Goddess Pallas was angry
with them, because they had stolen her image that fell from heaven, and
was called the Luck of Troy.  To soothe Pallas and prevent her from
sending great storms against the ships, the Trojans (so the man was to
say) had built this wooden horse as an offering to the Goddess.  The
Trojans, believing this story, would drag the horse into Troy, and, in
the night, the princes would come out, set fire to the city, and open the
gates to the army, which would return from Tenedos as soon as darkness
came on.

The prophet was much pleased with the plan of Ulysses, and, as two birds
happened to fly away on the right hand, he declared that the stratagem
would certainly be lucky.  Neoptolemus, on the other hand, voted for
taking Troy, without any trick, by sheer hard fighting.  Ulysses replied
that if Achilles could not do that, it could not be done at all, and that
Epeius, a famous carpenter, had better set about making the horse at
once.

Next day half the army, with axes in their hands, were sent to cut down
trees on Mount Ida, and thousands of planks were cut from the trees by
Epeius and his workmen, and in three days he had finished the horse.
Ulysses then asked the best of the Greeks to come forward and go inside
the machine; while one, whom the Greeks did not know by sight, should
volunteer to stay behind in the camp and deceive the Trojans.  Then a
young man called Sinon stood up and said that he would risk himself and
take the chance that the Trojans might disbelieve him, and burn him
alive.  Certainly, none of the Greeks did anything more courageous, yet
Sinon had not been considered brave.

Had he fought in the front ranks, the Trojans would have known him; but
there were many brave fighters who would not have dared to do what Sinon
undertook.

Then old Nestor was the first that volunteered to go into the horse; but
Neoptolemus said that, brave as he was, he was too old, and that he must
depart with the army to Tenedos.  Neoptolemus himself would go into the
horse, for he would rather die than turn his back on Troy.  So
Neoptolemus armed himself and climbed into the horse, as did Menelaus,
Ulysses, Diomede, Thrasymedes (Nestor's son), Idomeneus, Philoctetes,
Meriones, and all the best men except Agamemnon, while Epeius himself
entered last of all.  Agamemnon was not allowed by the other Greeks to
share their adventure, as he was to command the army when they returned
from Tenedos.  They meanwhile launched their ships and sailed away.

But first Menelaus had led Ulysses apart, and told him that if they took
Troy (and now they must either take it or die at the hands of the
Trojans), he would owe to Ulysses the glory.  When they came back to
Greece, he wished to give Ulysses one of his own cities, that they might
always be near each other.  Ulysses smiled and shook his head; he could
not leave Ithaca, his own rough island kingdom.  "But if we both live
through the night that is coming," he said, "I may ask you for one gift,
and giving it will make you none the poorer."  Then Menelaus swore by the
splendour of Zeus that Ulysses could ask him for no gift that he would
not gladly give; so they embraced, and both armed themselves and went up
into the horse.  With them were all the chiefs except Nestor, whom they
would not allow to come, and Agamemnon, who, as chief general, had to
command the army.  They swathed themselves and their arms in soft silks,
that they might not ring and clash, when the Trojans, if they were so
foolish, dragged the horse up into their town, and there they sat in the
dark waiting.  Meanwhile, the army burned their huts and launched their
ships, and with oars and sails made their way to the back of the isle of
Tenedos.




THE END OF TROY AND THE SAVING OF HELEN


From the walls the Trojans saw the black smoke go up thick into the sky,
and the whole fleet of the Greeks sailing out to sea.  Never were men so
glad, and they armed themselves for fear of an ambush, and went
cautiously, sending forth scouts in front of them, down to the seashore.
Here they found the huts burned down and the camp deserted, and some of
the scouts also caught Sinon, who had hid himself in a place where he was
likely to be found.  They rushed on him with fierce cries, and bound his
hands with a rope, and kicked and dragged him along to the place where
Priam and the princes were wondering at the great horse of tree.  Sinon
looked round upon them, while some were saying that he ought to be
tortured with fire to make him tell all the truth about the horse.  The
chiefs in the horse must have trembled for fear lest torture should wring
the truth out of Sinon, for then the Trojans would simply burn the
machine and them within it.

But Sinon said: "Miserable man that I am, whom the Greeks hate and the
Trojans are eager to slay!"  When the Trojans heard that the Greeks hated
him, they were curious, and asked who he was, and how he came to be
there.  "I will tell you all, oh King!" he answered Priam.  "I was a
friend and squire of an unhappy chief, Palamedes, whom the wicked Ulysses
hated and slew secretly one day, when he found him alone, fishing in the
sea.  I was angry, and in my folly I did not hide my anger, and my words
came to the ears of Ulysses.  From that hour he sought occasion to slay
me.  Then Calchas--" here he stopped, saying: "But why tell a long tale?
If you hate all Greeks alike, then slay me; this is what Agamemnon and
Ulysses desire; Menelaus would thank you for my head."

The Trojans were now more curious than before.  They bade him go on, and
he said that the Greeks had consulted an Oracle, which advised them to
sacrifice one of their army to appease the anger of the Gods and gain a
fair wind homewards.  "But who was to be sacrificed?  They asked Calchas,
who for fifteen days refused to speak.  At last, being bribed by Ulysses,
he pointed to me, Sinon, and said that I must be the victim.  I was bound
and kept in prison, while they built their great horse as a present for
Pallas Athene the Goddess.  They made it so large that you Trojans might
never be able to drag it into your city; while, if you destroyed it, the
Goddess might turn her anger against you.  And now they have gone home to
bring back the image that fell from heaven, which they had sent to
Greece, and to restore it to the Temple of Pallas Athene, when they have
taken your town, for the Goddess is angry with them for that theft of
Ulysses."

The Trojans were foolish enough to believe the story of Sinon, and they
pitied him and unbound his hands.  Then they tied ropes to the wooden
horse, and laid rollers in front of it, like men launching a ship, and
they all took turns to drag the horse up to the Scaean gate.  Children
and women put their hands to the ropes and hauled, and with shouts and
dances, and hymns they toiled, till about nightfall the horse stood in
the courtyard of the inmost castle.

Then all the people of Troy began to dance, and drink, and sing.  Such
sentinels as were set at the gates got as drunk as all the rest, who
danced about the city till after midnight, and then they went to their
homes and slept heavily.

Meanwhile the Greek ships were returning from behind Tenedos as fast as
the oarsmen could row them.

One Trojan did not drink or sleep; this was Deiphobus, at whose house
Helen was now living.  He bade her come with them, for he knew that she
was able to speak in the very voice of all men and women whom she had
ever seen, and he armed a few of his friends and went with them to the
citadel.  Then he stood beside the horse, holding Helen's hand, and
whispered to her that she must call each of the chiefs in the voice of
his wife.  She was obliged to obey, and she called Menelaus in her own
voice, and Diomede in the voice of his wife, and Ulysses in the very
voice of Penelope.  Then Menelaus and Diomede were eager to answer, but
Ulysses grasped their hands and whispered the word "Echo!"  Then they
remembered that this was a name of Helen, because she could speak in all
voices, and they were silent; but Anticlus was still eager to answer,
till Ulysses held his strong hand over his mouth.  There was only
silence, and Deiphobus led Helen back to his house.  When they had gone
away Epeius opened the side of the horse, and all the chiefs let
themselves down softly to the ground.  Some rushed to the gate, to open
it, and they killed the sleeping sentinels and let in the Greeks.  Others
sped with torches to burn the houses of the Trojan princes, and terrible
was the slaughter of men, unarmed and half awake, and loud were the cries
of the women.  But Ulysses had slipped away at the first, none knew
where.  Neoptolemus ran to the palace of Priam, who was sitting at the
altar in his courtyard, praying vainly to the Gods, for Neoptolemus slew
the old man cruelly, and his white hair was dabbled in his blood.  All
through the city was fighting and slaying; but Menelaus went to the house
of Deiphobus, knowing that Helen was there.

In the doorway he found Deiphobus lying dead in all his armour, a spear
standing in his breast.  There were footprints marked in blood, leading
through the portico and into the hall.  There Menelaus went, and found
Ulysses leaning, wounded, against one of the central pillars of the great
chamber, the firelight shining on his armour.

"Why hast thou slain Deiphobus and robbed me of my revenge?" said
Menelaus.  "You swore to give me a gift," said Ulysses, "and will you
keep your oath?"  "Ask what you will," said Menelaus; "it is yours and my
oath cannot be broken."  "I ask the life of Helen of the fair hands,"
said Ulysses "this is my own life-price that I pay back to her, for she
saved my life when I took the Luck of Troy, and I swore that hers should
be saved."

Then Helen stole, glimmering in white robes, from a recess in the dark
hall, and fell at the feet of Menelaus; her golden hair lay in the dust
of the hearth, and her hands moved to touch his knees.  His drawn sword
fell from the hands of Menelaus, and pity and love came into his heart,
and he raised her from the dust and her white arms were round his neck,
and they both wept.  That night Menelaus fought no more, but they tended
the wound of Ulysses, for the sword of Deiphobus had bitten through his
helmet.

When dawn came Troy lay in ashes, and the women were being driven with
spear shafts to the ships, and the men were left unburied, a prey to dogs
and all manner of birds.  Thus the grey city fell, that had lorded it for
many centuries.  All the gold and silver and rich embroideries, and ivory
and amber, the horses and chariots, were divided among the army; all but
a treasure of silver and gold, hidden in a chest within a hollow of the
wall, and this treasure was found, not very many years ago, by men
digging deep on the hill where Troy once stood.  The women, too, were
given to the princes, and Neoptolemus took Andromache to his home in
Argos, to draw water from the well and to be the slave of a master, and
Agamemnon carried beautiful Cassandra, the daughter of Priam, to his
palace in Mycenae, where they were both slain in one night.  Only Helen
was led with honour to the ship of Menelaus.

The story of all that happened to Ulysses on his way home from Troy is
told in another book, "Tales of the Greek Seas."

========================================
