========================================

THE TURMOIL

A NOVEL

By Booth Tarkington

1915.


To Laurel.



CHAPTER I

There is a midland city in the heart of fair, open country, a dirty and
wonderful city nesting dingily in the fog of its own smoke. The stranger
must feel the dirt before he feels the wonder, for the dirt will be upon
him instantly. It will be upon him and within him, since he must breathe
it, and he may care for no further proof that wealth is here better
loved than cleanliness; but whether he cares or not, the negligently
tended streets incessantly press home the point, and so do the flecked
and grimy citizens. At a breeze he must smother in the whirlpools of
dust, and if he should decline at any time to inhale the smoke he has
the meager alternative of suicide.

The smoke is like the bad breath of a giant panting for more and more
riches. He gets them and pants the fiercer, smelling and swelling
prodigiously. He has a voice, a hoarse voice, hot and rapacious trained
to one tune: "Wealth! I will get Wealth! I will make Wealth! I will sell
Wealth for more Wealth! My house shall be dirty, my garment shall be
dirty, and I will foul my neighbor so that he cannot be clean--but I
will get Wealth! There shall be no clean thing about me: my wife shall
be dirty and my child shall be dirty, but I will get Wealth!" And yet it
is not wealth that he is so greedy for: what the giant really wants is
hasty riches. To get these he squanders wealth upon the four winds, for
wealth is in the smoke.

Not so long ago as a generation, there was no panting giant here, no
heaving, grimy city; there was but a pleasant big town of neighborly
people who had understanding of one another, being, on the whole, much
of the same type. It was a leisurely and kindly place--"homelike," it
was called--and when the visitor had been taken through the State Asylum
for the Insane and made to appreciate the view of the cemetery from a
little hill, his host's duty as Baedeker was done. The good burghers
were given to jogging comfortably about in phaetons or in surreys for
a family drive on Sunday. No one was very rich; few were very poor; the
air was clean, and there was time to live.

But there was a spirit abroad in the land, and it was strong here as
elsewhere--a spirit that had moved in the depths of the American soil
and labored there, sweating, till it stirred the surface, rove the
mountains, and emerged, tangible and monstrous, the god of all good
American hearts--Bigness. And that god wrought the panting giant.

In the souls of the burghers there had always been the profound
longing for size. Year by year the longing increased until it became
an accumulated force: We must Grow! We must be Big! We must be Bigger!
Bigness means Money! And the thing began to happen; their longing became
a mighty Will. We must be Bigger! Bigger! Bigger! Get people here! Coax
them here! Bribe them! Swindle them into coming, if you must, but get
them! Shout them into coming! Deafen them into coming! Any kind of
people; all kinds of people! We must be Bigger! Blow! Boost! Brag!
Kill the fault-finder! Scream and bellow to the Most High: Bigness is
patriotism and honor! Bigness is love and life and happiness! Bigness is
Money! We want Bigness!

They got it. From all the states the people came; thinly at first, and
slowly, but faster and faster in thicker and thicker swarms as the quick
years went by. White people came, and black people and brown people
and yellow people; the negroes came from the South by the thousands and
thousands, multiplying by other thousands and thousands faster than
they could die. From the four quarters of the earth the people came,
the broken and the unbroken, the tame and the wild--Germans, Irish,
Italians, Hungarians, Scotch, Welsh, English, French, Swiss, Swedes,
Norwegians, Greeks, Poles, Russian Jews, Dalmatians, Armenians,
Rumanians, Servians, Persians, Syrians, Japanese, Chinese, Turks, and
every hybrid that these could propagate. And if there were no Eskimos
nor Patagonians, what other human strain that earth might furnish failed
to swim and bubble in this crucible?

With Bigness came the new machinery and the rush; the streets began to
roar and rattle, the houses to tremble; the pavements were worn under
the tread of hurrying multitudes. The old, leisurely, quizzical look of
the faces was lost in something harder and warier; and a cockney
type began to emerge discernibly--a cynical young mongrel barbaric
of feature, muscular and cunning; dressed in good fabrics fashioned
apparently in imitation of the sketches drawn by newspaper comedians.
The female of his kind came with him--a pale girl, shoddy and a little
rouged; and they communicated in a nasal argot, mainly insolences and
elisions. Nay, the common speech of the people showed change: in
place of the old midland vernacular, irregular but clean, and not
unwholesomely drawling, a jerky dialect of coined metaphors began to
be heard, held together by GUNNAS and GOTTAS and much fostered by the
public journals.

The city piled itself high in the center, tower on tower for a nucleus,
and spread itself out over the plain, mile after mile; and in its
vitals, like benevolent bacilli contending with malevolent in the body
of a man, missions and refuges offered what resistance they might to the
saloons and all the hells that cities house and shelter. Temptation
and ruin were ready commodities on the market for purchase by the
venturesome; highwaymen walked the streets at night and sometimes
killed; snatching thieves were busy everywhere in the dusk; while
house-breakers were a common apprehension and frequent reality. Life
itself was somewhat safer from intentional destruction than it was in
medieval Rome during a faction war--though the Roman murderer was more
like to pay for his deed--but death or mutilation beneath the wheels lay
in ambush at every crossing.

The politicians let the people make all the laws they liked; it did
not matter much, and the taxes went up, which is good for politicians.
Law-making was a pastime of the people; nothing pleased them more.
Singular fermentation of their humor, they even had laws forbidding
dangerous speed. More marvelous still, they had a law forbidding smoke!
They forbade chimneys to smoke and they forbade cigarettes to smoke.
They made laws for all things and forgot them immediately; though
sometimes they would remember after a while, and hurry to make new laws
that the old laws should be enforced--and then forget both new and old.
Wherever enforcement threatened Money or Votes--or wherever it was too
much to bother--it became a joke. Influence was the law.

So the place grew. And it grew strong.

Straightway when he came, each man fell to the same worship:

  Give me of thyself, O Bigness:
  Power to get more power!
  Riches to get more riches!
  Give me of thy sweat that I may sweat more!
  Give me Bigness to get more Bigness to myself,
  O Bigness, for Thine is the Power and the Glory! And
       there is no end but Bigness, ever and for ever!



CHAPTER II

The Sheridan Building was the biggest skyscraper; the Sheridan Trust
Company was the biggest of its kind, and Sheridan himself had been the
biggest builder and breaker and truster and buster under the smoke. He
had come from a country cross-roads, at the beginning of the growth, and
he had gone up and down in the booms and relapses of that period; but
each time he went down he rebounded a little higher, until finally,
after a year of overwork and anxiety--the latter not decreased by a
chance, remote but possible, of recuperation from the former in the
penitentiary--he found himself on top, with solid substance under
his feet; and thereafter "played it safe." But his hunger to get was
unabated, for it was in the very bones of him and grew fiercer.

He was the city incarnate. He loved it, calling it God's country, as he
called the smoke Prosperity, breathing the dingy cloud with relish. And
when soot fell upon his cuff he chuckled; he could have kissed it. "It's
good! It's good!" he said, and smacked his lips in gusto. "Good, clean
soot; it's our life-blood, God bless it!" The smoke was one of his
great enthusiasms; he laughed at a committee of plaintive housewives who
called to beg his aid against it. "Smoke's what brings your husbands'
money home on Saturday night," he told them, jovially. "Smoke may hurt
your little shrubberies in the front yard some, but it's the catarrhal
climate and the adenoids that starts your chuldern coughing. Smoke makes
the climate better. Smoke means good health: it makes the people wash
more. They have to wash so much they wash off the microbes. You go
home and ask your husbands what smoke puts in their pockets out o' the
pay-roll--and you'll come around next time to get me to turn out more
smoke instead o' chokin' it off!"

It was Narcissism in him to love the city so well; he saw his reflection
in it; and, like it, he was grimy, big, careless, rich, strong, and
unquenchably optimistic. From the deepest of his inside all the way out
he believed it was the finest city in the world. "Finest" was his word.
He thought of it as his city as he thought of his family as his family;
and just as profoundly believed his city to be the finest city in
the world, so did he believe his family to be--in spite of his son
Bibbs--the finest family in the world. As a matter of fact, he knew
nothing worth knowing about either.

Bibbs Sheridan was a musing sort of boy, poor in health, and considered
the failure--the "odd one"--of the family. Born during that most
dangerous and anxious of the early years, when the mother fretted and
the father took his chance, he was an ill-nourished baby, and
grew meagerly, only lengthwise, through a feeble childhood. At his
christening he was committed for life to "Bibbs" mainly through lack of
imagination on his mother's part, for though it was her maiden name, she
had no strong affection for it; but it was "her turn" to name the baby,
and, as she explained later, she "couldn't think of anything else she
liked AT ALL!" She offered this explanation one day when the sickly boy
was nine and after a long fit of brooding had demanded some reason for
his name's being Bibbs. He requested then with unwonted vehemence to
be allowed to exchange names with his older brother, Roscoe Conkling
Sheridan, or with the oldest, James Sheridan, Junior, and upon being
refused went down into the cellar and remained there the rest of
that day. And the cook, descending toward dusk, reported that he had
vanished; but a search revealed that he was in the coal-pile, completely
covered and still burrowing. Removed by force and carried upstairs,
he maintained a cryptic demeanor, refusing to utter a syllable of
explanation, even under the lash. This obvious thing was wholly a
mystery to both parents; the mother was nonplussed, failed to trace and
connect; and the father regarded his son as a stubborn and mysterious
fool, an impression not effaced as the years went by.

At twenty-two, Bibbs was physically no more than the outer scaffolding
of a man, waiting for the building to begin inside--a long-shanked,
long-faced, rickety youth, sallow and hollow and haggard, dark-haired
and dark-eyed, with a peculiar expression of countenance; indeed, at
first sight of Bibbs Sheridan a stranger might well be solicitous, for
he seemed upon the point of tears. But to a slightly longer gaze, not
grief, but mirth, was revealed as his emotion; while a more searching
scrutiny was proportionately more puzzling--he seemed about to burst out
crying or to burst out laughing, one or the other, inevitably, but it
was impossible to decide which. And Bibbs never, on any occasion of his
life, either laughed aloud or wept.

He was a "disappointment" to his father. At least that was the parent's
word--a confirmed and established word after his first attempt to make
a "business man" of the boy. He sent Bibbs to "begin at the bottom and
learn from the ground up" in the machine-shop of the Sheridan Automatic
Pump Works, and at the end of six months the family physician sent Bibbs
to begin at the bottom and learn from the ground up in a sanitarium.

"You needn't worry, mamma," Sheridan told his wife. "There's nothin' the
matter with Bibbs except he hates work so much it makes him sick. I put
him in the machine-shop, and I guess I know what I'm doin' about as well
as the next man. Ole Doc Gurney always was one o' them nutty alarmists.
Does he think I'd do anything 'd be bad for my own flesh and blood? He
makes me tired!"

Anything except perfectly definite health or perfectly definite disease
was incomprehensible to Sheridan. He had a genuine conviction that lack
of physical persistence in any task involving money must be due to some
subtle weakness of character itself, to some profound shiftlessness or
slyness. He understood typhoid fever, pneumonia, and appendicitis--one
had them, and either died or got over them and went back to work--but
when the word "nervous" appeared in a diagnosis he became honestly
suspicious: he had the feeling that there was something contemptible
about it, that there was a nigger in the wood-pile somewhere.

"Look at me," he said. "Look at what I did at his age! Why, when I was
twenty years old, wasn't I up every morning at four o'clock choppin'
wood--yes! and out in the dark and the snow--to build a fire in a
country grocery store? And here Bibbs has to go and have a DOCTOR
because he can't--Pho! it makes me tired! If he'd gone at it like a man
he wouldn't be sick."

He paced the bedroom--the usual setting for such parental
discussions--in his nightgown, shaking his big, grizzled head and
gesticulating to his bedded spouse. "My Lord!" he said. "If a little,
teeny bit o' work like this is too much for him, why, he ain't fit for
anything! It's nine-tenths imagination, and the rest of it--well, I
won't say it's deliberate, but I WOULD like to know just how much of
it's put on!"

"Bibbs didn't want the doctor," said Mrs. Sheridan. "It was when he was
here to dinner that night, and noticed how he couldn't eat anything.
Honey, you better come to bed."

"Eat!" he snorted. "Eat! It's work that makes men eat! And it's
imagination that keeps people from eatin'. Busy men don't get time for
that kind of imagination; and there's another thing you'll notice
about good health, if you'll take the trouble to look around you Mrs.
Sheridan: busy men haven't got time to be sick and they don't GET sick.
You just think it over and you'll find that ninety-nine per cent. of the
sick people you know are either women or loafers. Yes, ma'am!"

"Honey," she said again, drowsily, "you better come to bed."

"Look at the other boys," her husband bade her. "Look at Jim and Roscoe.
Look at how THEY work! There isn't a shiftless bone in their bodies.
Work never made Jim or Roscoe sick. Jim takes half the load off my
shoulders already. Right now there isn't a harder-workin', brighter
business man in this city than Jim. I've pushed him, but he give me
something to push AGAINST. You can't push 'nervous dyspepsia'! And look
at Roscoe; just LOOK at what that boy's done for himself, and barely
twenty-seven years old--married, got a fine wife, and ready to build
for himself with his own money, when I put up the New House for you and
Edie."

"Papa, you'll catch cold in your bare feet," she murmured. "You better
come to bed."

"And I'm just as proud of Edie, for a girl," he continued, emphatically,
"as I am of Jim and Roscoe for boys. She'll make some man a mighty good
wife when the time comes. She's the prettiest and talentedest girl in
the United States! Look at that poem she wrote when she was in school
and took the prize with; it's the best poem I ever read in my life, and
she'd never even tried to write one before. It's the finest thing I
ever read, and R. T. Bloss said so, too; and I guess he's a good enough
literary judge for me--turns out more advertisin' liter'cher than any
man in the city. I tell you she's smart! Look at the way she worked me
to get me to promise the New House--and I guess you had your finger
in that, too, mamma! This old shack's good enough for me, but you and
little Edie 'll have to have your way. I'll get behind her and push her
the same as I will Jim and Roscoe. I tell you I'm mighty proud o' them
three chuldern! But Bibbs--" He paused, shaking his head. "Honest,
mamma, when I talk to men that got ALL their boys doin' well and worth
their salt, why, I have to keep my mind on Jim and Roscoe and forget
about Bibbs."

Mrs. Sheridan tossed her head fretfully upon the pillow. "You did the
best you could, papa," she said, impatiently, "so come to bed and quit
reproachin' yourself for it."

He glared at her indignantly. "Reproachin' myself!" he snorted. "I ain't
doin' anything of the kind! What in the name o' goodness would I want
to reproach myself for? And it wasn't the 'best I could,' either. It was
the best ANYBODY could! I was givin' him a chance to show what was
in him and make a man of himself--and here he goes and gets 'nervous
dyspepsia' on me!"

He went to the old-fashioned gas-fixture, turned out the light, and
muttered his way morosely into bed.

"What?" said his wife, crossly, bothered by a subsequent mumbling.

"More like hook-worm, I said," he explained, speaking louder. "I don't
know what to do with him!"



CHAPTER III

Beginning at the beginning and learning from the ground up was a long
course for Bibbs at the sanitarium, with milk and "zwieback" as the
basis of instruction; and the months were many and tiresome before he
was considered near enough graduation to go for a walk leaning on a
nurse and a cane. These and subsequent months saw the planning, the
building, and the completion of the New House; and it was to that abode
of Bigness that Bibbs was brought when the cane, without the nurse, was
found sufficient to his support.

Edith met him at the station. "Well, well, Bibbs!" she said, as he came
slowly through the gates, the last of all the travelers from that train.
She gave his hand a brisk little shake, averting her eyes after a quick
glance at him, and turning at once toward the passage to the street. "Do
you think they ought to've let you come? You certainly don't look well!"

"But I certainly do look better," he returned, in a voice as slow as
his gait; a drawl that was a necessity, for when Bibbs tried to speak
quickly he stammered. "Up to about a month ago it took two people to see
me. They had to get me in a line between 'em!"

Edith did not turn her eyes directly toward him again, after her first
quick glance; and her expression, in spite of her, showed a faint,
troubled distaste, the look of a healthy person pressed by some
obligation of business to visit a "bad" ward in a hospital. She was
nineteen, fair and slim, with small, unequal features, but a prettiness
of color and a brilliancy of eyes that created a total impression close
upon beauty. Her movements were eager and restless: there was something
about her, as kind old ladies say, that was very sweet; and there was
something that was hurried and breathless. This was new to Bibbs; it was
a perceptible change since he had last seen her, and he bent upon her
a steady, whimsical scrutiny as they stood at the curb, waiting for an
automobile across the street to disengage itself from the traffic.

"That's the new car," she said. "Everything's new. We've got four now,
besides Jim's. Roscoe's got two."

"Edith, you look--" he began, and paused.

"Oh, WE're all well," she said, briskly; and then, as if something in
his tone had caught her as significant, "Well, HOW do I look, Bibbs?"

"You look--" He paused again, taking in the full length of her--her trim
brown shoes, her scant, tapering, rough skirt, and her coat of brown
and green, her long green tippet and her mad little rough hat in the mad
mode--all suited to the October day.

"How do I look?" she insisted.

"You look," he answered, as his examination ended upon an incrusted
watch of platinum and enamel at her wrist, "you look--expensive!" That
was a substitute for what he intended to say, for her constraint and
preoccupation, manifested particularly in her keeping her direct
glance away from him, did not seem to grant the privilege of impulsive
intimacies.

"I expect I am!" she laughed, and sidelong caught the direction of his
glance. "Of course I oughtn't to wear it in the daytime--it's an evening
thing, for the theater--but my day wrist-watch is out of gear. Bobby
Lamhorn broke it yesterday; he's a regular rowdy sometimes. Do you want
Claus to help you in?"

"Oh no," said Bibbs. "I'm alive." And after a fit of panting subsequent
to his climbing into the car unaided, he added, "Of course, I have to
TELL people!"

"We only got your telegram this morning," she said, as they began to
move rapidly through the "wholesale district" neighboring the station.
"Mother said she'd hardly expected you this month."

"They seemed to be through with me up there in the country," he
explained, gently. "At least they said they were, and they wouldn't keep
me any longer, because so many really sick people wanted to get in. They
told me to go home--and I didn't have any place else to go. It'll be all
right, Edith; I'll sit in the woodshed until after dark every day."

"Pshaw!" She laughed nervously. "Of course we're all of us glad to have
you back."

"Yes?" he said. "Father?"

"Of course! Didn't he write and tell you to come home?" She did not turn
to him with the question. All the while she rode with her face directly
forward.

"No," he said; "father hasn't written."

She flushed a little. "I expect I ought to've written sometime, or one
of the boys--"

"Oh no; that was all right."

"You can't think how busy we've all been this year, Bibbs. I often
planned to write--and then, just as I was going to, something would turn
up. And I'm sure it's been just the same way with Jim and Roscoe. Of
course we knew mamma was writing often and--"

"Of course!" he said, readily. "There's a chunk of coal fallen on your
glove, Edith. Better flick it off before it smears. My word! I'd almost
forgotten how sooty it is here."

"We've been having very bright weather this month--for us." She blew the
flake of soot into the air, seeming relieved.

He looked up at the dingy sky, wherein hung the disconsolate sun like
a cold tin pan nailed up in a smoke-house by some lunatic, for a
decoration. "Yes," said Bibbs. "It's very gay." A few moments later, as
they passed a corner, "Aren't we going home?" he asked.

"Why, yes! Did you want to go somewhere else first?"

"No. Your new driver's taking us out of the way, isn't he?"

"No. This is right. We're going straight home."

"But we've passed the corner. We always turned--"

"Good gracious!" she cried. "Didn't you know we'd moved? Didn't you know
we were in the New House?"

"Why, no!" said Bibbs. "Are you?"

"We've been there a month! Good gracious! Didn't you know--" She broke
off, flushing again, and then went on hastily: "Of course, mamma's never
been so busy in her life; we ALL haven't had time to do anything but
keep on the hop. Mamma couldn't even come to the station to-day. Papa's
got some of his business friends and people from around the
OLD-house neighborhood coming to-night for a big dinner and
'house-warming'--dreadful kind of people--but mamma's got it all on her
hands. She's never sat down a MINUTE; and if she did, papa would have
her up again before--"

"Of course," said Bibbs. "Do you like the new place, Edith?"

"I don't like some of the things father WOULD have in it, but it's the
finest house in town, and that ought to be good enough for me! Papa
bought one thing I like--a view of the Bay of Naples in oil that's
perfectly beautiful; it's the first thing you see as you come in the
front hall, and it's eleven feet long. But he would have that old
fruit picture we had in the Murphy Street house hung up in the new
dining-room. You remember it--a table and a watermelon sliced open,
and a lot of rouged-looking apples and some shiny lemons, with two dead
prairie-chickens on a chair? He bought it at a furniture-store years and
years ago, and he claims it's a finer picture than any they saw in the
museums, that time he took mamma to Europe. But it's horribly out of
date to have those things in dining-rooms, and I caught Bobby Lamhorn
giggling at it; and Sibyl made fun of it, too, with Bobby, and then told
papa she agreed with him about its being such a fine thing, and said he
did just right to insist on having it where he wanted it. She makes me
tired! Sibyl!"

Edith's first constraint with her brother, amounting almost to
awkwardness, vanished with this theme, though she still kept her full
gaze always to the front, even in the extreme ardor of her denunciation
of her sister-in-law.

"SIBYL!" she repeated, with such heat and vigor that the name seemed
to strike fire on her lips. "I'd like to know why Roscoe couldn't have
married somebody from HERE that would have done us some good! He could
have got in with Bobby Lamhorn years ago just as well as now, and
Bobby'd have introduced him to the nicest girls in town, but instead of
that he had to go and pick up this Sibyl Rink! I met some awfully
nice people from her town when mamma and I were at Atlantic City, last
spring, and not one had ever heard of the Rinks! Not even HEARD of 'em!"

"I thought you were great friends with Sibyl," Bibbs said.

"Up to the time I found her out!" the sister returned, with continuing
vehemence. "I've found out some things about Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan
lately--"

"It's only lately?"

"Well--" Edith hesitated, her lips setting primly. "Of course, I
always did see that she never cared the snap of her little finger about
ROSCOE!"

"It seems," said Bibbs, in laconic protest, "that she married him."

The sister emitted a shrill cry, to be interpreted as contemptuous
laughter, and, in her emotion, spoke too impulsively: "Why, she'd have
married YOU!"

"No, no," he said; "she couldn't be that bad!"

"I didn't mean--" she began, distressed. "I only meant--I didn't mean--"

"Never mind, Edith," he consoled her. "You see, she couldn't have
married me, because I didn't know her; and besides, if she's as
mercenary as all that she'd have been too clever. The head doctor even
had to lend me the money for my ticket home."

"I didn't mean anything unpleasant about YOU," Edith babbled. "I only
meant I thought she was the kind of girl who was so simply crazy to
marry somebody she'd have married anybody that asked her."

"Yes, yes," said Bibbs, "it's all straight." And, perceiving that
his sister's expression was that of a person whose adroitness has set
matters perfectly to rights, he chuckled silently.

"Roscoe's perfectly lovely to her," she continued, a moment later. "Too
lovely! If he'd wake up a little and lay down the law, some day, like a
MAN, I guess she'd respect him more and learn to behave herself!"

"'Behave'?"

"Oh, well, I mean she's so insincere," said Edith, characteristically
evasive when it came to stating the very point to which she had led, and
in this not unique of her sex.

Bibbs contented himself with a non-committal gesture. "Business
is crawling up the old streets," he said, his long, tremulous hand
indicating a vasty structure in course of erection. "The boarding-houses
come first and then the--"

"That isn't for shops," she informed him. "That's a new investment of
papa's--the 'Sheridan Apartments.'"

"Well, well," he murmured. "I supposed 'Sheridan' was almost well enough
known here already."

"Oh, we're well enough known ABOUT!" she said, impatiently. "I guess
there isn't a man, woman, child, or nigger baby in town that doesn't
know who we are. But we aren't in with the right people."

"No!" he exclaimed. "Who's all that?"

"Who's all what?"

"The 'right people.'"

"You know what I mean: the best people, the old families--the people
that have the real social position in this town and that know they've
got it."

Bibbs indulged in his silent chuckle again; he seemed greatly amused. "I
thought that the people who actually had the real what-you-may-call-it
didn't know it," he said. "I've always understood that it was very
unsatisfactory, because if you thought about it you didn't have it, and
if you had it you didn't know it."

"That's just bosh," she retorted. "They know it in this town, all right!
I found out a lot of things, long before we began to think of building
out in this direction. The right people in this town aren't always the
society-column ones, and they mix around with outsiders, and they don't
all belong to any one club--they're taken in all sorts into all their
clubs--but they're a clan, just the same; and they have the clan feeling
and they're just as much We, Us and Company as any crowd you read about
anywhere in the world. Most of 'em were here long before papa came, and
the grandfathers of the girls of my age knew each other, and--"

"I see," Bibbs interrupted, gravely. "Their ancestors fled together
from many a stricken field, and Crusaders' blood flows in their veins. I
always understood the first house was built by an old party of the name
of Vertrees who couldn't get along with Dan'l Boone, and hurried away to
these parts because Dan'l wanted him to give back a gun he'd lent him."

Edith gave a little ejaculation of alarm. "You mustn't repeat that
story, Bibbs, even if it's true. The Vertreeses are THE best family, and
of course the very oldest here; they were an old family even before
Mary Vertrees's great-great-grandfather came west and founded this
settlement. He came from Lynn, Massachusetts, and they have relatives
there YET--some of the best people in Lynn!"

"No!" exclaimed Bibbs, incredulously.

"And there are other old families like the Vertreeses," she went on,
not heeding him; "the Lamhorns and the Kittersbys and the J. Palmerston
Smiths--"

"Strange names to me," he interrupted. "Poor things! None of them have
my acquaintance."

"No, that's just it!" she cried. "And papa had never even heard the name
of Vertrees! Mrs. Vertrees went with some anti-smoke committee to see
him, and he told her that smoke was what made her husband bring home his
wages from the pay-roll on Saturday night! HE told us about it, and I
thought I just couldn't live through the night, I was so ashamed! Mr.
Vertrees has always lived on his income, and papa didn't know him, of
course. They're the stiffist, most elegant people in the whole town. And
to crown it all, papa went and bought the next lot to the old Vertrees
country mansion--it's in the very heart of the best new residence
district now, and that's where the New House is, right next door to
them--and I must say it makes their place look rather shabby! I met Mary
Vertrees when I joined the Mission Service Helpers, but she never did
any more than just barely bow to me, and since papa's break I doubt if
she'll do that! They haven't called."

"And you think if I spread this gossip about Vertrees the First stealing
Dan'l Boone's gun, the chances that they WILL call--"

"Papa knows what a break he made with Mrs. Vertrees. I made him
understand that," said Edith, demurely, "and he's promised to try and
meet Mr. Vertrees and be nice to him. It's just this way: if we don't
know THEM, it's practically no use in our having built the New House;
and if we DO know them and they're decent to us, we're right with the
right people. They can do the whole thing for us. Bobby Lamhorn told
Sibyl he was going to bring his mother to call on her and on mamma, but
it was weeks ago, and I notice he hasn't done it; and if Mrs. Vertrees
decides not to know us, I'm darn sure Mrs Lamhorn'll never come. That's
ONE thing Sibyl didn't manage! She SAID Bobby offered to bring his
mother--"

"You say he is a friend of Roscoe's?" Bibbs asked.

"Oh, he's a friend of the whole family," she returned, with a petulance
which she made an effort to disguise. "Roscoe and he got acquainted
somewhere, and they take him to the theater about every other night.
Sibyl has him to lunch, too, and keeps--" She broke off with an angry
little jerk of the head. "We can see the New House from the second
corner ahead. Roscoe has built straight across the street from us, you
know. Honestly, Sibyl makes me think of a snake, sometimes--the way
she pulls the wool over people's eyes! She honeys up to papa and gets
anything in the world she wants out of him, and then makes fun of him
behind his back--yes, and to his face, but HE can't see it! She got
him to give her a twelve-thousand-dollar porch for their house after it
was--"

"Good heavens!" said Bibbs, staring ahead as they reached the corner and
the car swung to the right, following a bend in the street. "Is that the
New House?"

"Yes. What do you think of it?"

"Well," he drawled, "I'm pretty sure the sanitarium's about half a size
bigger; I can't be certain till I measure."

And a moment later, as they entered the driveway, he added, seriously:
"But it's beautiful!"



CHAPTER IV

It was gray stone, with long roofs of thick green slate. An architect
who loved the milder "Gothic motives" had built what he liked: it was to
be seen at once that he had been left unhampered, and he had wrought a
picture out of his head into a noble and exultant reality. At the same
time a landscape-designer had played so good a second, with ready-made
accessories of screen, approach and vista, that already whatever look
of newness remained upon the place was to its advantage, as showing at
least one thing yet clean under the grimy sky. For, though the smoke was
thinner in this direction, and at this long distance from the heart
of the town, it was not absent, and under tutelage of wind and weather
could be malignant even here, where cows had wandered in the meadows and
corn had been growing not ten years gone.

Altogether, the New House was a success. It was one of those architects'
successes which leave the owners veiled in privacy; it revealed nothing
of the people who lived in it save that they were rich. There are houses
that cannot be detached from their own people without protesting: every
inch of mortar seems to mourn the separation, and such a house--no
matter what be done to it--is ever murmurous with regret, whispering the
old name sadly to itself unceasingly. But the New House was of a kind
to change hands without emotion. In our swelling cities, great places
of its type are useful as financial gauges of the business tides;
rich families, one after another, take title and occupy such houses as
fortunes rise and fall--they mark the high tide. It was impossible to
imagine a child's toy wagon left upon a walk or driveway of the New
House, and yet it was--as Bibbs rightly called it--"beautiful."

What the architect thought of the "Golfo di Napoli," which hung in its
vast gold revel of rococo frame against the gray wood of the hall, is to
be conjectured--perhaps he had not seen it.

"Edith, did you say only eleven feet?" Bibbs panted, staring at it, as
the white-jacketed twin of a Pullman porter helped him to get out of his
overcoat.

"Eleven without the frame," she explained. "It's splendid, don't you
think? It lightens things up so. The hall was kind of gloomy before."

"No gloom now!" said Bibbs.

"This statue in the corner is pretty, too," she remarked. "Mamma and I
bought that." And Bibbs turned at her direction to behold, amid a
grove of tubbed palms, a "life-size," black-bearded Moor, of a plastic
composition painted with unappeasable gloss and brilliancy. Upon his
chocolate head he wore a gold turban; in his hand he held a gold-tipped
spear; and for the rest, he was red and yellow and black and silver.

"Hallelujah!" was the sole comment of the returned wanderer, and Edith,
saying she would "find mamma," left him blinking at the Moor. Presently,
after she had disappeared, he turned to the colored man who stood
waiting, Bibbs's traveling-bag in his hand. "What do YOU think of it?"
Bibbs asked, solemnly.

"Gran'!" replied the servitor. "She mighty hard to dus'. Dus' git in all
'em wrinkles. Yessuh, she mighty hard to dus'."

"I expect she must be," said Bibbs, his glance returning reflectively
to the black bull beard for a moment. "Is there a place anywhere I could
lie down?"

"Yessuh. We got one nem spare rooms all fix up fo' you, suh. Right up
staihs, suh. Nice room."

He led the way, and Bibbs followed slowly, stopping at intervals to
rest, and noting a heavy increase in the staff of service since the
exodus from the "old" house. Maids and scrubwomen were at work under the
patently nominal direction of another Pullman porter, who was profoundly
enjoying his own affectation of being harassed with care.

"Ev'ything got look spick an' span fo' the big doin's to-night," Bibbs's
guide explained, chuckling. "Yessuh, we got big doin's to-night! Big
doin's!"

The room to which he conducted his lagging charge was furnished in
every particular like a room in a new hotel; and Bibbs found it
pleasant--though, indeed, any room with a good bed would have
seemed pleasant to him after his journey. He stretched himself flat
immediately, and having replied "Not now" to the attendant's offer to
unpack the bag, closed his eyes wearily.

White-jacket, racially sympathetic, lowered the window-shades and made
an exit on tiptoe, encountering the other white-jacket--the harassed
overseer--in the hall without. Said the emerging one: "He mighty shaky,
Mist' Jackson. Drop right down an' shet his eyes. Eyelids all black.
Rich folks gotta go same as anybody else. Anybody ast me if I change
'ith 'at ole boy--No, suh! Le'm keep 'is money; I keep my black skin an'
keep out the ground!"

Mr. Jackson expressed the same preference. "Yessuh, he look tuh me like
somebody awready laid out," he concluded. And upon the stairway landing,
near by, two old women, on all-fours at their work, were likewise
pessimistic.

"Hech!" said one, lamenting in a whisper. "It give me a turn to see him
go by--white as wax an' bony as a dead fish! Mrs. Cronin, tell me: d'it
make ye kind o' sick to look at um?"

"Sick? No more than the face of a blessed angel already in heaven!"

"Well," said the other, "I'd a b'y o' me own come home t' die once--"
She fell silent at a rustling of skirts in the corridor above them.

It was Mrs. Sheridan hurrying to greet her son.

She was one of those fat, pink people who fade and contract with age
like drying fruit; and her outside was a true portrait of her. Her
husband and her daughter had long ago absorbed her. What intelligence
she had was given almost wholly to comprehending and serving those
two, and except in the presence of one of them she was nearly always
absent-minded. Edith lived all day with her mother, as daughters do; and
Sheridan so held his wife to her unity with him that she had long ago
become unconscious of her existence as a thing separate from his. She
invariably perceived his moods, and nursed him through them when she
did not share them; and she gave him a profound sympathy with the inmost
spirit and purpose of his being, even though she did not comprehend it
and partook of it only as a spectator. They had known but one actual
altercation in their lives, and that was thirty years past, in the early
days of Sheridan's struggle, when, in order to enhance the favorable
impression he believed himself to be making upon some capitalists, he
had thought it necessary to accompany them to a performance of "The
Black Crook." But she had not once referred to this during the last ten
years.

Mrs. Sheridan's manner was hurried and inconsequent; her clothes rustled
more than other women's clothes; she seemed to wear too many at a time
and to be vaguely troubled by them, and she was patting a skirt down
over some unruly internal dissension at the moment she opened Bibbs's
door.

At sight of the recumbent figure she began to close the door softly,
withdrawing, but the young man had heard the turning of the knob and the
rustling of skirts, and he opened his eyes.

"Don't go, mother," he said. "I'm not asleep." He swung his long legs
over the side of the bed to rise, but she set a hand on his shoulder,
restraining him; and he lay flat again.

"No," she said, bending over to kiss his cheek, "I just come for a
minute, but I want to see how you seem. Edith said--"

"Poor Edith!" he murmured. "She couldn't look at me. She--"

"Nonsense!" Mrs. Sheridan, having let in the light at a window, came
back to the bedside. "You look a great deal better than what you did
before you went to the sanitarium, anyway. It's done you good; a body
can see that right away. You need fatting up, of course, and you haven't
got much color--"

"No," he said, "I haven't much color."

"But you will have when you get your strength back."

"Oh yes!" he responded, cheerfully. "THEN I will."

"You look a great deal better than what I expected."

"Edith must have a great vocabulary!" he chuckled.

"She's too sensitive," said Mrs. Sheridan, "and it makes her exaggerate
a little. What about your diet?"

"That's all right. They told me to eat anything."

"Anything at all?"

"Well--anything I could."

"That's good," she said, nodding. "They mean for you just to build up
your strength. That's what they told me the last time I went to see you
at the sanitarium. You look better than what you did then, and that's
only a little time ago. How long was it?"

"Eight months, I think."

"No, it couldn't be. I know it ain't THAT long, but maybe it was
longer'n I thought. And this last month or so I haven't had scarcely
even time to write more than just a line to ask how you were gettin'
along, but I told Edith to write, the weeks I couldn't, and I asked
Jim to, too, and they both said they would, so I suppose you've kept up
pretty well on the home news."

"Oh yes."

"What I think you need," said the mother, gravely, "is to liven up a
little and take an interest in things. That's what papa was sayin' this
morning, after we got your telegram; and that's what'll stimilate your
appetite, too. He was talkin' over his plans for you--"

"Plans?" Bibbs, turning on his side, shielded his eyes from the light
with his hand, so that he might see her better. "What--" He paused.
"What plans is he making for me, mother?"

She turned away, going back to the window to draw down the shade.
"Well, you better talk it over with HIM," she said, with perceptible
nervousness. "He better tell you himself. I don't feel as if I had any
call, exactly, to go into it; and you better get to sleep now, anyway."
She came and stood by the bedside once more. "But you must remember,
Bibbs, whatever papa does is for the best. He loves his chuldern and
wants to do what's right by ALL of 'em--and you'll always find he's
right in the end."

He made a little gesture of assent, which seemed to content her; and
she rustled to the door, turning to speak again after she had opened it.
"You get a good nap, now, so as to be all rested up for to-night."

"You--you mean--he--" Bibbs stammered, having begun to speak too
quickly. Checking himself, he drew a long breath, then asked, quietly,
"Does father expect me to come down-stairs this evening?"

"Well, I think he does," she answered. "You see, it's the
'house-warming,' as he calls it, and he said he thinks all our chuldern
ought to be around us, as well as the old friends and other folks. It's
just what he thinks you need--to take an interest and liven up. You
don't feel too bad to come down, do you?"

"Mother?"

"Well?"

"Take a good look at me," he said.

"Oh, see here!" she cried, with brusque cheerfulness. "You're not so bad
off as you think you are, Bibbs. You're on the mend; and it won't do you
any harm to please your--"

"It isn't that," he interrupted. "Honestly, I'm only afraid it might
spoil somebody's appetite. Edith--"

"I told you the child was too sensitive," she interrupted, in turn.
"You're a plenty good-lookin' enough young man for anybody! You look
like you been through a long spell and begun to get well, and that's all
there is to it."

"All right. I'll come to the party. If the rest of you can stand it, I
can!"

"It 'll do you good," she returned, rustling into the hall. "Now take
a nap, and I'll send one o' the help to wake you in time for you to get
dressed up before dinner. You go to sleep right away, now, Bibbs!"

Bibbs was unable to obey, though he kept his eyes closed. Something
she had said kept running in his mind, repeating itself over and over
interminably. "His plans for you--his plans for you--his plans for
you--his plans for you--" And then, taking the place of "his plans for
you," after what seemed a long, long while, her flurried voice came
back to him insistently, seeming to whisper in his ear: "He loves his
chuldern--he loves his chuldern--he loves his chuldern"--"you'll find
he's always right--you'll find he's always right--" Until at last, as he
drifted into the state of half-dreams and distorted realities, the voice
seemed to murmur from beyond a great black wing that came out of the
wall and stretched over his bed--it was a black wing within the room,
and at the same time it was a black cloud crossing the sky, bridging the
whole earth from pole to pole. It was a cloud of black smoke, and out
of the heart of it came a flurried voice whispering over and over, "His
plans for you--his plans for you--his plans for you--" And then there
was nothing.

He woke refreshed, stretched himself gingerly--as one might have a care
against too quick or too long a pull upon a frayed elastic--and, getting
to his feet, went blinking to the window and touched the shade so that
it flew up, letting in a pale sunset.

He looked out into the lemon-colored light and smiled wanly at the
next house, as Edith's grandiose phrase came to mind, "the old Vertrees
country mansion." It stood in a broad lawn which was separated from the
Sheridans' by a young hedge; and it was a big, square, plain old box
of a house with a giant salt-cellar atop for a cupola. Paint had been
spared for a long time, and no one could have put a name to the color of
it, but in spite of that the place had no look of being out at heel, and
the sward was as neatly trimmed as the Sheridans' own.

The separating hedge ran almost beneath Bibbs's window--for this wing of
the New House extended here almost to the edge of the lot--and, directly
opposite the window, the Vertreeses' lawn had been graded so as to make
a little knoll upon which stood a small rustic "summer-house." It was
almost on a level with Bibbs's window and not thirty feet away; and
it was easy for him to imagine the present dynasty of Vertreeses
in grievous outcry when they had found this retreat ruined by the
juxtaposition of the parvenu intruder. Probably the "summer-house" was
pleasant and pretty in summer. It had the look of a place wherein little
girls had played for a generation or so with dolls and "housekeeping,"
or where a lovely old lady might come to read something dull on warm
afternoons; but now in the thin light it was desolate, the color of
dust, and hung with haggard vines which had lost their leaves.

Bibbs looked at it with grave sympathy, probably feeling some kinship
with anything so dismantled; then he turned to a cheval-glass beside the
window and paid himself the dubious tribute of a thorough inspection. He
looked the mirror up and down, slowly, repeatedly, but came in the end
to a long and earnest scrutiny of the face. Throughout this cryptic
seance his manner was profoundly impersonal; he had the air of an
entomologist intent upon classifying a specimen, but finally he appeared
to become pessimistic. He shook his head solemnly; then gazed again
and shook his head again, and continued to shake it slowly, in complete
disapproval.

"You certainly are one horrible sight!" he said, aloud.

And at that he was instantly aware of an observer. Turning quickly,
he was vouchsafed the picture of a charming lady, framed in a
rustic aperture of the "summer-house" and staring full into his
window--straight into his eyes, too, for the infinitesimal fraction of
a second before the flashingly censorious withdrawal of her own.
Composedly, she pulled several dead twigs from a vine, the manner of her
action conveying a message or proclamation to the effect that she was in
the summer-house for the sole purpose of such-like pruning and tending,
and that no gentleman could suppose her presence there to be due to any
other purpose whatsoever, or that, being there on that account, she
had allowed her attention to wander for one instant in the direction of
things of which she was in reality unconscious.

Having pulled enough twigs to emphasize her unconsciousness--and at the
same time her disapproval--of everything in the nature of a Sheridan
or belonging to a Sheridan, she descended the knoll with maintained
composure, and sauntered toward a side-door of the country mansion of
the Vertreeses. An elderly lady, bonneted and cloaked, opened the door
and came to meet her.

"Are you ready, Mary? I've been looking for you. What were you doing?"

"Nothing. Just looking into one of Sheridans' windows," said Mary
Vertrees. "I got caught at it."

"Mary!" cried her mother. "Just as we were going to call! Good heavens!"

"We'll go, just the same," the daughter returned. "I suppose those women
would be glad to have us if we'd burned their house to the ground."

"But WHO saw you?" insisted Mrs. Vertrees.

"One of the sons, I suppose he was. I believe he's insane, or something.
At least I hear they keep him in a sanitarium somewhere, and never talk
about him. He was staring at himself in a mirror and talking to himself.
Then he looked out and caught me."

"What did he--"

"Nothing, of course."

"How did he look?"

"Like a ghost in a blue suit," said Miss Vertrees, moving toward the
street and waving a white-gloved hand in farewell to her father, who
was observing them from the window of his library. "Rather tragic and
altogether impossible. Do come on, mother, and let's get it over!"

And Mrs. Vertrees, with many misgivings, set forth with her daughter for
their gracious assault upon the New House next door.



CHAPTER V

Mr. Vertrees, having watched their departure with the air of a man who
had something at hazard upon the expedition, turned from the window and
began to pace the library thoughtfully, pending their return. He was
about sixty; a small man, withered and dry and fine, a trim little
sketch of an elderly dandy. His lambrequin mustache--relic of a
forgotten Anglomania--had been profoundly black, but now, like his
smooth hair, it was approaching an equally sheer whiteness; and though
his clothes were old, they had shapeliness and a flavor of mode. And for
greater spruceness there were some jaunty touches; gray spats, a narrow
black ribbon across the gray waistcoat to the eye-glasses in a pocket,
a fleck of color from a button in the lapel of the black coat, labeling
him the descendant of patriot warriors.

The room was not like him, being cheerful and hideous, whereas Mr.
Vertrees was anxious and decorative. Under a mantel of imitation black
marble a merry little coal-fire beamed forth upon high and narrow
"Eastlake" bookcases with long glass doors, and upon comfortable,
incongruous furniture, and upon meaningless "woodwork" everywhere,
and upon half a dozen Landseer engravings which Mr. and Mrs. Vertrees
sometimes mentioned to each other, after thirty years of possession, as
"very fine things." They had been the first people in town to possess
Landseer engravings, and there, in art, they had rested, but they still
had a feeling that in all such matters they were in the van; and when
Mr. Vertrees discovered Landseers upon the walls of other people's
houses he thawed, as a chieftain to a trusted follower; and if he
found an edition of Bulwer Lytton accompanying the Landseers as a final
corroboration of culture, he would say, inevitably, "Those people know
good pictures and they know good books."

The growth of the city, which might easily have made him a millionaire,
had ruined him because he had failed to understand it. When towns begin
to grow they have whims, and the whims of a town always ruin somebody.
Mr. Vertrees had been most strikingly the somebody in this case. At
about the time he bought the Landseers, he owned, through inheritance,
an office-building and a large house not far from it, where he spent the
winter; and he had a country place--a farm of four hundred acres--where
he went for the summers to the comfortable, ugly old house that was his
home now, perforce, all the year round. If he had known how to sit
still and let things happen he would have prospered miraculously; but,
strangely enough, the dainty little man was one of the first to fall
down and worship Bigness, the which proceeded straightway to enact the
role of Juggernaut for his better education. He was a true prophet of
the prodigious growth, but he had a fatal gift for selling good and
buying bad. He should have stayed at home and looked at his Landseers
and read his Bulwer, but he took his cow to market, and the trained
milkers milked her dry and then ate her. He sold the office-building and
the house in town to buy a great tract of lots in a new suburb; then
he sold the farm, except the house and the ground about it, to pay the
taxes on the suburban lots and to "keep them up." The lots refused to
stay up; but he had to do something to keep himself and his family up,
so in despair he sold the lots (which went up beautifully the next year)
for "traction stock" that was paying dividends; and thereafter he ceased
to buy and sell. Thus he disappeared altogether from the commercial
surface at about the time James Sheridan came out securely on top; and
Sheridan, until Mrs. Vertrees called upon him with her "anti-smoke"
committee, had never heard the name.

Mr. Vertrees, pinched, retired to his Landseers, and Mrs. Vertrees
"managed somehow" on the dividends, though "managing" became more and
more difficult as the years went by and money bought less and less. But
there came a day when three servitors of Bigness in Philadelphia took
greedy counsel with four fellow-worshipers from New York, and not long
after that there were no more dividends for Mr. Vertrees. In fact, there
was nothing for Mr. Vertrees, because the "traction stock" henceforth
was no stock at all, and he had mortgaged his house long ago to help
"manage somehow" according to his conception of his "position in
life"--one of his own old-fashioned phrases. Six months before the
completion of the New House next door, Mr. Vertrees had sold his horses
and the worn Victoria and "station-wagon," to pay the arrears of his two
servants and re-establish credit at the grocer's and butcher's--and a
pair of elderly carriage-horses with such accoutrements are not very
ample barter, in these days, for six months' food and fuel and service.
Mr. Vertrees had discovered, too, that there was no salary for him in
all the buzzing city--he could do nothing.

It may be said that he was at the end of his string. Such times do come
in all their bitterness, finally, to the man with no trade or craft, if
his feeble clutch on that slippery ghost, Property, shall fail.

The windows grew black while he paced the room, and smoky twilight
closed round about the house, yet not more darkly than what closed round
about the heart of the anxious little man patrolling the fan-shaped zone
of firelight. But as the mantel clock struck wheezily six there was the
rattle of an outer door, and a rich and beautiful peal of laughter went
ringing through the house. Thus cheerfully did Mary Vertrees herald her
return with her mother from their expedition among the barbarians.

She came rushing into the library and threw herself into a deep chair by
the hearth, laughing so uncontrollably that tears were in her eyes. Mrs.
Vertrees followed decorously, no mirth about her; on the contrary,
she looked vaguely disturbed, as if she had eaten something not quite
certain to agree with her, and regretted it.

"Papa! Oh, oh!" And Miss Vertrees was fain to apply a handkerchief upon
her eyes. "I'm SO glad you made us go! I wouldn't have missed it--"

Mrs. Vertrees shook her head. "I suppose I'm very dull," she said,
gently. "I didn't see anything amusing. They're most ordinary, and the
house is altogether in bad taste, but we anticipated that, and--"

"Papa!" Mary cried, breaking in. "They asked us to DINNER!"

"What!"

"And I'm GOING!" she shouted, and was seized with fresh paroxysms.
"Think of it! Never in their house before; never met any of them but the
daughter--and just BARELY met her--"

"What about you?" interrupted Mr. Vertrees, turning sharply upon his
wife.

She made a little face as if positive now that what she had eaten would
not agree with her. "I couldn't!" she said. "I--"

"Yes, that's just--just the way she--she looked when they asked her!"
cried Mary, choking. "And then she--she realized it, and tried to turn
it into a cough, and she didn't know how, and it sounded like--like a
squeal!"

"I suppose," said Mrs. Vertrees, much injured, "that Mary will have an
uproarious time at my funeral. She makes fun of--"

Mary jumped up instantly and kissed her; then she went to the mantel
and, leaning an elbow upon it, gazed thoughtfully at the buckle of her
shoe, twinkling in the firelight.

"THEY didn't notice anything," she said. "So far as they were concerned,
mamma, it was one of the finest coughs you ever coughed."

"Who were 'they'?" asked her father. "Whom did you see?"

"Only the mother and daughter," Mary answered. "Mrs. Sheridan is dumpy
and rustly; and Miss Sheridan is pretty and pushing--dresses by the
fashion magazines and talks about New York people that have
their pictures in 'em. She tutors the mother, but not very
successfully--partly because her own foundation is too flimsy and partly
because she began too late. They've got an enormous Moor of painted
plaster or something in the hall, and the girl evidently thought it was
to her credit that she selected it!"

"They have oil-paintings, too," added Mrs. Vertrees, with a glance of
gentle pride at the Landseers. "I've always thought oil-paintings in a
private house the worst of taste."

"Oh, if one owned a Raphael or a Titian!" said Mr. Vertrees, finishing
the implication, not in words, but with a wave of his hand. "Go on,
Mary. None of the rest of them came in? You didn't meet Mr. Sheridan
or--" He paused and adjusted a lump of coal in the fire delicately with
the poker. "Or one of the sons?"

Mary's glance crossed his, at that, with a flash of utter comprehension.
He turned instantly away, but she had begun to laugh again.

"No," she said, "no one except the women, but mamma inquired about the
sons thoroughly!"

"Mary!" Mrs. Vertrees protested.

"Oh, most adroitly, too!" laughed the girl. "Only she couldn't help
unconsciously turning to look at me--when she did it!"

"Mary Vertrees!"

"Never mind, mamma! Mrs. Sheridan and Miss Sheridan neither of THEM
could help unconsciously turning to look at me--speculatively--at the
same time! They all three kept looking at me and talking about the
oldest son, Mr. James Sheridan, Junior. Mrs. Sheridan said his father is
very anxious 'to get Jim to marry and settle down,' and she assured me
that 'Jim is right cultivated.' Another of the sons, the youngest one,
caught me looking in the window this afternoon; but they didn't seem
to consider him quite one of themselves, somehow, though Mrs. Sheridan
mentioned that a couple of years or so ago he had been 'right sick,'
and had been to some cure or other. They seemed relieved to bring the
subject back to 'Jim' and his virtues--and to look at me! The other
brother is the middle one, Roscoe; he's the one that owns the new house
across the street, where that young black-sheep of the Lamhorns, Robert,
goes so often. I saw a short, dark young man standing on the porch with
Robert Lamhorn there the other day, so I suppose that was Roscoe. 'Jim'
still lurks in the mists, but I shall meet him to-night. Papa--" She
stepped nearer to him so that he had to face her, and his eyes were
troubled as he did. There may have been a trouble deep within her own,
but she kept their surface merry with laughter. "Papa, Bibbs is the
youngest one's name, and Bibbs--to the best of our information--is a
lunatic. Roscoe is married. Papa, does it have to be Jim?"

"Mary!" Mrs. Vertrees cried, sharply. "You're outrageous! That's a
perfectly horrible way of talking!"

"Well, I'm close to twenty-four," said Mary, turning to her. "I haven't
been able to like anybody yet that's asked me to marry him, and maybe I
never shall. Until a year or so ago I've had everything I ever wanted in
my life--you and papa gave it all to me--and it's about time I began
to pay back. Unfortunately, I don't know how to do anything--but
something's got to be done."

"But you needn't talk of it like THAT!" insisted the mother,
plaintively. "It's not--it's not--"

"No, it's not," said Mary. "I know that!"

"How did they happen to ask you to dinner?" Mr. Vertrees inquired,
uneasily. "'Stextrawdn'ry thing!"

"Climbers' hospitality," Mary defined it. "We were so very cordial and
easy! I think Mrs. Sheridan herself might have done it just as any kind
old woman on a farm might ask a neighbor, but it was Miss Sheridan who
did it. She played around it awhile; you could see she wanted to--she's
in a dreadful hurry to get into things--and I fancied she had an idea it
might impress that Lamhorn boy to find us there to-night. It's a sort of
house-warming dinner, and they talked about it and talked about it--and
then the girl got her courage up and blurted out the invitation. And
mamma--" Here Mary was once more a victim to incorrigible merriment.
"Mamma tried to say yes, and COULDN'T! She swallowed and squealed--I
mean you coughed, dear! And then, papa, she said that you and she had
promised to go to a lecture at the Emerson Club to-night, but that her
daughter would be delighted to come to the Big Show! So there I am,
and there's Mr. Jim Sheridan--and there's the clock. Dinner's at
seven-thirty!"

And she ran out of the room, scooping up her fallen furs with a gesture
of flying grace as she sped.

When she came down, at twenty minutes after seven, her father stood in
the hall, at the foot of the stairs, waiting to be her escort through
the dark. He looked up and watched her as she descended, and his gaze
was fond and proud--and profoundly disturbed. But she smiled and nodded
gaily, and, when she reached the floor, put a hand on his shoulder.

"At least no one could suspect me to-night," she said. "I LOOK rich,
don't I, papa?"

She did. She had a look that worshipful girl friends bravely called
"regal." A head taller than her father, she was as straight and jauntily
poised as a boy athlete; and her brown hair and her brown eyes were
like her mother's, but for the rest she went back to some stronger and
livelier ancestor than either of her parents.

"Don't I look too rich to be suspected?" she insisted.

"You look everything beautiful, Mary," he said, huskily.

"And my dress?" She threw open her dark velvet cloak, showing a splendor
of white and silver. "Anything better at Nice next winter, do you
think?" She laughed, shrouding her glittering figure in the cloak again.
"Two years old, and no one would dream it! I did it over."

"You can do anything, Mary."

There was a curious humility in his tone, and something more--a
significance not veiled and yet abysmally apologetic. It was as if
he suggested something to her and begged her forgiveness in the same
breath.

And upon that, for the moment, she became as serious as he. She lifted
her hand from his shoulder and then set it back more firmly, so that he
should feel the reassurance of its pressure.

"Don't worry," she said, in a low voice and gravely. "I know exactly
what you want me to do."



CHAPTER VI

It was a brave and lustrous banquet; and a noisy one, too, because there
was an orchestra among some plants at one end of the long dining-room,
and after a preliminary stiffness the guests were impelled to
converse--necessarily at the tops of their voices. The whole company
of fifty sat at a great oblong table, improvised for the occasion by
carpenters; but, not betraying itself as an improvisation, it seemed
a permanent continent of damask and lace, with shores of crystal and
silver running up to spreading groves of orchids and lilies and
white roses--an inhabited continent, evidently, for there were three
marvelous, gleaming buildings: one in the center and one at each end,
white miracles wrought by some inspired craftsman in sculptural icing.
They were models in miniature, and they represented the Sheridan
Building, the Sheridan Apartments, and the Pump Works. Nearly all the
guests recognized them without having to be told what they were, and
pronounced the likenesses superb.

The arrangement of the table was visibly baronial. At the head sat the
great Thane, with the flower of his family and of the guests about him;
then on each side came the neighbors of the "old" house, grading down to
vassals and retainers--superintendents, cashiers, heads of departments,
and the like--at the foot, where the Thane's lady took her place as a
consolation for the less important. Here, too, among the thralls and
bondmen, sat Bibbs Sheridan, a meek Banquo, wondering how anybody could
look at him and eat.

Nevertheless, there was a vast, continuous eating, for these were
wholesome folk who understood that dinner meant something intended
for introduction into the system by means of an aperture in the face,
devised by nature for that express purpose. And besides, nobody looked
at Bibbs.

He was better content to be left to himself; his voice was not strong
enough to make itself heard over the hubbub without an exhausting
effort, and the talk that went on about him was too fast and too
fragmentary for his drawl to keep pace with it. So he felt relieved when
each of his neighbors in turn, after a polite inquiry about his health,
turned to seek livelier responses in other directions. For the talk
went on with the eating, incessantly. It rose over the throbbing of the
orchestra and the clatter and clinking of silver and china and glass,
and there was a mighty babble.

"Yes, sir! Started without a dollar."... "Yellow flounces on the
overskirt--"... "I says, 'Wilkie, your department's got to go bigger
this year,' I says."... "Fifteen per cent. turnover in thirty-one
weeks."... "One of the biggest men in the biggest--"... "The wife says
she'll have to let out my pants if my appetite--"... "Say, did you see
that statue of a Turk in the hall? One of the finest things I ever--"...
"Not a dollar, not a nickel, not one red cent do you get out o' me,' I
says, and so he ups and--"... "Yes, the baby makes four, they've lost
now."... "Well, they got their raise, and they went in big."... "Yes,
sir! Not a dollar to his name, and look at what--"... "You wait! The
population of this town's goin' to hit the million mark before she
stops."... "Well, if you can show me a bigger deal than--"

And through the interstices of this clamoring Bibbs could hear the
continual booming of his father's heavy voice, and once he caught the
sentence, "Yes, young lady, that's just what did it for me, and that's
just what'll do it for my boys--they got to make two blades o' grass
grow where one grew before!" It was his familiar flourish, an old
story to Bibbs, and now jovially declaimed for the edification of Mary
Vertrees.

It was a great night for Sheridan--the very crest of his wave. He sat
there knowing himself Thane and master by his own endeavor; and his big,
smooth, red face grew more and more radiant with good will and with the
simplest, happiest, most boy-like vanity. He was the picture of health,
of good cheer, and of power on a holiday. He had thirty teeth, none
bought, and showed most of them when he laughed; his grizzled hair was
thick, and as unruly as a farm laborer's; his chest was deep and big
beneath its vast facade of starched white linen, where little diamonds
twinkled, circling three large pearls; his hands were stubby and strong,
and he used them freely in gestures of marked picturesqueness; and,
though he had grown fat at chin and waist and wrist, he had not lost the
look of readiness and activity.

He dominated the table, shouting jocular questions and railleries at
every one. His idea was that when people were having a good time they
were noisy; and his own additions to the hubbub increased his pleasure,
and, of course, met the warmest encouragement from his guests. Edith had
discovered that he had very foggy notions of the difference between a
band and an orchestra, and when it was made clear to him he had held out
for a band until Edith threatened tears; but the size of the orchestra
they hired consoled him, and he had now no regrets in the matter.

He kept time to the music continually--with his feet, or pounding on the
table with his fist, and sometimes with spoon or knife upon his plate
or a glass, without permitting these side-products to interfere with the
real business of eating and shouting.

"Tell 'em to play 'Nancy Lee'!" he would bellow down the length of
the table to his wife, while the musicians were in the midst of the
"Toreador" song, perhaps. "Ask that fellow if they don't know 'Nancy
Lee'!" And when the leader would shake his head apologetically in answer
to an obedient shriek from Mrs. Sheridan, the "Toreador" continuing
vehemently, Sheridan would roar half-remembered fragments of "Nancy
Lee," naturally mingling some Bizet with the air of that uxorious
tribute.

"Oh, there she stands and waves her hands while I'm away! A sail-er's
wife a sail-er's star should be! Yo ho, oh, oh! Oh, Nancy, Nancy, Nancy
Lee! Oh, Na-hancy Lee!"

"HAY, there, old lady!" he would bellow. "Tell 'em to play 'In the
Gloaming.' In the gloaming, oh, my darling, la-la-lum-tee--Well, if they
don't know that, what's the matter with 'Larboard Watch, Ahoy'? THAT'S
good music! That's the kind o' music I like! Come on, now! Mrs. Callin,
get 'em singin' down in your part o' the table. What's the matter you
folks down there, anyway? Larboard watch, ahoy!"

"What joy he feels, as--ta-tum-dum-tee-dee-dum steals. La-a-r-board
watch, ahoy!"

No external bubbling contributed to this effervescence; the Sheridans'
table had never borne wine, and, more because of timidity about it than
conviction, it bore none now; though "mineral waters" were copiously
poured from bottles wrapped, for some reason, in napkins, and proved
wholly satisfactory to almost all of the guests. And certainly no wine
could have inspired more turbulent good spirits in the host. Not even
Bibbs was an alloy in this night's happiness, for, as Mrs. Sheridan had
said, he had "plans for Bibbs"--plans which were going to straighten out
some things that had gone wrong.

So he pounded the table and boomed his echoes of old songs, and then,
forgetting these, would renew his friendly railleries, or perhaps,
turning to Mary Vertrees, who sat near him, round the corner of the
table at his right, he would become autobiographical. Gentlemen less
naive than he had paid her that tribute, for she was a girl who inspired
the autobiographical impulse in every man who met her--it needed but the
sight of her.

The dinner seemed, somehow, to center about Mary Vertrees and the
jocund host as a play centers about its hero and heroine; they were the
rubicund king and the starry princess of this spectacle--they paid court
to each other, and everybody paid court to them. Down near the
sugar Pump Works, where Bibbs sat, there was audible speculation and
admiration. "Wonder who that lady is--makin' such a hit with the old
man." "Must be some heiress." "Heiress? Golly, I guess I could stand it
to marry rich, then!"

Edith and Sibyl were radiant: at first they had watched Miss Vertrees
with an almost haggard anxiety, wondering what disasterous effect
Sheridan's pastoral gaieties--and other things--would have upon her,
but she seemed delighted with everything, and with him most of all.
She treated him as if he were some delicious, foolish old joke that
she understood perfectly, laughing at him almost violently when he
bragged--probably his first experience of that kind in his life. It
enchanted him.

As he proclaimed to the table, she had "a way with her." She had,
indeed, as Roscoe Sheridan, upon her right, discovered just after the
feast began. Since his marriage three years before, no lady had bestowed
upon him so protracted a full view of brilliant eyes; and, with the
look, his lovely neighbor said--and it was her first speech to him--

"I hope you're very susceptible, Mr. Sheridan!"

Honest Roscoe was taken aback, and "Why?" was all he managed to say.

She repeated the look deliberately, which was noted, with a
mystification equal to his own, by his sister across the table. No one,
reflected Edith, could image Mary Vertrees the sort of girl who would
"really flirt" with married men--she was obviously the "opposite of all
that." Edith defined her as a "thoroughbred," a "nice girl"; and the
look given to Roscoe was astounding. Roscoe's wife saw it, too, and
she was another whom it puzzled--though not because its recipient was
married.

"Because!" said Mary Vertrees, replying to Roscoe's monosyllable. "And
also because we're next-door neighbors at table, and it's dull times
ahead for both of us if we don't get along."

Roscoe was a literal young man, all stocks and bonds, and he had been
brought up to believe that when a man married he "married and settled
down." It was "all right," he felt, for a man as old as his father to
pay florid compliments to as pretty a girl as this Miss Vertrees, but
for himself--"a young married man"--it wouldn't do; and it wouldn't
even be quite moral. He knew that young married people might have
friendships, like his wife's for Lamhorn; but Sibyl and Lamhorn never
"flirted"--they were always very matter-of-fact with each other. Roscoe
would have been troubled if Sibyl had ever told Lamhorn she hoped he was
susceptible.

"Yes--we're neighbors," he said, awkwardly.

"Next-door neighbors in houses, too," she added.

"No, not exactly. I live across the street."

"Why, no!" she exclaimed, and seemed startled. "Your mother told me this
afternoon that you lived at home."

"Yes, of course I live at home. I built that new house across the
street."

"But you--" she paused, confused, and then slowly a deep color came into
her cheek. "But I understood--"

"No," he said; "my wife and I lived with the old folks the first year,
but that's all. Edith and Jim live with them, of course."

"I--I see," she said, the deep color still deepening as she turned from
him and saw, written upon a card before the gentleman at her left the
name, "Mr. James Sheridan, Jr." And from that moment Roscoe had little
enough cause for wondering what he ought to reply to her disturbing
coquetries.

Mr. James Sheridan had been anxiously waiting for the dazzling visitor
to "get through with old Roscoe," as he thought of it, and give a
bachelor a chance. "Old Roscoe" was the younger, but he had always been
the steady wheel-horse of the family. Jim was "steady" enough, but was
considered livelier than Roscoe, which in truth is not saying much for
Jim's liveliness. As their father habitually boasted, both brothers were
"capable, hard-working young business men," and the principal difference
between them was merely that which resulted from Jim's being still a
bachelor. Physically they were of the same type: dark of eyes and of
hair, fresh-colored and thick-set, and though Roscoe was several inches
taller than Jim, neither was of the height, breadth, or depth of the
father. Both wore young business men's mustaches, and either could have
sat for the tailor-shop lithographs of young business men wearing "rich
suitings in dark mixtures."

Jim, approving warmly of his neighbor's profile, perceived her access of
color, which increased his approbation. "What's that old Roscoe saying
to you, Miss Vertrees?" he asked. "These young married men are mighty
forward nowadays, but you mustn't let 'em make you blush."

"Am I blushing?" she said. "Are you sure?" And with that she gave him
ample opportunity to make sure, repeating with interest the look wasted
upon Roscoe. "I think you must be mistaken," she continued. "I think
it's your brother who is blushing. I've thrown him into confusion."

"How?"

She laughed, and then, leaning to him a little, said in a tone as
confidential as she could make it, under cover of the uproar. "By trying
to begin with him a courtship I meant for YOU!"

This might well be a style new to Jim; and it was. He supposed it a
nonsensical form of badinage, and yet it took his breath. He realized
that he wished what she said to be the literal truth, and he was
instantly snared by that realization.

"By George!" he said. "I guess you're the kind of girl that can say
anything--yes, and get away with it, too!"

She laughed again--in her way, so that he could not tell whether she was
laughing at him or at herself or at the nonsense she was talking; and
she said: "But you see I don't care whether I get away with it or not.
I wish you'd tell me frankly if you think I've got a chance to get away
with YOU?"

"More like if you've got a chance to get away FROM me!" Jim was inspired
to reply. "Not one in the world, especially after beginning by making
fun of me like that."

"I mightn't be so much in fun as you think," she said, regarding him
with sudden gravity.

"Well," said Jim, in simple honesty, "you're a funny girl!"

Her gravity continued an instant longer. "I may not turn out to be funny
for YOU."

"So long as you turn out to be anything at all for me, I expect I can
manage to be satisfied." And with that, to his own surprise, it was his
turn to blush, whereupon she laughed again.

"Yes," he said, plaintively, not wholly lacking intuition, "I can see
you're the sort of girl that would laugh the minute you see a man really
means anything!"

"'Laugh'!" she cried, gaily. "Why, it might be a matter of life and
death! But if you want tragedy, I'd better put the question at once,
considering the mistake I made with your brother."

Jim was dazed. She seemed to be playing a little game of mockery and
nonsense with him, but he had glimpses of a flashing danger in it;
he was but too sensible of being outclassed, and had somewhere a
consciousness that he could never quite know this giddy and alluring
lady, no matter how long it pleased her to play with him. But he
mightily wanted her to keep on playing with him.

"Put what question?" he said, breathlessly.

"As you are a new neighbor of mine and of my family," she returned,
speaking slowly and with a cross-examiner's severity, "I think it would
be well for me to know at once whether you are already walking out with
any young lady or not. Mr. Sheridan, think well! Are you spoken for?"

"Not yet," he gasped. "Are you?"

"NO!" she cried, and with that they both laughed again; and the pastime
proceeded, increasing both in its gaiety and in its gravity.

Observing its continuance, Mr. Robert Lamhorn, opposite, turned from a
lively conversation with Edith and remarked covertly to Sibyl that Miss
Vertrees was "starting rather picturesquely with Jim." And he added,
languidly, "Do you suppose she WOULD?"

For the moment Sibyl gave no sign of having heard him, but seemed
interested in the clasp of a long "rope" of pearls, a loop of which she
was allowing to swing from her fingers, resting her elbow upon the table
and following with her eyes the twinkle of diamonds and platinum in the
clasp at the end of the loop. She wore many jewels. She was pretty,
but hers was not the kind of prettiness to be loaded with too sumptuous
accessories, and jeweled head-dresses are dangerous--they may emphasize
the wrongness of the wearer.

"I said Miss Vertrees seems to be starting pretty strong with Jim,"
repeated Mr. Lamhorn.

"I heard you." There was a latent discontent always somewhere in her
eyes, no matter what she threw upon the surface of cover it, and just
now she did not care to cover it; she looked sullen. "Starting any
stronger than you did with Edith?" she inquired.

"Oh, keep the peace!" he said, crossly. "That's off, of course."

"You haven't been making her see it this evening--precisely," said
Sibyl, looking at him steadily. "You've talked to her for--"

"For Heaven's sake," he begged, "keep the peace!"

"Well, what have you just been doing?"

"SH!" he said. "Listen to your father-in-law."

Sheridan was booming and braying louder than ever, the orchestra having
begun to play "The Rosary," to his vast content.

"I COUNT THEM OVER, LA-LA-TUM-TEE-DUM," he roared, beating the measures
with his fork. "EACH HOUR A PEARL, EACH PEARL TEE-DUM-TUM-DUM--What's
the matter with all you folks? Why'n't you SING? Miss Vertrees, I bet a
thousand dollars YOU sing! Why'n't--"

"Mr. Sheridan," she said, turning cheerfully from the ardent Jim, "you
don't know what you interrupted! Your son isn't used to my rough ways,
and my soldier's wooing frightens him, but I think he was about to say
something important."

"I'll say something important to him if he doesn't!" the father
threatened, more delighted with her than ever. "By gosh! if I was his
age--or a widower right NOW--"

"Oh, wait!" cried Mary. "If they'd only make less noise! I want Mrs.
Sheridan to hear."

"She'd say the same," he shouted. "She'd tell me I was mighty slow if I
couldn't get ahead o' Jim. Why, when I was his age--"

"You must listen to your father," Mary interrupted, turning to Jim, who
had grown red again. "He's going to tell us how, when he was your age,
he made those two blades of grass grow out of a teacup--and you could
see for yourself he didn't get them out of his sleeve!"

At that Sheridan pounded the table till it jumped. "Look here, young
lady!" he roared. "Some o' these days I'm either goin' to slap you--or
I'm goin' to kiss you!"

Edith looked aghast; she was afraid this was indeed "too awful," but
Mary Vertrees burst into ringing laughter.

"Both!" she cried. "Both! The one to make me forget the other!"

"But which--" he began, and then suddenly gave forth such stentorian
trumpetings of mirth that for once the whole table stopped to listen.
"Jim," he roared, "if you don't propose to that girl to-night I'll send
you back to the machine-shop with Bibbs!"

And Bibbs--down among the retainers by the sugar Pump Works, and
watching Mary Vertrees as a ragged boy in the street might watch a rich
little girl in a garden--Bibbs heard. He heard--and he knew what his
father's plans were now.



CHAPTER VII

Mrs. Vertrees "sat up" for her daughter, Mr. Vertrees having retired
after a restless evening, not much soothed by the society of his
Landseers. Mary had taken a key, insisting that he should not come for
her and seeming confident that she would not lack for escort; nor did
the sequel prove her confidence unwarranted. But Mrs. Vertrees had a
long vigil of it.

She was not the woman to make herself easy--no servant had ever seen her
in a wrapper--and with her hair and dress and her shoes just what they
had been when she returned from the afternoon's call, she sat through
the slow night hours in a stiff little chair under the gaslight in her
own room, which was directly over the "front hall." There, book in hand,
she employed the time in her own reminiscences, though it was her belief
that she was reading Madame de Remusat's.

Her thoughts went backward into her life and into her husband's; and the
deeper into the past they went, the brighter the pictures they brought
her--and there is tragedy. Like her husband, she thought backward
because she did not dare think forward definitely. What thinking forward
this troubled couple ventured took the form of a slender hope which
neither of them could have borne to hear put in words, and yet they
had talked it over, day after day, from the very hour when they heard
Sheridan was to build his New House next door. For--so quickly does
any ideal of human behavior become an antique--their youth was of the
innocent old days, so dead! of "breeding" and "gentility," and no craft
had been more straitly trained upon them than that of talking about
things without mentioning them. Herein was marked the most vital
difference between Mr. and Mrs. Vertrees and their big new neighbor.
Sheridan, though his youth was of the same epoch, knew nothing of such
matters. He had been chopping wood for the morning fire in the country
grocery while they were still dancing.

It was after one o'clock when Mrs. Vertrees heard steps and the delicate
clinking of the key in the lock, and then, with the opening of the door,
Mary's laugh, and "Yes--if you aren't afraid--to-morrow!"

The door closed, and she rushed up-stairs, bringing with her a breath
of cold and bracing air into her mother's room. "Yes," she said, before
Mrs. Vertrees could speak, "he brought me home!"

She let her cloak fall upon the bed, and, drawing an old red-velvet
rocking-chair forward, sat beside her mother after giving her a light
pat upon the shoulder and a hearty kiss upon the cheek.

"Mamma!" Mary exclaimed, when Mrs. Vertrees had expressed a hope that
she had enjoyed the evening and had not caught cold. "Why don't you ask
me?"

This inquiry obviously made her mother uncomfortable. "I don't--" she
faltered. "Ask you what, Mary?"

"How I got along and what he's like."

"Mary!"

"Oh, it isn't distressing!" said Mary. "And I got along so fast--" She
broke off to laugh; continuing then, "But that's the way I went at it,
of course. We ARE in a hurry, aren't we?"

"I don't know what you mean," Mrs. Vertrees insisted, shaking her head
plaintively.

"Yes," said Mary, "I'm going out in his car with him to-morrow
afternoon, and to the theater the next night--but I stopped it there.
You see, after you give the first push, you must leave it to them while
YOU pretend to run away!"

"My dear, I don't know what to--"

"What to make of anything!" Mary finished for her. "So that's all
right! Now I'll tell you all about it. It was gorgeous and deafening and
tee-total. We could have lived a year on it. I'm not good at figures,
but I calculated that if we lived six months on poor old Charlie and Ned
and the station-wagon and the Victoria, we could manage at least twice
as long on the cost of the 'house-warming.' I think the orchids alone
would have lasted us a couple of months. There they were, before me, but
I couldn't steal 'em and sell 'em, and so--well, so I did what I could!"

She leaned back and laughed reassuringly to her troubled mother. "It
seemed to be a success--what I could," she said, clasping her hands
behind her neck and stirring the rocker to motion as a rhythmic
accompaniment to her narrative. "The girl Edith and her sister-in-law,
Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan, were too anxious about the effect of things on me.
The father's worth a bushel of both of them, if they knew it. He's
what he is. I like him." She paused reflectively, continuing, "Edith's
'interested' in that Lamhorn boy; he's good-looking and not stupid, but
I think he's--" She interrupted herself with a cheery outcry: "Oh! I
mustn't be calling him names! If he's trying to make Edith like him, I
ought to respect him as a colleague."

"I don't understand a thing you're talking about," Mrs. Vertrees
complained.

"All the better! Well, he's a bad lot, that Lamhorn boy; everybody's
always known that, but the Sheridans don't know the everybodies that
know. He sat between Edith and Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan. SHE'S like those
people you wondered about at the theater, the last time we went--dressed
in ball-gowns; bound to show their clothes and jewels SOMEwhere! She
flatters the father, and so did I, for that matter--but not that way. I
treated him outrageously!"

"Mary!"

"That's what flattered him. After dinner he made the whole regiment of
us follow him all over the house, while he lectured like a guide on the
Palatine. He gave dimensions and costs, and the whole b'ilin' of 'em
listened as if they thought he intended to make them a present of the
house. What he was proudest of was the plumbing and that Bay of Naples
panorama in the hall. He made us look at all the plumbing--bath-rooms
and everywhere else--and then he made us look at the Bay of Naples. He
said it was a hundred and eleven feet long, but I think it's more. And
he led us all into the ready-made library to see a poem Edith had taken
a prize with at school. They'd had it printed in gold letters and framed
in mother-of-pearl. But the poem itself was rather simple and wistful
and nice--he read it to us, though Edith tried to stop him. She was
modest about it, and said she'd never written anything else. And then,
after a while, Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan asked me to come across the street
to her house with them--her husband and Edith and Mr. Lamhorn and Jim
Sheridan--"

Mrs. Vertrees was shocked. "'Jim'!" she exclaimed. "Mary, PLEASE--"

"Of course," said Mary. "I'll make it as easy for you as I can,
mamma. Mr. James Sheridan, Junior. We went over there, and Mrs. Roscoe
explained that 'the men were all dying for a drink,' though I noticed
that Mr. Lamhorn was the only one near death's door on that account.
Edith and Mrs. Roscoe said they knew I'd been bored at the dinner. They
were objectionably apologetic about it, and they seemed to think NOW we
were going to have a 'good time' to make up for it. But I hadn't been
bored at the dinner, I'd been amused; and the 'good time' at Mrs.
Roscoe's was horribly, horribly stupid."

"But, Mary," her mother began, "is--is--" And she seemed unable to
complete the question.

"Never mind, mamma. I'll say it. Is Mr. James Sheridan, Junior, stupid?
I'm sure he's not at all stupid about business. Otherwise--Oh, what
right have I to be calling people 'stupid' because they're not exactly
my kind? On the big dinner-table they had enormous icing models of the
Sheridan Building--"

"Oh, no!" Mrs. Vertrees cried. "Surely not!"

"Yes, and two other things of that kind--I don't know what. But, after
all, I wondered if they were so bad. If I'd been at a dinner at a palace
in Italy, and a relief or inscription on one of the old silver pieces
had referred to some great deed or achievement of the family, I
shouldn't have felt superior; I'd have thought it picturesque and
stately--I'd have been impressed. And what's the real difference? The
icing is temporary, and that's much more modest, isn't it? And why is
it vulgar to feel important more on account of something you've done
yourself than because of something one of your ancestors did? Besides,
if we go back a few generations, we've all got such hundreds of
ancestors it seems idiotic to go picking out one or two to be proud of
ourselves about. Well, then, mamma, I managed not to feel superior to
Mr. James Sheridan, Junior, because he didn't see anything out of place
in the Sheridan Building in sugar."

Mrs. Vertrees's expression had lost none of its anxiety pending the
conclusion of this lively bit of analysis, and she shook her head
gravely. "My dear, dear child," she said, "it seems to me--It looks--I'm
afraid--"

"Say as much of it as you can, mamma," said Mary, encouragingly. "I can
get it, if you'll just give me one key-word."

"Everything you say," Mrs. Vertrees began, timidly, "seems to have the
air of--it is as if you were seeking to--to make yourself--"

"Oh, I see! You mean I sound as if I were trying to force myself to like
him."

"Not exactly, Mary. That wasn't quite what I meant," said Mrs. Vertrees,
speaking direct untruth with perfect unconsciousness. "But you said
that--that you found the latter part of the evening at young Mrs.
Sheridan's unentertaining--"

"And as Mr. James Sheridan was there, and I saw more of him than at
dinner, and had a horribly stupid time in spite of that, you think I--"
And then it was Mary who left the deduction unfinished.

Mrs. Vertrees nodded; and though both the mother and the daughter
understood, Mary felt it better to make the understanding definite.

"Well," she asked, gravely, "is there anything else I can do? You and
papa don't want me to do anything that distresses me, and so, as this is
the only thing to be done, it seems it's up to me not to let it distress
me. That's all there is about it, isn't it?"

"But nothing MUST distress you!" the mother cried.

"That's what I say!" said Mary, cheerfully. "And so it doesn't. It's all
right." She rose and took her cloak over her arm, as if to go to her own
room. But on the way to the door she stopped, and stood leaning against
the foot of the bed, contemplating a threadbare rug at her feet.
"Mother, you've told me a thousand times that it doesn't really matter
whom a girl marries."

"No, no!" Mrs. Vertrees protested. "I never said such a--"

"No, not in words; I mean what you MEANT. It's true, isn't it, that
marriage really is 'not a bed of roses, but a field of battle'? To get
right down to it, a girl could fight it out with anybody, couldn't she?
One man as well as another?"

"Oh, my dear! I'm sure your father and I--"

"Yes, yes," said Mary, indulgently. "I don't mean you and papa. But
isn't it propinquity that makes marriages? So many people say so, there
must be something in it."

"Mary, I can't bear for you to talk like that." And Mrs. Vertrees
lifted pleading eyes to her daughter--eyes that begged to be spared. "It
sounds--almost reckless!"

Mary caught the appeal, came to her, and kissed her gaily. "Never fret,
dear! I'm not likely to do anything I don't want to do--I've always been
too thorough-going a little pig! And if it IS propinquity that does our
choosing for us, well, at least no girl in the world could ask for more
than THAT! How could there be any more propinquity than the very house
next door?"

She gave her mother a final kiss and went gaily all the way to the door
this time, pausing for her postscript with her hand on the knob. "Oh,
the one that caught me looking in the window, mamma, the youngest one--"

"Did he speak of it?" Mrs. Vertrees asked, apprehensively.

"No. He didn't speak at all, that I saw, to any one. I didn't meet him.
But he isn't insane, I'm sure; or if he is, he has long intervals when
he's not. Mr. James Sheridan mentioned that he lived at home when he was
'well enough'; and it may be he's only an invalid. He looks dreadfully
ill, but he has pleasant eyes, and it struck me that if--if one were
in the Sheridan family"--she laughed a little ruefully--"he might be
interesting to talk to sometimes, when there was too much stocks and
bonds. I didn't see him after dinner."

"There must be something wrong with him," said Mrs. Vertrees. "They'd
have introduced him if there wasn't."

"I don't know. He's been ill so much and away so much--sometimes people
like that just don't seem to 'count' in a family. His father spoke of
sending him back to a machine-shop of some sort; I suppose he meant
when the poor thing gets better. I glanced at him just then, when Mr.
Sheridan mentioned him, and he happened to be looking straight at me;
and he was pathetic-looking enough before that, but the most tragic
change came over him. He seemed just to die, right there at the table!"

"You mean when his father spoke of sending him to the shop place?"

"Yes."

"Mr. Sheridan must be very unfeeling."

"No," said Mary, thoughtfully, "I don't think he is; but he might be
uncomprehending, and certainly he's the kind of man to do anything he
once sets out to do. But I wish I hadn't been looking at that poor boy
just then! I'm afraid I'll keep remembering--"

"I wouldn't." Mrs. Vertrees smiled faintly, and in her smile there
was the remotest ghost of a genteel roguishness. "I'd keep my mind on
pleasanter things, Mary."

Mary laughed and nodded. "Yes, indeed! Plenty pleasant enough, and
probably, if all were known, too good--even for me!"

And when she had gone Mrs. Vertrees drew a long breath, as if a burden
were off her mind, and, smiling, began to undress in a gentle reverie.



CHAPTER VIII

Edith, glancing casually into the "ready-made" library, stopped
abruptly, seeing Bibbs there alone. He was standing before the
pearl-framed and golden-lettered poem, musingly inspecting it. He read
it:

                  FUGITIVE

  I will forget the things that sting:
    The lashing look, the barbed word.
  I know the very hands that fling
    The stones at me had never stirred
  To anger but for their own scars.
    They've suffered so, that's why they strike.
  I'll keep my heart among the stars
    Where none shall hunt it out.  Oh, like
  These wounded ones I must not be,
    For, wounded, I might strike in turn!
  So, none shall hurt me.  Far and free
    Where my heart flies no one shall learn.

"Bibbs!" Edith's voice was angry, and her color deepened suddenly as she
came into the room, preceded by a scent of violets much more powerful
than that warranted by the actual bunch of them upon the lapel of her
coat.

Bibbs did not turn his head, but wagged it solemnly, seeming depressed
by the poem. "Pretty young, isn't it?" he said. "There must have been
something about your looks that got the prize, Edith; I can't believe
the poem did it."

She glanced hurriedly over her shoulder and spoke sharply, but in a
low voice: "I don't think it's very nice of you to bring it up at all,
Bibbs. I'd like a chance to forget the whole silly business. I didn't
want them to frame it, and I wish to goodness papa'd quit talking about
it; but here, that night, after the dinner, didn't he go and read it
aloud to the whole crowd of 'em! And then they all wanted to know what
other poems I'd written and why I didn't keep it up and write some more,
and if I didn't, why didn't I, and why this and why that, till I thought
I'd die of shame!"

"You could tell 'em you had writer's cramp," Bibbs suggested.

"I couldn't tell 'em anything! I just choke with mortification every
time anybody speaks of the thing."

Bibbs looked grieved. "The poem isn't THAT bad, Edith. You see, you were
only seventeen when you wrote it."

"Oh, hush up!" she snapped. "I wish it had burnt my fingers the first
time I touched it. Then I might have had sense enough to leave it where
it was. I had no business to take it, and I've been ashamed--"

"No, no," he said, comfortingly. "It was the very most flattering thing
ever happened to me. It was almost my last flight before I went to the
machine-shop, and it's pleasant to think somebody liked it enough to--"

"But I DON'T like it!" she exclaimed. "I don't even understand it--and
papa made so much fuss over its getting the prize, I just hate it! The
truth is I never dreamed it'd get the prize."

"Maybe they expected father to endow the school," Bibbs murmured.

"Well, I had to have something to turn in, and I couldn't write a LINE!
I hate poetry, anyhow; and Bobby Lamhorn's always teasing me about how
I 'keep my heart among the stars.' He makes it seem such a mushy kind of
thing, the way he says it. I hate it!"

"You'll have to live it down, Edith. Perhaps abroad and under another
name you might find--"

"Oh, hush up! I'll hire some one to steal it and burn it the first
chance I get." She turned away petulantly, moving to the door. "I'd like
to think I could hope to hear the last of it before I die!"

"Edith!" he called, as she went into the hall.

"What's the matter?"

"I want to ask you: Do I really look better, or have you just got used
to me?"

"What on earth do you mean?" she said, coming back as far as the
threshold.

"When I first came you couldn't look at me," Bibbs explained, in his
impersonal way. "But I've noticed you look at me lately. I wondered if
I'd--"

"It's because you look so much better," she told him, cheerfully. "This
month you've been here's done you no end of good. It's the change."

"Yes, that's what they said at the sanitarium--the change."

"You look worse than 'most anybody I ever saw," said Edith, with supreme
candor. "But I don't know much about it. I've never seen a corpse in my
life, and I've never even seen anybody that was terribly sick, so you
mustn't judge by me. I only know you do look better, I'm glad to say.
But you're right about my not being able to look at you at first. You
had a kind of whiteness that--Well, you're almost as thin, I suppose,
but you've got more just ordinarily pale; not that ghastly look. Anybody
could look at you now, Bibbs, and no--not get--"

"Sick?"

"Well--almost that!" she laughed. "And you're getting a better color
every day, Bibbs; you really are. You're getting along splendidly."

"I--I'm afraid so," he said, ruefully.

"'Afraid so'! Well, if you aren't the queerest! I suppose you mean
father might send you back to the machine-shop if you get well enough.
I heard him say something about it the night of the--" The jingle of
a distant bell interrupted her, and she glanced at her watch. "Bobby
Lamhorn! I'm going to motor him out to look at a place in the country.
Afternoon, Bibbs!"

When she had gone, Bibbs mooned pessimistically from shelf to shelf,
his eye wandering among the titles of the books. The library consisted
almost entirely of handsome "uniform editions": Irving, Poe, Cooper,
Goldsmith, Scott, Byron, Burns, Longfellow, Tennyson, Hume, Gibbon,
Prescott, Thackeray, Dickens, De Musset, Balzac, Gautier, Flaubert,
Goethe, Schiller, Dante, and Tasso. There were shelves and shelves
of encyclopedias, of anthologies, of "famous classics," of "Oriental
masterpieces," of "masterpieces of oratory," and more shelves of
"selected libraries" of "literature," of "the drama," and of "modern
science." They made an effective decoration for the room, all these
big, expensive books, with a glossy binding here and there twinkling a
reflection of the flames that crackled in the splendid Gothic fireplace;
but Bibbs had an impression that the bookseller who selected them
considered them a relief, and that white-jacket considered them a
burden of dust, and that nobody else considered them at all. Himself, he
disturbed not one.

There came a chime of bells from a clock in another part of the house,
and white-jacket appeared beamingly in the doorway, bearing furs.
"Awready, Mist' Bibbs," he announced. "You' ma say wrap up wawm f' you'
ride, an' she cain' go with you to-day, an' not f'git go see you' pa at
fo' 'clock. Aw ready, suh."

He equipped Bibbs for the daily drive Dr. Gurney had commanded; and in
the manner of a master of ceremonies unctuously led the way. In the
hall they passed the Moor, and Bibbs paused before it while white-jacket
opened the door with a flourish and waved condescendingly to the
chauffeur in the car which stood waiting in the driveway.

"It seems to me I asked you what you thought about this 'statue' when I
first came home, George," said Bibbs, thoughtfully. "What did you tell
me?"

"Yessuh!" George chuckled, perfectly understanding that for some unknown
reason Bibbs enjoyed hearing him repeat his opinion of the Moor. "You
ast me when you firs' come home, an' you ast me nex' day, an' mighty
near ev'y day all time you been here; an' las' Sunday you ast me
twicet." He shook his head solemnly. "Look to me mus' be somep'm might
lamiDAL 'bout 'at statue!"

"Mighty what?"

"Mighty lamiDAL!" George, burst out laughing. "What DO 'at word mean,
Mist' Bibbs?"

"It's new to me, George. Where did you hear it?"

"I nev' DID hear it!" said George. "I uz dess sittin' thinkum to myse'f
an' she pop in my head--'lamiDAL,' dess like 'at! An' she soun' so good,
seem like she GOTTA mean somep'm!"

"Come to think of it, I believe she does mean something. Why, yes--"

"Do she?" cried George. "WHAT she mean?"

"It's exactly the word for the statue," said Bibbs, with conviction, as
he climbed into the car. "It's a lamiDAL statue."

"Hiyi!" George exulted. "Man! Man! Listen! Well, suh, she mighty lamiDAL
statue, but lamiDAL statue heap o' trouble to dus'!"

"I expect she is!" said Bibbs, as the engine began to churn; and a moment later he was swept from sight.

George turned to Mist' Jackson, who had been listening benevolently in
the hallway. "Same he aw-ways say, Mist' Jackson--'I expec' she is!'
Ev'y day he try t' git me talk 'bout 'at lamiDAL statue, an' aw-ways,
las' thing HE say, 'I expec' she is!' You know, Mist' Jackson, if he git
well, 'at young man go' be pride o' the family, Mist' Jackson. Yes-suh,
right now I pick 'im fo' firs' money!"

"Look out with all 'at money, George!" Jackson warned the enthusiast.
"White folks 'n 'is house know 'im heap longer'n you. You the on'y man
bettin' on 'im!"

"I risk it!" cried George, merrily. "I put her all on now--ev'y cent!
'At boy's go' be flower o' the flock!"

This singular prophecy, founded somewhat recklessly upon gratitude for
the meaning of "lamiDAL," differed radically from another prediction
concerning Bibbs, set forth for the benefit of a fair auditor some
twenty minutes later.

Jim Sheridan, skirting the edges of the town with Mary Vertrees
beside him, in his own swift machine, encountered the invalid upon
the highroad. The two cars were going in opposite directions, and the
occupants of Jim's had only a swaying glimpse of Bibbs sitting alone on
the back seat--his white face startlingly white against cap and collar
of black fur--but he flashed into recognition as Mary bowed to him.

Jim waved his left hand carelessly. "It's Bibbs, taking his
constitutional," he explained.

"Yes, I know," said Mary. "I bowed to him, too, though I've never met
him. In fact, I've only seen him once--no, twice. I hope he won't think
I'm very bold, bowing to him."

"I doubt if he noticed it," said honest Jim.

"Oh, no!" she cried.

"What's the trouble?"

"I'm almost sure people notice it when I bow to them."

"Oh, I see!" said Jim. "Of course they would ordinarily, but Bibbs is
funny."

"Is he? How?" she asked. "He strikes me as anything but funny."

"Well, I'm his brother," Jim said, deprecatingly, "but I don't know what
he's like, and, to tell the truth, I've never felt exactly like I WAS
his brother, the way I do Roscoe. Bibbs never did seem more than half
alive to me. Of course Roscoe and I are older, and when we were boys we
were too big to play with him, but he never played anyway, with boys his
own age. He'd rather just sit in the house and mope around by himself.
Nobody could ever get him to DO anything; you can't get him to do
anything now. He never had any LIFE in him; and honestly, if he is my
brother, I must say I believe Bibbs Sheridan is the laziest man God ever
made! Father put him in the machine-shop over at the Pump Works--best
thing in the world for him--and he was just plain no account. It made
him sick! If he'd had the right kind of energy--the kind father's got,
for instance, or Roscoe, either--why, it wouldn't have made him sick.
And suppose it was either of them--yes, or me, either--do you think any
of us would have stopped if we WERE sick? Not much! I hate to say it,
but Bibbs Sheridan'll never amount to anything as long as he lives."

Mary looked thoughtful. "Is there any particular reason why he should?"
she asked.

"Good gracious!" he exclaimed. "You don't mean that, do you? Don't you
believe in a man's knowing how to earn his salt, no matter how much
money his father's got? Hasn't the business of this world got to be
carried on by everybody in it? Are we going to lay back on what we've
got and see other fellows get ahead of us? If we've got big things
already, isn't it every man's business to go ahead and make 'em bigger?
Isn't it his duty? Don't we always want to get bigger and bigger?"

"Ye-es--I don't know. But I feel rather sorry for your brother. He
looked so lonely--and sick."

"He's gettin' better every day," Jim said. "Dr. Gurney says so. There's
nothing much the matter with him, really--it's nine-tenths imaginary.
'Nerves'! People that are willing to be busy don't have nervous
diseases, because they don't have time to imagine 'em."

"You mean his trouble is really mental?"

"Oh, he's not a lunatic," said Jim. "He's just queer. Sometimes he'll
say something right bright, but half the time what he says is 'way off
the subject, or else there isn't any sense to it at all. For instance,
the other day I heard him talkin' to one of the darkies in the hall. The
darky asked him what time he wanted the car for his drive, and anybody
else in the world would have just said what time they DID want it, and
that would have been all there was to it; but here's what Bibbs says,
and I heard him with my own ears. 'What time do I want the car?' he
says. 'Well, now, that depends--that depends,' he says. He talks slow
like that, you know. 'I'll tell you what time I want the car, George,'
he says, 'if you'll tell ME what you think of this statue!' That's
exactly his words! Asked the darky what he thought of that Arab Edith
and mother bought for the hall!"

Mary pondered upon this. "He might have been in fun, perhaps," she
suggested.

"Askin' a darky what he thought of a piece of statuary--of a work
of art! Where on earth would be the fun of that? No, you're just
kind-hearted--and that's the way you OUGHT to be, of course--"

"Thank you, Mr. Sheridan!" she laughed.

"See here!" he cried. "Isn't there any way for us to get over this
Mister and Miss thing? A month's got thirty-one days in it; I've managed
to be with you a part of pretty near all the thirty-one, and I think you
know how I feel by this time--"

She looked panic-stricken immediately. "Oh, no," she protested, quickly.
"No, I don't, and--"

"Yes, you do," he said, and his voice shook a little. "You couldn't help
knowing."

"But I do!" she denied, hurriedly. "I do help knowing. I mean--Oh,
wait!"

"What for? You do know how I feel, and you--well, you've certainly
WANTED me to feel that way--or else pretended--"

"Now, now!" she lamented. "You're spoiling such a cheerful afternoon!"

"'Spoilin' it!'" He slowed down the car and turned his face to her
squarely. "See here, Miss Vertrees, haven't you--"

"Stop! Stop the car a minute." And when he had complied she faced him as
squarely as he evidently desired her to face him. "Listen. I don't want
you to go on, to-day."

"Why not?" he asked, sharply.

"I don't know."

"You mean it's just a whim?"

"I don't know," she repeated. Her voice was low and troubled and honest,
and she kept her clear eyes upon his.

"Will you tell me something?"

"Almost anything."

"Have you ever told any man you loved him?"

And at that, though she laughed, she looked a little contemptuous. "No,"
she said. "And I don't think I ever shall tell any man that--or ever
know what it means. I'm in earnest, Mr. Sheridan."

"Then you--you've just been flirting with me!" Poor Jim looked both
furious and crestfallen.

"Not one bit!" she cried. "Not one word! Not one syllable! I've meant
every single thing!"

"I don't--"

"Of course you don't!" she said. "Now, Mr. Sheridan, I want you to start
the car. Now! Thank you. Slowly, till I finish what I have to say. I
have not flirted with you. I have deliberately courted you. One thing
more, and then I want you to take me straight home, talking about the
weather all the way. I said that I do not believe I shall ever 'care'
for any man, and that is true. I doubt the existence of the kind of
'caring' we hear about in poems and plays and novels. I think it must be
just a kind of emotional TALK--most of it. At all events, I don't feel
it. Now, we can go faster, please."

"Just where does that let me out?" he demanded. "How does that excuse
you for--"

"It isn't an excuse," she said, gently, and gave him one final look,
wholly desolate. "I haven't said I should never marry."

"What?" Jim gasped.

She inclined her head in a broken sort of acquiescence, very humble,
unfathomably sorrowful.

"I promise nothing," she said, faintly.

"You needn't!" shouted Jim, radiant and exultant. "You needn't! By
George! I know you're square; that's enough for me! You wait and promise
whenever you're ready!"

"Don't forget what I asked," she begged him.

"Talk about the weather? I will! God bless the old weather!" cried the
happy Jim.



CHAPTER IX

Through the open country Bibbs was borne flying between brown fields
and sun-flecked groves of gray trees, to breathe the rushing, clean
air beneath a glorious sky--that sky so despised in the city, and so
maltreated there, that from early October to mid-May it was impossible
for men to remember that blue is the rightful color overhead.

Upon each of Bibbs's cheeks there was a hint of something almost
resembling a pinkishness; not actual color, but undeniably its phantom.
How largely this apparition may have been the work of the wind upon his
face it is difficult to calculate, for beyond a doubt it was partly the
result of a lady's bowing to him upon no more formal introduction than
the circumstance of his having caught her looking into his window a
month before. She had bowed definitely; she had bowed charmingly. And it
seemed to Bibbs that she must have meant to convey her forgiveness.

There had been something in her recognition of him unfamiliar to
his experience, and he rode the warmer for it. Nor did he lack the
impression that he would long remember her as he had just seen her: her
veil tumultuously blowing back, her face glowing in the wind--and that
look of gay friendliness tossed to him like a fresh rose in carnival.

By and by, upon a rising ground, the driver halted the car, then backed
and tacked, and sent it forward again with its nose to the south and the
smoke. Far before him Bibbs saw the great smudge upon the horizon,
that nest of cloud in which the city strove and panted like an engine
shrouded in its own steam. But to Bibbs, who had now to go to the very
heart of it, for a commanded interview with his father, the distant
cloud was like an implacable genius issuing thunderously in smoke from
his enchanted bottle, and irresistibly drawing Bibbs nearer and nearer.

They passed from the farm lands, and came, in the amber light of
November late afternoon, to the farthermost outskirts of the city; and
here the sky shimmered upon the verge of change from blue to gray;
the smoke did not visibly permeate the air, but it was there,
nevertheless--impalpable, thin, no more than the dust of smoke. And
then, as the car drove on, the chimneys and stacks of factories came
swimming up into view like miles of steamers advancing abreast, every
funnel with its vast plume, savage and black, sweeping to the horizon,
dripping wealth and dirt and suffocation over league on league already
rich and vile with grime.

The sky had become only a dingy thickening of the soiled air; and a roar
and clangor of metals beat deafeningly on Bibbs's ears. And now the car
passed two great blocks of long brick buildings, hideous in all ways
possible to make them hideous; doorways showing dark one moment and
lurid the next with the leap of some virulent interior flame, revealing
blackened giants, half naked, in passionate action, struggling with
formless things in the hot illumination. And big as these shops were,
they were growing bigger, spreading over a third block, where two new
structures were mushrooming to completion in some hasty cement process
of a stability not over-reassuring. Bibbs pulled the rug closer about
him, and not even the phantom of color was left upon his cheeks as he
passed this place, for he knew it too well. Across the face of one of
the buildings there was an enormous sign: "Sheridan Automatic Pump Co.,
Inc."

Thence they went through streets of wooden houses, all grimed, and
adding their own grime from many a sooty chimney; flimsey wooden houses
of a thousand flimsy whimsies in the fashioning, built on narrow lots
and nudging one another crossly, shutting out the stingy sunlight from
one another; bad neighbors who would destroy one another root and branch
some night when the right wind blew. They were only waiting for that
wind and a cigarette, and then they would all be gone together--a pinch
of incense burned upon the tripod of the god.

Along these streets there were skinny shade-trees, and here and there
a forest elm or walnut had been left; but these were dying. Some people
said it was the scale; some said it was the smoke; and some were sure
that asphalt and "improving" the streets did it; but Bigness was in
too Big a hurry to bother much about trees. He had telegraph-poles
and telephone-poles and electric-light-poles and trolley-poles by the
thousand to take their places. So he let the trees die and put up his
poles. They were hideous, but nobody minded that; and sometimes the
wires fell and killed people--but not often enough to matter at all.

Thence onward the car bore Bibbs through the older parts of the
town where the few solid old houses not already demolished were in
transition: some, with their fronts torn away, were being made into
segments of apartment-buildings; others had gone uproariously into
trade, brazenly putting forth "show-windows" on their first floors,
seeming to mean it for a joke; one or two with unaltered facades peeped
humorously over the tops of temporary office buildings of one story
erected in the old front yards. Altogether, the town here was like a
boarding-house hash the Sunday after Thanksgiving; the old ingredients
were discernible.

This was the fringe of Bigness's own sanctuary, and now Bibbs reached
the roaring holy of holies itself. The car must stop at every crossing
while the dark-garbed crowds, enveloped in maelstroms of dust, hurried
before it. Magnificent new buildings, already dingy, loomed hundreds of
feet above him; newer ones, more magnificent, were rising beside them,
rising higher; old buildings were coming down; middle-aged buildings
were coming down; the streets were laid open to their entrails and men
worked underground between palisades, and overhead in metal cobwebs
like spiders in the sky. Trolley-cars and long interurban cars, built to
split the wind like torpedo-boats, clanged and shrieked their way
round swarming corners; motor-cars of every kind and shape known to
man babbled frightful warnings and frantic demands; hospital ambulances
clamored wildly for passage; steam-whistles signaled the swinging of
titanic tentacle and claw; riveters rattled like machine-guns; the
ground shook to the thunder of gigantic trucks; and the conglomerate
sound of it all was the sound of earthquake playing accompaniments for
battle and sudden death. On one of the new steel buildings no work
was being done that afternoon. The building had killed a man in the
morning--and the steel-workers always stop for the day when that
"happens."

And in the hurrying crowds, swirling and sifting through the
brobdingnagian camp of iron and steel, one saw the camp-followers and
the pagan women--there would be work to-day and dancing to-night. For
the Puritan's dry voice is but the crackling of a leaf underfoot in the
rush and roar of the coming of the new Egypt.

Bibbs was on time. He knew it must be "to the minute" or his father
would consider it an outrage; and the big chronometer in Sheridan's
office marked four precisely when Bibbs walked in. Coincidentally with
his entrance five people who had been at work in the office, under
Sheridan's direction, walked out. They departed upon no visible or
audible suggestion, and with a promptness that seemed ominous to
the new-comer. As the massive door clicked softly behind the elderly
stenographer, the last of the procession, Bibbs had a feeling that
they all understood that he was a failure as a great man's son, a
disappointment, the "queer one" of the family, and that he had been
summoned to judgment--a well-founded impression, for that was exactly
what they understood.

"Sit down," said Sheridan.

It is frequently an advantage for deans, school-masters, and worried
fathers to place delinquents in the sitting-posture. Bibbs sat.

Sheridan, standing, gazed enigmatically upon his son for a period of
silence, then walked slowly to a window and stood looking out of it, his
big hands, loosely hooked together by the thumbs, behind his back. They
were soiled, as were all other hands down-town, except such as might be
still damp from a basin.

"Well, Bibbs," he said at last, not altering his attitude, "do you know
what I'm goin' to do with you?"

Bibbs, leaning back in his chair, fixed his eyes contemplatively upon
the ceiling. "I heard you tell Jim," he began, in his slow way. "You
said you'd send him to the machine-shop with me if he didn't propose to
Miss Vertrees. So I suppose that must be your plan for me. But--"

"But what?" said Sheridan, irritably, as the son paused.

"Isn't there somebody you'd let ME propose to?"

That brought his father sharply round to face him. "You beat the devil!
Bibbs, what IS the matter with you? Why can't you be like anybody else?"

"Liver, maybe," said Bibbs, gently.

"Boh! Even ole Doc Gurney says there's nothin' wrong with you
organically. No. You're a dreamer, Bibbs; that's what's the matter,
and that's ALL the matter. Oh, not one o' these BIG dreamers that put
through the big deals! No, sir! You're the kind o' dreamer that just
sets out on the back fence and thinks about how much trouble there must
be in the world! That ain't the kind that builds the bridges, Bibbs;
it's the kind that borrows fifteen cents from his wife's uncle's
brother-in-law to get ten cent's worth o' plug tobacco and a nickel's
worth o' quinine!"

He put the finishing touch on this etching with a snort, and turned
again to the window.

"Look out there!" he bade his son. "Look out o' that window! Look at the
life and energy down there! I should think ANY young man's blood would
tingle to get into it and be part of it. Look at the big things young
men are doin' in this town!" He swung about, coming to the mahogany desk
in the middle of the room. "Look at what I was doin' at your age! Look
at what your own brothers are doin'! Look at Roscoe! Yes, and look
at Jim! I made Jim president o' the Sheridan Realty Company last
New-Year's, with charge of every inch o' ground and every brick and
every shingle and stick o' wood we own; and it's an example to any young
man--or ole man, either--the way he took ahold of it. Last July we found
out we wanted two more big warehouses at the Pump Works--wanted 'em
quick. Contractors said it couldn't be done; said nine or ten months
at the soonest; couldn't see it any other way. What'd Jim do? Took the
contract himself; found a fellow with a new cement and concrete process;
kept men on the job night and day, and stayed on it night and day
himself--and, by George! we begin to USE them warehouses next week! Four
months and a half, and every inch fireproof! I tell you Jim's one o'
these fellers that make miracles happen! Now, I don't say every young
man can be like Jim, because there's mighty few got his ability, but
every young man can go in and do his share. This town is God's own
country, and there's opportunity for anybody with a pound of energy and
an ounce o' gumption. I tell you these young business men I watch just
do my heart good! THEY don't set around on the back fence--no, sir! They
take enough exercise to keep their health; and they go to a baseball
game once or twice a week in summer, maybe, and they're raisin' nice
families, with sons to take their places sometime and carry on the
work--because the work's got to go ON! They're puttin' their life-blood
into it, I tell you, and that's why we're gettin' bigger every minute,
and why THEY'RE gettin' bigger, and why it's all goin' to keep ON
gettin' bigger!"

He slapped the desk resoundingly with his open palm, and then, observing
that Bibbs remained in the same impassive attitude, with his eyes still
fixed upon the ceiling in a contemplation somewhat plaintive, Sheridan
was impelled to groan. "Oh, Lord!" he said. "This is the way you always
were. I don't believe you understood a darn word I been sayin'! You
don't LOOK as if you did. By George! it's discouraging!"

"I don't understand about getting--about getting bigger," said Bibbs,
bringing his gaze down to look at his father placatively. "I don't see
just why--"

"WHAT?" Sheridan leaned forward, resting his hands upon the desk and
staring across it incredulously at his son.

"I don't understand--exactly--what you want it all bigger for?"

"Great God!" shouted Sheridan, and struck the desk a blow with his
clenched fist. "A son of mine asks me that! You go out and ask the
poorest day-laborer you can find! Ask him that question--"

"I did once," Bibbs interrupted; "when I was in the machine-shop. I--"

"Wha'd he say?"

"He said, 'Oh, hell!'" answered Bibbs, mildly.

"Yes, I reckon he would!" Sheridan swung away from the desk. "I reckon
he certainly would! And I got plenty sympathy with him right now,
myself!"

"It's the same answer, then?" Bibbs's voice was serious, almost
tremulous.

"Damnation!" Sheridan roared. "Did you ever hear the word Prosperity,
you ninny? Did you ever hear the word Ambition? Did you ever hear the
word PROGRESS?"

He flung himself into a chair after the outburst, his big chest surging,
his throat tumultuous with gutteral incoherences. "Now then," he said,
huskily, when the anguish had somewhat abated, "what do you want to do?"

"Sir?"

"What do you WANT to do, I said."

Taken by surprise, Bibbs stammered. "What--what do--I--what--"

"If I'd let you do exactly what you had the whim for, what would you
do?"

Bibbs looked startled; then timidity overwhelmed him--a profound
shyness. He bent his head and fixed his lowered eyes upon the toe of his
shoe, which he moved to and fro upon the rug, like a culprit called to
the desk in school.

"What would you do? Loaf?"

"No, sir." Bibbs's voice was almost inaudible, and what little sound it
made was unquestionably a guilty sound. "I suppose I'd--I'd--"

"Well?"

"I suppose I'd try to--to write."

"Write what?"

"Nothing important--just poems and essays, perhaps."

"That all?"

"Yes, sir."

"I see," said his father, breathing quickly with the restraint he was
putting upon himself. "That is, you want to write, but you don't want to
write anything of any account."

"You think--"

Sheridan got up again. "I take my hat off to the man that can write
a good ad," he said, emphatically. "The best writin' talent in this
country is right spang in the ad business to-day. You buy a magazine for
good writin'--look on the back of it! Let me tell you I pay money for
that kind o' writin'. Maybe you think it's easy. Just try it! I've tried
it, and I can't do it. I tell you an ad's got to be written so it makes
people do the hardest thing in this world to GET 'em to do: it's got to
make 'em give up their MONEY! You talk about 'poems and essays.' I tell
you when it comes to the actual skill o' puttin' words together so as to
make things HAPPEN, R. T. Bloss, right here in this city, knows more in
a minute than George Waldo Emerson ever knew in his whole life!"

"You--you may be--" Bibbs said, indistinctly, the last word smothered in
a cough.

"Of COURSE I'm right! And if it ain't just like you to want to take up
with the most out-o'-date kind o' writin' there is! 'Poems and essays'!
My Lord, Bibbs, that's WOMEN'S work! You can't pick up a newspaper
without havin' to see where Mrs. Rumskididle read a paper on 'Jane
Eyre,' or 'East Lynne,' at the God-Knows-What Club. And 'poetry'! Why,
look at Edith! I expect that poem o' hers would set a pretty high-water
mark for you, young man, and it's the only one she's ever managed to
write in her whole LIFE! When I wanted her to go on and write some more
she said it took too much time. Said it took months and months. And
Edith's a smart girl; she's got more energy in her little finger than
you ever give me a chance to see in your whole body, Bibbs. Now look
at the facts: say she could turn out four or five poems a year and you
could turn out maybe two. That medal she got was worth about fifteen
dollars, so there's your income--thirty dollars a year! That's a fine
success to make of your life! I'm not sayin' a word against poetry. I
wouldn't take ten thousand dollars right now for that poem of Edith's;
and poetry's all right enough in its place--but you leave it to the
girls. A man's got to do a man's work in this world!"

He seated himself in a chair at his son's side and, leaning over, tapped
Bibbs confidentially on the knee. "This city's got the greatest future
in America, and if my sons behave right by me and by themselves they're
goin' to have a mighty fair share of it--a mighty fair share. I love
this town. It's God's own footstool, and it's made money for me every
day right along, I don't know how many years. I love it like I do my own
business, and I'd fight for it as quick as I'd fight for my own family.
It's a beautiful town. Look at our wholesale district; look at any
district you want to; look at the park system we're puttin' through,
and the boulevards and the public statuary. And she grows. God! how she
grows!" He had become intensely grave; he spoke with solemnity. "Now,
Bibbs, I can't take any of it--nor any gold or silver nor buildings nor
bonds--away with me in my shroud when I have to go. But I want to leave
my share in it to my boys. I've worked for it; I've been a builder and
a maker; and two blades of grass have grown where one grew before,
whenever I laid my hand on the ground and willed 'em to grow. I've built
big, and I want the buildin' to go on. And when my last hour comes I
want to know that my boys are ready to take charge; that they're fit
to take charge and go ON with it. Bibbs, when that hour comes I want
to know that my boys are big men, ready and fit to take hold of big things.
Bibbs, when I'm up above I want to know that the big share I've made
mine, here below, is growin' bigger and bigger in the charge of my
boys."

He leaned back, deeply moved. "There!" he said, huskily. "I've never
spoken more what was in my heart in my life. I do it because I want you
to understand--and not think me a mean father. I never had to talk that
way to Jim and Roscoe. They understood without any talk, Bibbs."

"I see," said Bibbs. "At least I think I do. But--"

"Wait a minute!" Sheridan raised his hand. "If you see the least bit
in the world, then you understand how it feels to me to have my son set
here and talk about 'poems and essays' and such-like fooleries. And you
must understand, too, what it meant to start one o' my boys and have
him come back on me the way you did, and have to be sent to a sanitarium
because he couldn't stand work. Now, let's get right down to it, Bibbs.
I've had a whole lot o' talk with ole Doc Gurney about you, one time
another, and I reckon I understand your case just about as well as he
does, anyway! Now here, I'll be frank with you. I started you in harder
than what I did the other boys, and that was for your own good, because
I saw you needed to be shook up more'n they did. You were always kind of
moody and mopish--and you needed work that'd keep you on the jump. Now,
why did it make you sick instead of brace you up and make a man of you
the way it ought of done? I pinned ole Gurney down to it. I says, 'Look
here, ain't it really because he just plain hated it?' 'Yes,' he says,
'that's it. If he'd enjoyed it, it wouldn't 'a' hurt him. He loathes it,
and that affects his nervous system. The more he tries it, the more he
hates it; and the more he hates it, the more injury it does him.' That
ain't quite his words, but it's what he meant. And that's about the way
it is."

"Yes," said Bibbs, "that's about the way it is."

"Well, then, I reckon it's up to me not only to make you do it, but to
make you like it!"

Bibbs shivered. And he turned upon his father a look that was almost
ghostly. "I can't," he said, in a low voice. "I can't."

"Can't go back to the shop?"

"No. Can't like it. I can't."

Sheridan jumped up, his patience gone. To his own view, he had reasoned
exhaustively, had explained fully and had pleaded more than a father
should, only to be met in the end with the unreasoning and mysterious
stubbornness which had been Bibbs's baffling characteristic from
childhood. "By George, you will!" he cried. "You'll go back there and
you'll like it! Gurney says it won't hurt you if you like it, and he
says it'll kill you if you go back and hate it; so it looks as if it
was about up to you not to hate it. Well, Gurney's a fool! Hatin' work
doesn't kill anybody; and this isn't goin' to kill you, whether you hate
it or not. I've never made a mistake in a serious matter in my life,
and it wasn't a mistake my sendin' you there in the first place. And
I'm goin' to prove it--I'm goin' to send you back there and vindicate my
judgment. Gurney says it's all 'mental attitude.' Well, you're goin'
to learn the right one! He says in a couple more months this fool thing
that's been the matter with you'll be disappeared completely and you'll
be back in as good or better condition than you were before you ever
went into the shop. And right then is when you begin over--right in that
same shop! Nobody can call me a hard man or a mean father. I do the best
I can for my chuldern, and I take full responsibility for bringin' my
sons up to be men. Now, so far, I've failed with you. But I'm not goin'
to keep ON failin'. I never tackled a job YET I didn't put through, and
I'm not goin' to begin with my own son. I'm goin' to make a MAN of you.
By God! I am!"

Bibbs rose and went slowly to the door, where he turned. "You say you
give me a couple of months?" he said.

Sheridan pushed a bell-button on his desk. "Gurney said two months more
would put you back where you were. You go home and begin to get yourself
in the right 'mental attitude' before those two months are up! Good-by!"

"Good-by, sir," said Bibbs, meekly.



CHAPTER X

Bibbs's room, that neat apartment for transients to which the "lamidal"
George had shown him upon his return, still bore the appearance of
temporary quarters, possibly because Bibbs had no clear conception
of himself as a permanent incumbent. However, he had set upon the
mantelpiece the two photographs that he owned: one, a "group" twenty
years old--his father and mother, with Jim and Roscoe as boys--and the
other a "cabinet" of Edith at sixteen. And upon a table were the books
he had taken from his trunk: Sartor Resartus, Virginibus Puerisque,
Huckleberry Finn, and Afterwhiles. There were some other books in the
trunk--a large one, which remained unremoved at the foot of the bed,
adding to the general impression of transiency. It contained nearly all
the possessions as well as the secret life of Bibbs Sheridan, and Bibbs
sat beside it, the day after his interview with his father, raking over
a small collection of manuscripts in the top tray. Some of these he
glanced through dubiously, finding little comfort in them; but one made
him smile. Then he shook his head ruefully indeed, and ruefully began to
read it. It was written on paper stamped "Hood Sanitarium," and bore the
title, "Leisure."

  A man may keep a quiet heart at seventy miles an hour, but not if
  he is running the train.  Nor is the habit of contemplation a useful
  quality in the stoker of a foundry furnace; it will not be found to
  recommend him to the approbation of his superiors.  For a profession
  adapted solely to the pursuit of happiness in thinking, I would
  choose that of an invalid:  his money is time and he may spend it on
  Olympus.  It will not suffice to be an amateur invalid.  To my way
  of thinking, the perfect practitioner must be to all outward
  purposes already dead if he is to begin the perfect enjoyment of
  life.  His serenity must not be disturbed by rumors of recovery; he
  must lie serene in his long chair in the sunshine.  The world must
  be on the other side of the wall, and the wall must be so thick and
  so high that he cannot hear the roaring of the furnace fires and the
  screaming of the whistles.  Peace--

Having read so far as the word "peace," Bibbs suffered an interruption
interesting as a coincidence of contrast. High voices sounded in the
hall just outside his door; and it became evident that a woman's quarrel
was in progress, the parties to it having begun it in Edith's room, and
continuing it vehemently as they came out into the hall.

"Yes, you BETTER go home!" Bibbs heard his sister vociferating, shrilly.
"You better go home and keep your mind a little more on your HUSBAND!"

"Edie, Edie!" he heard his mother remonstrating, as peacemaker.

"You see here!" This was Sibyl, and her voice was both acrid and
tremulous. "Don't you talk to me that way! I came here to tell Mother
Sheridan what I'd heard, and to let her tell Father Sheridan if she
thought she ought to, and I did it for your own good."

"Yes, you did!" And Edith's gibing laughter tooted loudly. "Yes, you
did! YOU didn't have any other reason! OH no! YOU don't want to break it
up between Bobby Lamhorn and me because--"

"Edie, Edie! Now, now!"

"Oh, hush up, mamma! I'd like to know, then, if she says her new friends
tell her he's got such a reputation that he oughtn't to come here, what
about his not going to HER house. How--"

"I've explained that to Mother Sheridan." Sibyl's voice indicated that
she was descending the stairs. "Married people are not the same. Some
things that should be shielded from a young girl--"

This seemed to have no very soothing effect upon Edith. "'Shielded from
a young girl'!" she shrilled. "You seem pretty willing to be the shield!
You look out Roscoe doesn't notice what kind of a shield you are!"

Sibyl's answer was inaudible, but Mrs. Sheridan's flurried attempts at
pacification were renewed. "Now, Edie, Edie, she means it for your good,
and you'd oughtn't to--"

"Oh, hush up, mamma, and let me alone! If you dare tell papa--"

"Now, now! I'm not going to tell him to-day, and maybe--"

"You've got to promise NEVER to tell him!" the girl cried, passionately.

"Well, we'll see. You just come back in your own room, and we'll--"

"No! I WON'T 'talk it over'! Stop pulling me! Let me ALONE!" And Edith,
flinging herself violently upon Bibbs's door, jerked it open, swung
round it into the room, slammed the door behind her, and threw herself,
face down, upon the bed in such a riot of emotion that she had no
perception of Bibbs's presence in the room. Gasping and sobbing in a
passion of tears, she beat the coverlet and pillows with her clenched
fists. "Sneak!" she babbled aloud. "Sneak! Snake-in-the-grass! Cat!"

Bibbs saw that she did not know he was there, and he went softly toward
the door, hoping to get away before she became aware of him; but some
sound of his movement reached her, and she sat up, startled, facing him.

"Bibbs! I thought I saw you go out awhile ago."

"Yes. I came back, though. I'm sorry--"

"Did you hear me quarreling with Sibyl?"

"Only what you said in the hall. You lie down again, Edith. I'm going
out."

"No; don't go." She applied a handkerchief to her eyes, emitted a sob,
and repeated her request. "Don't go. I don't mind you; you're quiet,
anyhow. Mamma's so fussy, and never gets anywhere. I don't mind you at
all, but I wish you'd sit down."

"All right." And he returned to his chair beside the trunk. "Go ahead
and cry all you want, Edith," he said. "No harm in that!"

"Sibyl told mamma--OH!" she began, choking. "Mary Vertrees had mamma and
Sibyl and I to tea, one afternoon two weeks or so ago, and she had some
women there that Sibyl's been crazy to get in with, and she just laid
herself out to make a hit with 'em, and she's been running after 'em
ever since, and now she comes over here and says THEY say Bobby Lamhorn
is so bad that, even though they like his family, none of the nice
people in town would let him in their houses. In the first place, it's
a falsehood, and I don't believe a word of it; and in the second place
I know the reason she did it, and, what's more, she KNOWS I know it! I
won't SAY what it is--not yet--because papa and all of you would think
I'm as crazy as she is snaky; and Roscoe's such a fool he'd probably
quit speaking to me. But it's true! Just you watch her; that's all I
ask. Just you watch that woman. You'll see!"

As it happened, Bibbs was literally watching "that woman." Glancing from
the window, he saw Sibyl pause upon the pavement in front of the old
house next door. She stood a moment, in deep thought, then walked
quickly up the path to the door, undoubtedly with the intention
of calling. But he did not mention this to his sister, who, after
delivering herself of a rather vague jeremiad upon the subject of her
sister-in-law's treacheries, departed to her own chamber, leaving him to
his speculations. The chief of these concerned the social elasticities
of women. Sibyl had just been a participant in a violent scene; she had
suffered hot insult of a kind that could not fail to set her quivering
with resentment; and yet she elected to betake herself to the presence
of people whom she knew no more than "formally." Bibbs marveled. Surely,
he reflected, some traces of emotion must linger upon Sibyl's face or in
her manner; she could not have ironed it all quite out in the three or
four minutes it took her to reach the Vertreeses' door.

And in this he was not mistaken, for Mary Vertrees was at that moment
wondering what internal excitement Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan was striving to
master. But Sibyl had no idea that she was allowing herself to exhibit
anything except the gaiety which she conceived proper to the manner of a
casual caller. She was wholly intent upon fulfilling the sudden purpose
that brought her, and she was no more self-conscious than she was finely
intelligent. For Sibyl Sheridan belonged to a type Scriptural in its
antiquity. She was merely the idle and half-educated intriguer who may
and does delude men, of course, and the best and dullest of her own sex
as well, finding invariably strong supporters among these latter. It is
a type that has wrought some damage in the world and would have wrought
greater, save for the check put upon its power by intelligent women
and by its own "lack of perspective," for it is a type that never sees
itself. Sibyl followed her impulses with no reflection or question--it
was like a hound on the gallop after a master on horseback. She had not
even the instinct to stop and consider her effect. If she wished to make
a certain impression she believed that she made it. She believed that
she was believed.

"My mother asked me to say that she was sorry she couldn't come down,"
Mary said, when they were seated.

Sibyl ran the scale of a cooing simulance of laughter, which she had
been brought up to consider the polite thing to do after a remark
addressed to her by any person with whom she was not on familiar terms.
It was intended partly as a courtesy and partly as the foundation for an
impression of sweetness.

"Just thought I'd fly in a minute," she said, continuing the cooing to
relieve the last doubt of her gentiality. "I thought I'd just behave
like REAL country neighbors. We are almost out in the country, so far
from down-town, aren't we? And it seemed such a LOVELY day! I wanted
to tell you how much I enjoyed meeting those nice people at tea that
afternoon. You see, coming here a bride and never having lived here
before, I've had to depend on my husband's friends almost entirely, and
I really've known scarcely anybody. Mr. Sheridan has been so engrossed
in business ever since he was a mere boy, why, of course--"

She paused, with the air of having completed an explanation.

"Of course," said Mary, sympathetically accepting it.

"Yes. I've been seeing quite a lot of the Kittersbys since that
afternoon," Sibyl went on. "They're really delightful people. Indeed
they are! Yes--"

She stopped with unconscious abruptness, her mind plainly wandering to
another matter; and Mary perceived that she had come upon a definite
errand. Moreover, a tensing of Sibyl's eyelids, in that moment of
abstraction as she looked aside from her hostess, indicated that the
errand was a serious one for the caller and easily to be connected
with the slight but perceptible agitation underlying her assumption of
cheerful ease. There was a restlessness of breathing, a restlessness of
hands.

"Mrs. Kittersby and her daughter were chatting about some of the people
here in town the other day," said Sibyl, repeating the cooing and
protracting it. "They said something that took ME by surprise! We were
talking about our mutual friend, Mr. Robert Lamhorn--"

Mary interrupted her promptly. "Do you mean 'mutual' to include my
mother and me?" she asked.

"Why, yes; the Kittersbys and you and all of us Sheridans, I mean."

"No," said Mary. "We shouldn't consider Mr. Robert Lamhorn a friend of
ours."

To her surprise, Sibyl nodded eagerly, as if greatly pleased. "That's
just the way Mrs. Kittersby talked!" she cried, with a vehemence that
made Mary stare. "Yes, and I hear that's the way ALL you old families
here speak of him!"

Mary looked aside, but otherwise she was able to maintain her composure.
"I had the impression he was a friend of yours," she said; adding,
hastily, "and your husband's."

"Oh yes," said the caller, absently. "He is, certainly. A man's
reputation for a little gaiety oughtn't to make a great difference to
married people, of course. It's where young girls are in question. THEN
it may be very, very dangerous. There are a great many things safe and
proper for married people that might be awf'ly imprudent for a young
girl. Don't you agree, Miss Vertrees?"

"I don't know," returned the frank Mary. "Do you mean that you intend
to remain a friend of Mr. Lamhorn's, but disapprove of Miss Sheridan's
doing so?"

"That's it exactly!" was the naive and ardent response of Sibyl. "What
I feel about it is that a man with his reputation isn't at all suitable
for Edith, and the family ought to be made to understand it. I tell
you," she cried, with a sudden access of vehemence, "her father ought to
put his foot down!"

Her eyes flashed with a green spark; something seemed to leap out and
then retreat, but not before Mary had caught a glimpse of it, as one
might catch a glimpse of a thing darting forth and then scuttling back
into hiding under a bush.

"Of course," said Sibyl, much more composedly, "I hardly need say that
it's entirely on Edith's account that I'm worried about this. I'm as
fond of Edith as if she was really my sister, and I can't help fretting
about it. It would break my heart to have Edith's life spoiled."

This tune was off the key, to Mary's ear. Sibyl tried to sing with
pathos, but she flatted.

And when a lady receives a call from another who suffers under the
stress of some feeling which she wishes to conceal, there is not
uncommonly developed a phenomenon of duality comparable to the effect
obtained by placing two mirrors opposite each other, one clear and
the other flawed. In this case, particularly, Sibyl had an imperfect
consciousness of Mary. The Mary Vertrees that she saw was merely
something to be cozened to her own frantic purpose--a Mary Vertrees who
was incapable of penetrating that purpose. Sibyl sat there believing
that she was projecting the image of herself that she desired to
project, never dreaming that with every word, every look, and every
gesture she was more and more fully disclosing the pitiable truth to
the clear eyes of Mary. And the Sibyl that Mary saw was an overdressed
woman, in manner half rustic, and in mind as shallow as a pan, but
possessed by emotions that appeared to be strong--perhaps even violent.
What those emotions were Mary had not guessed, but she began to suspect.

"And Edith's life WOULD be spoiled," Sibyl continued. "It would be a
dreadful thing for the whole family. She's the very apple of Father
Sheridan's eye, and he's as proud of her as he is of Jim and Roscoe. It
would be a horrible thing for him to have her marry a man like Robert
Lamhorn; but he doesn't KNOW anything about him, and if somebody doesn't
tell him, what I'm most afraid of is that Edith might get his consent
and hurry on the wedding before he finds out, and then it would be too
late. You see, Miss Vertrees, it's very difficult for me to decide just
what it's my duty to do."

"I see," said Mary, looking at her thoughtfully, "Does Miss Sheridan
seem to--to care very much about him?"

"He's deliberately fascinated her," returned the visitor, beginning to
breathe quickly and heavily. "Oh, she wasn't difficult! She knew she
wasn't in right in this town, and she was crazy to meet the people that
were, and she thought he was one of 'em. But that was only the start
that made it easy for him--and he didn't need it. He could have done
it, anyway!" Sibyl was launched now; her eyes were furious and her voice
shook. "He went after her deliberately, the way he does everything; he's
as cold-blooded as a fish. All he cares about is his own pleasure, and
lately he's decided it would be pleasant to get hold of a piece of real
money--and there was Edith! And he'll marry her! Nothing on earth can
stop him unless he finds out she won't HAVE any money if she marries
him, and the only person that could make him understand that is Father
Sheridan. Somehow, that's got to be managed, because Lamhorn is going to
hurry it on as fast as he can. He told me so last night. He said he was
going to marry her the first minute he could persuade her to it--and
little Edith's all ready to be persuaded!" Sibyl's eyes flashed green
again. "And he swore he'd do it," she panted. "He swore he'd marry Edith
Sheridan, and nothing on earth could stop him!"

And then Mary understood. Her lips parted and she stared at the babbling
creature incredulously, a sudden vivid picture in her mind, a canvas of
unconscious Sibyl's painting. Mary beheld it with pity and horror: she
saw Sibyl clinging to Robert Lamhorn, raging, in a whisper, perhaps--for
Roscoe might have been in the house, or servants might have heard.
She saw Sibyl entreating, beseeching, threatening despairingly, and
Lamhorn--tired of her--first evasive, then brutally letting her have the
truth; and at last, infuriated, "swearing" to marry her rival. If Sibyl
had not babbled out the word "swore" it might have been less plain.

The poor woman blundered on, wholly unaware of what she had confessed.
"You see," she said, more quietly, "whatever's going to be done ought to
be done right away. I went over and told Mother Sheridan what I'd heard
about Lamhorn--oh, I was open and aboveboard! I told her right before
Edith. I think it ought all to be done with perfect frankness, because
nobody can say it isn't for the girl's own good and what her best friend
would do. But Mother Sheridan's under Edith's thumb, and she's afraid
to ever come right out with anything. Father Sheridan's different. Edith
can get anything she wants out of him in the way of money or ordinary
indulgence, but when it comes to a matter like this he'd be a steel
rock. If it's a question of his will against anybody else's he'd make
his will rule if it killed 'em both! Now, he'd never in the world let
Lamhorn come near the house again if he knew his reputation. So, you
see, somebody's got to tell him. It isn't a very easy position for me,
is it, Miss Vertrees?"

"No," said Mary, gravely.

"Well, to be frank," said Sibyl, smiling, "that's why I've come to you."

"To ME!" Mary frowned.

Sibyl rippled and cooed again. "There isn't ANYBODY ever made such a hit
with Father Sheridan in his life as you have. And of course we ALL
hope you're not going to be exactly an outsider in the affairs of the
family!" (This sally with another and louder effect of laughter). "And
if it's MY duty, why, in a way, I think it might be thought yours, too."

"No, no!" exclaimed Mary, sharply.

"Listen," said Sibyl. "Now suppose I go to Father Sheridan with this
story, and Edith says it's not true; suppose she says Lamhorn has a
good reputation and that I'm repeating irresponsible gossip, or suppose
(what's most likely) she loses her temper and says I invented it, then
what am I going to do? Father Sheridan doesn't know Mrs. Kittersby and
her daughter, and they're out of the question, anyway. But suppose I
could say: 'All right, if you want proof, ask Miss Vertrees. She came
with me, and she's waiting in the next room right now, to--"

"No, no," said Mary, quickly. "You mustn't--"

"Listen just a minute more," Sibyl urged, confidingly. She was on easy
ground now, to her own mind, and had no doubt of her success. "You
naturally don't want to begin by taking part in a family quarrel, but
if YOU take part in it, it won't be one. You don't know yourself what
weight you carry over there, and no one would have the right to say you
did it except out of the purest kindness. Don't you see that Jim and
his father would admire you all the more for it? Miss Vertrees, listen!
Don't you see we OUGHT to do it, you and I? Do you suppose Robert
Lamhorn cares a snap of his finger for her? Do you suppose a man like
him would LOOK at Edith Sheridan if it wasn't for the money?" And again
Sibyl's emotion rose to the surface. "I tell you he's after nothing on
earth but to get his finger in that old man's money-pile, over there,
next door! He'd marry ANYBODY to do it. Marry Edith?" she cried. "I tell
you he'd marry their nigger cook for THAT!"

She stopped, afraid--at the wrong time--that she had been too vehement,
but a glance at Mary reassured her, and Sibyl decided that she had
produced the effect she wished. Mary was not looking at her; she was
staring straight before her at the wall, her eyes wide and shining. She
became visibly a little paler as Sibyl looked at her.

"After nothing on earth but to get his finger in that old man's
money-pile, over there, next door!" The voice was vulgar, the words were
vulgar--and the plain truth was vulgar! How it rang in Mary Vertrees's
ears! The clear mirror had caught its own image clearly in the flawed
one at last.

Sibyl put forth her best bid to clench the matter. She offered her
bargain. "Now don't you worry," she said, sunnily, "about this setting
Edith against you. She'll get over it after a while, anyway, but if she
tried to be spiteful and make it uncomfortable for you when you drop in
over there, or managed so as to sort of leave you out, why, I've got a
house, and Jim likes to come there. I don't THINK Edith WOULD be that
way; she's too crazy to have you take her around with the smart crowd,
but if she DID, you needn't worry. And another thing--I guess you won't
mind Jim's own sister-in-law speaking of it. Of course, I don't know
just how matters stand between you and Jim, but Jim and Roscoe are about
as much alike as two brothers can be, and Roscoe was very slow making up
his mind; sometimes I used to think he actually never WOULD. Now, what
I mean is, sisters-in-law can do lots of things to help matters on like
that. There's lots of little things can be said, and lots--"

She stopped, puzzled. Mary Vertrees had gone from pale to scarlet, and
now, still scarlet indeed, she rose, without a word of explanation, or
any other kind of word, and walked slowly to the open door and out of
the room.

Sibyl was a little taken aback. She supposed Mary had remembered
something neglected and necessary for the instruction of a servant, and
that she would return in a moment; but it was rather a rude excess of
absent-mindedness not to have excused herself, especially as her guest
was talking. And, Mary's return being delayed, Sibyl found time to think
this unprefaced exit odder and ruder than she had first considered it.
There might have been more excuse for it, she thought, had she been
speaking of matters less important--offering to do the girl all the
kindness in her power, too!

Sibyl yawned and swung her muff impatiently; she examined the sole of
her shoe; she decided on a new shape of heel; she made an inventory
of the furniture of the room, of the rugs, of the wall-paper and
engravings. Then she looked at her watch and frowned; went to a window
and stood looking out upon the brown lawn, then came back to the chair
she had abandoned, and sat again. There was no sound in the house.

A strange expression began imperceptibly to alter the planes of her
face, and slowly she grew as scarlet as Mary--scarlet to the ears. She
looked at her watch again--and twenty-five minutes had elapsed since she
had looked at it before.

She went into the hall, glanced over her shoulder oddly; then she let
herself softly out of the front door, and went across the street to her
own house.

Roscoe met her upon the threshold, gloomily. "Saw you from the window,"
he explained. "You must find a lot to say to that old lady."

"What old lady?"

"Mrs. Vertrees. I been waiting for you a long time, and I saw the
daughter come out, fifteen minutes ago, and post a letter, and then walk
on up the street. Don't stand out on the porch," he said, crossly.
"Come in here. There's something it's come time I'll have to talk to you
about. Come in!"

But as she was moving to obey he glanced across at his father's house
and started. He lifted his hand to shield his eyes from the setting sun,
staring fixedly. "Something's the matter over there," he muttered, and
then, more loudly, as alarm came into his voice, he said, "What's the
matter over there?"

Bibbs dashed out of the gate in an automobile set at its highest speed,
and as he saw Roscoe he made a gesture singularly eloquent of calamity,
and was lost at once in a cloud of dust down the street. Edith had
followed part of the way down the drive, and it could be seen that she
was crying bitterly. She lifted both arms to Roscoe, summoning him.

"By George!" gasped Roscoe. "I believe somebody's dead!"

And he started for the New House at a run.



CHAPTER XI

Sheridan had decided to conclude his day's work early that afternoon,
and at about two o'clock he left his office with a man of affairs from
foreign parts, who had traveled far for a business conference with
Sheridan and his colleagues. Herr Favre, in spite of his French name,
was a gentleman of Bavaria. It was his first visit to our country, and
Sheridan took pleasure in showing him the sights of the country's finest
city. They got into an open car at the main entrance of the Sheridan
Building, and were driven first, slowly and momentously, through the
wholesale district and the retail district; then more rapidly they
inspected the packing-houses and the stock-yards; then skirmished over
the "park system" and "boulevards"; and after that whizzed through the
"residence section" on their way to the factories and foundries.

"All cray," observed Herr Favre, smilingly.

"'Cray'?" echoed Sheridan. "I don't know what you mean. 'Cray'?"

"No white," said Herr Favre, with a wave of his hand toward the
long rows of houses on both sides of the street. "No white lace
window-curtains; all cray lace window-curtains."

"Oh. I see!" Sheridan laughed indulgently. "You mean 'GRAY.' No, they
ain't, they're white. I never saw any gray ones."

Herr Favre shook his head, much amused. "There are NO white ones,"
he said. "There is no white ANYTHING in your city; no white
window-curtains, no white house, no white peeble!" He pointed upward.
"Smoke!" Then he sniffed the air and clasped his nose between forefinger
and thumb. "Smoke! Smoke ef'rywhere. Smoke in your insites." He tapped
his chest. "Smoke in your lunks!"

"Oh! SMOKE!" Sheridan cried with gusto, drawing in a deep breath and
patently finding it delicious. "You BET we got smoke!"

"Exbensif!" said Herr Favre. "Ruins foliage; ruins fabrics. Maybe in
summer it iss not so bad, but I wonder your wifes will bear it."

Sheridan laughed uproariously. "They know it means new spring hats for
'em!"

"They must need many, too!" said the visitor. "New hats, new all things,
but nothing white. In Munchen we could not do it; we are a safing
peeble."

"Where's that?"

"In Munchen. You say 'Munich.'"

"Well, I never been to Munich, but I took in the Mediterranean trip,
and I tell you, outside o' some right good scenery, all I saw was mighty
dirty and mighty shiftless and mighty run-down at the heel. Now comin'
right down TO it, Mr. Farver, wouldn't you rather live here in this town
than in Munich? I know you got more enterprise up there than the part of
the old country I saw, and I know YOU'RE a live business man and you're
associated with others like you, but when it comes to LIVIN' in a place,
wouldn't you heap rather be here than over there?"

"For me," said Herr Favre, "no. Here I should not think I was living. It
would be like the miner who goes into the mine to work; nothing else."

"We got a good many good citizens here from your part o' the world. THEY
like it."

"Oh yes." And Herr Favre laughed deprecatingly. "The first generation,
they bring their Germany with them; then, after that, they are
Americans, like you." He tapped his host's big knee genially. "You are
patriot; so are they."

"Well, I reckon you must be a pretty hot little patriot yourself, Mr.
Farver!" Sheridan exclaimed, gaily. "You certainly stand up for your
own town, if you stick to sayin' you'd rather live there than you would
here. Yes, SIR! You sure are some patriot to say THAT--after you've seen
our city! It ain't reasonable in you, but I must say I kind of admire
you for it; every man ought to stick up for his own, even when he sees
the other fellow's got the goods on him. Yet I expect way down deep in
your heart, Mr. Farver, you'd rather live right here than any place else
in the world, if you had your choice. Man alive! this is God's country,
Mr. Farver, and a blind man couldn't help seein' it! You couldn't stand
where you do in a business way and NOT see it. Soho, boy! Here we are.
This is the big works, and I'll show you something now that'll make your
eyes stick out!"

They had arrived at the Pump Works; and for an hour Mr. Favre was
personally conducted and personally instructed by the founder and
president, the buzzing queen bee of those buzzing hives.

"Now I'll take you for a spin in the country," said Sheridan, when at
last they came out to the car again. "We'll take a breezer." But, with
his foot on the step, he paused to hail a neat young man who came out
of the office smiling a greeting. "Hello, young fellow!" Sheridan said,
heartily. "On the job, are you, Jimmie? Ha! They don't catch you OFF of
it very often, I guess, though I do hear you go automobile-ridin' in
the country sometimes with a mighty fine-lookin' girl settin' up beside
you!" He roared with laughter, clapping his son upon the shoulder.
"That's all right with me--if it is with HER! So, Jimmie? Well, when we
goin' to move into your new warehouses? Monday?"

"Sunday, if you want to," said Jim.

"No!" cried his father, delighted. "Don't tell me you're goin' to keep
your word about dates! That's no way to do contractin'! Never heard of a
contractor yet didn't want more time."

"They'll be all ready for you on the minute," said Jim. "I'm going over
both of 'em now, with Links and Sherman, from foundation to roof. I
guess they'll pass inspection, too!"

"Well, then, when you get through with that," said his father, "you go
and take your girl out ridin'. By George! you've earned it! You tell
her you stand high with ME!" He stepped into the car, waving a waggish
farewell, and when the wheels were in motion again, he turned upon his
companion a broad face literally shining with pride. "That's my boy
Jimmie!" he said.

"Fine young man, yes," said Herr Favre.

"I got two o' the finest boys," said Sheridan, "I got two o' the finest
boys God ever made, and that's a fact, Mr. Farver! Jim's the oldest, and
I tell you they got to get up the day before if they expect to catch HIM
in bed! My other boy, Roscoe, he's always to the good, too, but Jim's
a wizard. You saw them two new-process warehouses, just about finished?
Well, JIM built 'em. I'll tell you about that, Mr. Farver." And he
recited this history, describing the new process at length; in fact, he
had such pride in Jim's achievement that he told Herr Favre all about it
more than once.

"Fine young man, yes," repeated the good Munchner, three-quarters of an
hour later. They were many miles out in the open country by this time.

"He is that!" said Sheridan, adding, as if confidentially: "I got a fine
family, Mr. Farver--fine chuldern. I got a daughter now; you take her
and put her anywhere you please, and she'll shine up with ANY of 'em.
There's culture and refinement and society in this town by the car-load,
and here lately she's been gettin' right in the thick of it--her and my
daughter-in-law, both. I got a mighty fine daughter-in-law, Mr. Farver.
I'm goin' to get you up for a meal with us before you leave town, and
you'll see--and, well, sir, from all I hear the two of 'em been holdin'
their own with the best. Myself, I and the wife never had time for much
o' that kind o' doin's, but it's all right and good for the chuldern;
and my daughter she's always kind of taken to it. I'll read you a poem
she wrote when I get you up at the house. She wrote it in school and
took the first prize for poetry with it. I tell you they don't make 'em
any smarter'n that girl, Mr. Farver. Yes, sir; take us all round, we're
a pretty happy family; yes, sir. Roscoe hasn't got any chuldern yet,
and I haven't ever spoke to him and his wife about it--it's kind of
a delicate matter--but it's about time the wife and I saw some
gran'-chuldern growin' up around us. I certainly do hanker for about
four or five little curly-headed rascals to take on my knee. Boys, I
hope, o' course; that's only natural. Jim's got his eye on a mighty
splendid-lookin' girl; lives right next door to us. I expect you heard
me joshin' him about it back yonder. She's one of the ole blue-bloods
here, and I guess it was a mighty good stock--to raise HER! She's one
these girls that stand right up and look at you! And pretty? She's
the prettiest thing you ever saw! Good size, too; good health and good
sense. Jim'll be just right if he gets her. I must say it tickles ME
to think o' the way that boy took ahold o' that job back yonder. Four
months and a half! Yes, sir--"

He expanded this theme once more; and thus he continued to entertain
the stranger throughout the long drive. Darkness had fallen before they
reached the city on their return, and it was after five when Sheridan
allowed Herr Favre to descend at the door of his hotel, where boys were
shrieking extra editions of the evening paper.

"Now, good night, Mr. Farver," said Sheridan, leaning from the car to
shake hands with his guest. "Don't forget I'm goin' to come around and
take you up to--Go on away, boy!"

A newsboy had thrust himself almost between them, yelling, "Extry!
Secon' Extry. Extry, all about the horrable acciDENT. Extry!"

"Get out!" laughed Sheridan. "Who wants to read about accidents? Get
out!"

The boy moved away philosophically. "Extry! Extry!" he shrilled. "Three
men killed! Extry! Millionaire killed! Two other men killed! Extry!
Extry!"

"Don't forget, Mr. Farver," Sheridan completed his interrupted
farewells. "I'll come by to take you up to our house for dinner. I'll be
here for you about half-past five to-morrow afternoon. Hope you 'njoyed
the drive much as I have. Good night--good night!" He leaned back,
speaking to the chauffer. "Now you can take me around to the Central
City barber-shop, boy. I want to get a shave 'fore I go up home."

"Extry! Extry!" screamed the newsboys, zig-zagging among the crowds like
bats in the dusk. "Extry! All about the horrable acciDENT! Extry!" It
struck Sheridan that the papers sent out too many "Extras"; they printed
"Extras" for all sorts of petty crimes and casualties. It was a mistake,
he decided, critically. Crying "Wolf!" too often wouldn't sell the
goods; it was bad business. The papers would "make more in the long
run," he was sure, if they published an "Extra" only when something of
real importance happened.

"Extry! All about the hor'ble AX'nt! Extry!" a boy squawked under his
nose, as he descended from the car.

"Go on away!" said Sheridan, gruffly, though he smiled. He liked to see
the youngsters working so noisily to get on in the world.

But as he crossed the pavement to the brilliant glass doors of the
barber-shop, a second newsboy grasped the arm of the one who had thus
cried his wares.

"Say, Yallern," said this second, hoarse with awe, "'n't chew know who
that IS?"

"Who?"

"It's SHERIDAN!"

"Jeest!" cried the first, staring insanely.

At about the same hour, four times a week--Monday, Wednesday, Friday,
and Saturday--Sheridan stopped at this shop to be shaved by the head
barber. The barbers were negroes, he was their great man, and it was
their habit to give him a "reception," his entrance being always the
signal for a flurry of jocular hospitality, followed by general excesses
of briskness and gaiety. But it was not so this evening.

The shop was crowded. Copies of the "Extra" were being read by men
waiting, and by men in the latter stages of treatment. "Extras" lay upon
vacant seats and showed from the pockets of hanging coats.

There was a loud chatter between the practitioners and their recumbent
patients, a vocal charivari which stopped abruptly as Sheridan opened
the door. His name seemed to fizz in the air like the last sputtering
of a firework; the barbers stopped shaving and clipping; lathered men
turned their prostrate heads to stare, and there was a moment of amazing
silence in the shop.

The head barber, nearest the door, stood like a barber in a tableau. His
left hand held stretched between thumb and forefinger an elastic section
of his helpless customer's cheek, while his right hand hung poised above
it, the razor motionless. And then, roused from trance by the door's
closing, he accepted the fact of Sheridan's presence. The barber
remembered that there are no circumstances in life--or just after
it--under which a man does not need to be shaved.

He stepped forward, profoundly grave. "I be through with this man in the
chair one minute, Mist' Sheridan," he said, in a hushed tone. "Yessuh."
And of a solemn negro youth who stood by, gazing stupidly, "You goin'
RESIGN?" he demanded in a fierce undertone. "You goin' take Mist'
Sheridan's coat?" He sent an angry look round the shop, and the barbers,
taking his meaning, averted their eyes and fell to work, the murmur of
subdued conversation buzzing from chair to chair.

"You sit down ONE minute, Mist' Sheridan," said the head barber, gently.
"I fix nice chair fo' you to wait in."

"Never mind," said Sheridan. "Go on get through with your man."

"Yessuh." And he went quickly back to his chair on tiptoe, followed by
Sheridan's puzzled gaze.

Something had gone wrong in the shop, evidently. Sheridan did not know
what to make of it. Ordinarily he would have shouted a hilarious demand
for the meaning of the mystery, but an inexplicable silence had been
imposed upon him by the hush that fell upon his entrance and by the odd
look every man in the shop had bent upon him.

Vaguely disquieted, he walked to one of the seats in the rear of the
shop, and looked up and down the two lines of barbers, catching quickly
shifted, furtive glances here and there. He made this brief survey after
wondering if one of the barbers had died suddenly, that day, or the
night before; but there was no vacancy in either line.

The seat next to his was unoccupied, but some one had left a copy of
the "Extra" there, and, frowning, he picked it up and glanced at it. The
first of the swollen display lines had little meaning to him:

  Fatally Faulty.  New Process Roof Collapses Hurling Capitalist to
  Death with Inventor.  Seven Escape When Crash Comes.  Death Claims--

Thus far had he read when a thin hand fell upon the paper, covering the
print from his eyes; and, looking up, he saw Bibbs standing before him,
pale and gentle, immeasurably compassionate.

"I've come for you, father," said Bibbs. "Here's the boy with your coat
and hat. Put them on and come home."

And even then Sheridan did not understand. So secure was he in the
strength and bigness of everything that was his, he did not know what
calamity had befallen him. But he was frightened.

Without a word, he followed Bibbs heavily out throught the still shop,
but as they reached the pavement he stopped short and, grasping his
son's sleeve with shaking fingers, swung him round so that they stood
face to face.

"What--what--" His mouth could not do him the service he asked of it, he
was so frightened.

"Extry!" screamed a newsboy straight in his face. "Young North Side
millionaire insuntly killed! Extry!"

"Not--JIM!" said Sheridan.

Bibbs caught his father's hand in his own.

"And YOU come to tell me that?"

Sheridan did not know what he said. But in those first words and in the
first anguish of the big, stricken face Bibbs understood the unuttered
cry of accusation:

"Why wasn't it you?"



CHAPTER XII

Standing in the black group under gaunt trees at the cemetery, three
days later, Bibbs unwillingly let an old, old thought become definite
in his mind: the sickly brother had buried the strong brother, and Bibbs
wondered how many million times that had happened since men first made a
word to name the sons of one mother. Almost literally he had buried his
strong brother, for Sheridan had gone to pieces when he saw his dead
son. He had nothing to help him meet the shock, neither definite
religion nor "philosophy" definite or indefinite. He could only beat his
forehead and beg, over and over, to be killed with an ax, while his wife
was helpless except to entreat him not to "take on," herself adding a
continuous lamentation. Edith, weeping, made truce with Sibyl and saw to
it that the mourning garments were beyond criticism. Roscoe was dazed,
and he shirked, justifying himself curiously by saying he "never had
any experience in such matters." So it was Bibbs, the shy outsider, who
became, during this dreadful little time, the master of the house; for
as strange a thing as that, sometimes, may be the result of a death. He
met the relatives from out of town at the station; he set the time
for the funeral and the time for meals; he selected the flowers and
he selected Jim's coffin; he did all the grim things and all the other
things. Jim had belonged to an order of Knights, who lengthened the
rites with a picturesque ceremony of their own, and at first Bibbs
wished to avoid this, but upon reflection he offered no objection--he
divined that the Knights and their service would be not precisely a
consolation, but a satisfaction to his father. So the Knights led the
procession, with their band playing a dirge part of the long way to the
cemetery; and then turned back, after forming in two lines, plumed
hats sympathetically in hand, to let the hearse and the carriages pass
between.

"Mighty fine-lookin' men," said Sheridan, brokenly. "They all--all liked
him. He was--" His breath caught in a sob and choked him. "He was--a
Grand Supreme Herald."

Bibbs had divined aright.

"Dust to dust," said the minister, under the gaunt trees; and at that
Sheridan shook convulsively from head to foot. All of the black group
shivered, except Bibbs, when it came to "Dust to dust." Bibbs stood
passive, for he was the only one of them who had known that thought as a
familiar neighbor; he had been close upon dust himself for a long, long
time, and even now he could prophesy no protracted separation between
himself and dust. The machine-shop had brought him very close, and if
he had to go back it would probably bring him closer still; so close--as
Dr. Gurney predicted--that no one would be able to tell the difference
between dust and himself. And Sheridan, if Bibbs read him truly, would
be all the more determined to "make a man" of him, now that there was
a man less in the family. To Bibbs's knowledge, no one and nothing had
ever prevented his father from carrying through his plans, once he had
determined upon them; and Sheridan was incapable of believing that any
plan of his would not work out according to his calculations. His nature
unfitted him to accept failure. He had the gift of terrible persistence,
and with unflecked confidence that his way was the only way he would
hold to that way of "making a man" of Bibbs, who understood very well,
in his passive and impersonal fashion, that it was a way which might
make, not a man, but dust of him. But he had no shudder for the thought.

He had no shudder for that thought or for any other thought. The
truth about Bibbs was in the poem which Edith had adopted: he had so
thoroughly formed the over-sensitive habit of hiding his feelings that
no doubt he had forgotten--by this time--where he had put some of them,
especially those which concerned himself. But he had not hidden his
feelings about his father where they could not be found. He was strange
to his father, but his father was not strange to him. He knew that
Sheridan's plans were conceived in the stubborn belief that they would
bring about a good thing for Bibbs himself; and whatever the result was
to be, the son had no bitterness. Far otherwise, for as he looked at the
big, woeful figure, shaking and tortured, an almost unbearable pity laid
hands upon Bibbs's throat. Roscoe stood blinking, his lip quivering;
Edith wept audibly; Mrs. Sheridan leaned in half collapse against her
husband; but Bibbs knew that his father was the one who cared.

It was over. Men in overalls stepped forward with their shovels, and
Bibbs nodded quickly to Roscoe, making a slight gesture toward the line
of waiting carriages. Roscoe understood--Bibbs would stay and see the
grave filled; the rest were to go. The groups began to move away over
the turf; wheels creaked on the graveled drive; and one by one the
carriages filled and departed, the horses setting off at a walk. Bibbs
gazed steadfastly at the workmen; he knew that his father kept looking
back as he went toward the carriage, and that was a thing he did not
want to see. But after a little while there were no sounds of wheels
or hoofs on the gravel, and Bibbs, glancing up, saw that every one had
gone. A coupe had been left for him, the driver dozing patiently.

The workmen placed the flowers and wreaths upon the mound and about
it, and Bibbs altered the position of one or two of these, then stood
looking thoughtfully at the grotesque brilliancy of that festal-seeming
hillock beneath the darkening November sky. "It's too bad!" he half
whispered, his lips forming the words--and his meaning was that it was
too bad that the strong brother had been the one to go. For this was
his last thought before he walked to the coupe and saw Mary Vertrees
standing, all alone, on the other side of the drive.

She had just emerged from a grove of leafless trees that grew on a
slope where the tombs were many; and behind her rose a multitude of the
barbaric and classic shapes we so strangely strew about our graveyards:
urn-crowned columns and stone-draped obelisks, shop-carved angels and
shop-carved children poising on pillars and shafts, all lifting--in
unthought pathos--their blind stoniness toward the sky. Against such
a background, Bibbs was not incongruous, with his figure, in black, so
long and slender, and his face so long and thin and white; nor was the
undertaker's coupe out of keeping, with the shabby driver dozing on the
box and the shaggy horses standing patiently in attitudes without
hope and without regret. But for Mary Vertrees, here was a grotesque
setting--she was a vivid, living creature of a beautiful world. And a
graveyard is not the place for people to look charming.

She also looked startled and confused, but not more startled and
confused than Bibbs. In "Edith's" poem he had declared his intention of
hiding his heart "among the stars"; and in his boyhood one day he had
successfully hidden his body in the coal-pile. He had been no comrade
of other boys or of girls, and his acquaintances of a recent period were
only a few fellow-invalids and the nurses at the Hood Sanitarium. All
his life Bibbs had kept himself to himself--he was but a shy onlooker in
the world. Nevertheless, the startled gaze he bent upon the
unexpected lady before him had causes other than his shyness and her
unexpectedness. For Mary Vertrees had been a shining figure in the
little world of late given to the view of this humble and elusive
outsider, and spectators sometimes find their hearts beating faster than
those of the actors in the spectacle. Thus with Bibbs now. He started
and stared; he lifted his hat with incredible awkwardness, his fingers
fumbling at his forehead before they found the brim.

"Mr. Sheridan," said Mary, "I'm afraid you'll have to take me home with
you. I--" She stopped, not lacking a momentary awkwardness of her own.

"Why--why--yes," Bibbs stammered. "I'll--I'll be de--Won't you get in?"

In that manner and in that place they exchanged their first words. Then
Mary without more ado got into the coupe, and Bibbs followed, closing
the door.

"You're very kind," she said, somewhat breathlessly. "I should have had
to walk, and it's beginning to get dark. It's three miles, I think."

"Yes," said Bibbs. "It--it is beginning to get dark. I--I noticed that."

"I ought to tell you--I--" Mary began, confusedly. She bit her lip, sat
silent a moment, then spoke with composure. "It must seem odd, my--"

"No, no!" Bibbs protested, earnestly. "Not in the--in the least."

"It does, though," said Mary. "I had not intended to come to the
cemetery, Mr. Sheridan, but one of the men in charge at the house came
and whispered to me that 'the family wished me to'--I think your sister
sent him. So I came. But when we reached here I--oh, I felt that perhaps
I--"

Bibbs nodded gravely. "Yes, yes," he murmured.

"I got out on the opposite side of the carriage," she continued. "I mean
opposite from--from where all of you were. And I wandered off over in
the other direction; and I didn't realize how little time it takes.
From where I was I couldn't see the carriages leaving--at least I didn't
notice them. So when I got back, just now, you were the only one here.
I didn't know the other people in the carriage I came in, and of course
they didn't think to wait for me. That's why--"

"Yes," said Bibbs, "I--" And that seemed all he had to say just then.

Mary looked out through the dusty window. "I think we'd better be going
home, if you please," she said.

"Yes," Bibbs agreed, not moving. "It will be dark before we get there."

She gave him a quick little glance. "I think you must be very tired,
Mr. Sheridan; and I know you have reason to be," she said, gently. "If
you'll let me, I'll--" And without explaining her purpose she opened the
door on her side of the coupe and leaned out.

Bibbs started in blank perplexity, not knowing what she meant to do.

"Driver!" she called, in her clear voice, loudly. "Driver! We'd like to
start, please! Driver! Stop at the house just north of Mr. Sheridan's,
please." The wheels began to move, and she leaned back beside Bibbs
once more. "I noticed that he was asleep when we got in," she said. "I
suppose they have a great deal of night work."

Bibbs drew a long breath and waited till he could command his voice.
"I've never been able to apologize quickly," he said, with his
accustomed slowness, "because if I try to I stammer. My brother Roscoe
whipped me once, when we were boys, for stepping on his slate-pencil.
It took me so long to tell him it was an accident, he finished before I
did."

Mary Vertrees had never heard anything quite like the drawling, gentle
voice or the odd implication that his not noticing the motionless state
of their vehicle was an "accident." She had formed a casual impression
of him, not without sympathy, but at once she discovered that he was
unlike any of her cursory and vague imaginings of him. And suddenly she
saw a picture he had not intended to paint for sympathy: a sturdy boy
hammering a smaller, sickly boy, and the sickly boy unresentful. Not
that picture alone; others flashed before her. Instantaneously she had a
glimpse of Bibbs's life and into his life. She had a queer feeling, new
to her experience, of knowing him instantly. It startled her a little;
and then, with some surprise, she realized that she was glad he had sat
so long, after getting into the coupe, before he noticed that it had
not started. What she did not realize, however, was that she had made
no response to his apology, and they passed out of the cemetery gates,
neither having spoken again.

Bibbs was so content with the silence he did not know that it was
silence. The dusk, gathering in their small inclosure, was filled with a
rich presence for him; and presently it was so dark that neither of the
two could see the other, nor did even their garments touch. But neither
had any sense of being alone. The wheels creaked steadily, rumbling
presently on paved streets; there were the sounds, as from a distance,
of the plod-plod of the horses; and sometimes the driver became audible,
coughing asthmatically, or saying, "You, JOE!" with a spiritless flap of
the whip upon an unresponsive back. Oblongs of light from the lamps
at street-corners came swimming into the interior of the coupe and,
thinning rapidly to lances, passed utterly, leaving greater darkness.
And yet neither of these two last attendants at Jim Sheridan's funeral
broke the silence.

It was Mary who preceived the strangeness of it--too late. Abruptly she
realized that for an indefinite interval she had been thinking of her
companion and not talking to him. "Mr. Sheridan," she began, not knowing
what she was going to say, but impelled to say anything, as she realized
the queerness of this drive--"Mr. Sheridan, I--"

The coupe stopped. "You, JOE!" said the driver, reproachfully, and
climbed down and opened the door.

"What's the trouble?" Bibbs inquired.

"Lady said stop at the first house north of Mr. Sheridan's, sir."

Mary was incredulous; she felt that it couldn't be true and that it
mustn't be true that they had driven all the way without speaking.

"What?" Bibbs demanded.

"We're there, sir," said the driver, sympathetically. "Next house north
of Mr. Sheridan's."

Bibbs descended to the curb. "Why, yes," he said. "Yes, you seem to
be right." And while he stood staring at the dimly illuminated front
windows of Mr. Vertrees's house Mary got out, unassisted.

"Let me help you," said Bibbs, stepping toward her mechanically; and she
was several feet from the coupe when he spoke.

"Oh no," she murmured. "I think I can--" She meant that she could get
out of the coupe without help, but, perceiving that she had already
accomplished this feat, she decided not to complete the sentence.

"You, JOE!" cried the driver, angrily, climbing to his box. And he
rumbled away at his team's best pace--a snail's.

"Thank you for bringing me home, Mr. Sheridan," said Mary, stiffly. She
did not offer her hand. "Good night."

"Good night," Bibbs said in response, and, turning with her, walked
beside her to the door. Mary made that a short walk; she almost ran.
Realization of the queerness of their drive was growing upon her,
beginning to shock her; she stepped aside from the light that fell
through the glass panels of the door and withheld her hand as it touched
the old-fashioned bell-handle.

"I'm quite safe, thank you," she said, with a little emphasis. "Good
night."

"Good night," said Bibbs, and went obediently. When he reached the
street he looked back, but she had vanished within the house.

Moving slowly away, he caromed against two people who were turning out
from the pavement to cross the street. They were Roscoe and his wife.

"Where are your eyes, Bibbs?" demanded Roscoe. "Sleep-walking, as
usual?"

But Sibyl took the wanderer by the arm. "Come over to our house for a
little while, Bibbs," she urged. "I want to--"

"No, I'd better--"

"Yes. I want you to. Your father's gone to bed, and they're all quiet
over there--all worn out. Just come for a minute."

He yielded, and when they were in the house she repeated herself with
real feeling: "'All worn out!' Well, if anybody is, YOU are, Bibbs! And
I don't wonder; you've done every bit of the work of it. You mustn't get
down sick again. I'm going to make you take a little brandy."

He let her have her own way, following her into the dining-room, and
was grateful when she brought him a tiny glass filled from one of the
decanters on the sideboard. Roscoe gloomily poured for himself a much
heavier libation in a larger glass; and the two men sat, while Sibyl
leaned against the sideboard, reviewing the episodes of the day and
recalling the names of the donors of flowers and wreaths. She pressed
Bibbs to remain longer when he rose to go, and then, as he persisted,
she went with him to the front door. He opened it, and she said:

"Bibbs, you were coming out of the Vertreeses' house when we met you.
How did you happen to be there?"

"I had only been to the door," he said. "Good night, Sibyl."

"Wait," she insisted. "We saw you coming out."

"I wasn't," he explained, moving to depart. "I'd just brought Miss
Vertrees home."

"What?" she cried.

"Yes," he said, and stepped out upon the porch, "that was it. Good
night, Sibyl."

"Wait!" she said, following him across the threshold. "How did that
happen? I thought you were going to wait while those men filled
the--the--" She paused, but moved nearer him insistently.

"I did wait. Miss Vertrees was there," he said, reluctantly. "She
had walked away for a while and didn't notice that the carriages were
leaving. When she came back the coupe waiting for me was the only one
left."

Sibyl regarded him with dilating eyes. She spoke with a slow
breathlessness. "And she drove home from Jim's funeral--with you!"

Without warning she burst into laughter, clapped her hand ineffectually
over her mouth, and ran back uproariously into the house, hurling the
door shut behind her.



CHAPTER XIII

Bibbs went home pondering. He did not understand why Sibyl had laughed.
The laughter itself had been spontaneous and beyond suspicion, but it
seemed to him that she had only affected the effort to suppress it and
that she wished it to be significant. Significant of what? And why had
she wished to impress upon him the fact of her overwhelming amusement?
He found no answer, but she had succeeded in disturbing him, and he
wished that he had not encountered her.

At home, uncles, aunts, and cousins from out of town were wandering
about the house, several mournfully admiring the "Bay of Naples," and
others occupied with the Moor and the plumbing, while they waited for
trains. Edith and her mother had retired to some upper fastness, but
Bibbs interviewed Jackson and had the various groups of relatives
summoned to the dining-room for food. One great-uncle, old Gideon
Sheridan from Boonville, could not be found, and Bibbs went in search of
him. He ransacked the house, discovering the missing antique at last
by accident. Passing his father's closed door on tiptoe, Bibbs heard
a murmurous sound, and paused to listen. The sound proved to be a
quavering and rickety voice, monotonously bleating:

"The Lo-ord givuth and the Lo-ord takuth away! We got to remember that;
we got to remember that! I'm a-gittin' along, James; I'm a-gittin'
along, and I've seen a-many of 'em go--two daughters and a son the Lord
give me, and He has taken all away. For the Lo-ord givuth and the Lo-ord
takuth away! Remember the words of Bildad the Shuhite, James. Bildad the
Shuhite says, 'He shall have neither son nor nephew among his people,
nor any remaining in his dwellings.' Bildad the Shuhite--"

Bibbs opened the door softly. His father was lying upon the bed, in
his underclothes, face downward, and Uncle Gideon sat near by, swinging
backward and forward in a rocking-chair, stroking his long white beard
and gazing at the ceiling as he talked. Bibbs beckoned him urgently, but
Uncle Gideon paid no attention.

"Bildad the Shuhite spake and he says, 'If thy children have sinned
against Him and He have cast them away--'"

There was a muffled explosion beneath the floor, and the windows
rattled. The figure lying face downward on the bed did not move, but
Uncle Gideon leaped from his chair. "My God!" he cried. "What's that?"

There came a second explosion, and Uncle Gideon ran out into the hall.
Bibbs went to the head of the great staircase, and, looking down,
discovered the source of the disturbance. Gideon's grandson, a boy
of fourteen, had brought his camera to the funeral and was taking
"flash-lights" of the Moor. Uncle Gideon, reassured by Bibbs's
explanation, would have returned to finish his quotation from Bildad the
Shuhite, but Bibbs detained him, and after a little argument persuaded
him to descend to the dining-room whither Bibbs followed, after closing
the door of his father's room.

He kept his eye on Gideon after dinner, diplomatically preventing
several attempts on the part of that comforter to reascend the stairs;
and it was a relief to Bibbs when George announced that an automobile
was waiting to convey the ancient man and his grandson to their train.
They were the last to leave, and when they had gone Bibbs went sighing
to his own room.

He stretched himself wearily upon the bed, but presently rose, went to
the window, and looked for a long time at the darkened house where
Mary Vertrees lived. Then he opened his trunk, took therefrom a small
note-book half filled with fragmentary scribblings, and began to write:

  Laughter after a funeral.  In this reaction people will laugh at
  anything and at nothing.  The band plays a dirge on the way to the
  cemetery, but when it turns back, and the mourning carriages are
  out of hearing, it strikes up, "Darktown is Out To-night."  That
  is natural--but there are women whose laughter is like the whirring
  of whips.  Why is it that certain kinds of laughter seem to spoil
  something hidden away from the laughers?  If they do not know of
  it, and have never seen it, how can their laughter hurt it?  Yet it
  does.  Beauty is not out of place among grave-stones.  It is not
  out of place anywhere.  But a woman who has been betrothed to a
  man would not look beautiful at his funeral.  A woman might look
  beautiful, though, at the funeral of a man whom she had known and
  liked.  And in that case, too, she would probably not want to talk
  if she drove home from the cemetery with his brother:  nor would
  she want the brother to talk.  Silence is usually either stupid or
  timid.  But for a man who stammers if he tries to talk fast, and
  drawls so slowly, when he doesn't stammer, that nobody has time to
  listen to him, silence is advisable.  Nevertheless, too much silence
  is open to suspicion.  It may be reticence, or it may be a vacuum.
  It may be dignity, or it may be false teeth.

  Sometimes an imperceptible odor will become perceptible in a small
  inclosure, such as a closed carriage.  The ghost of gasoline rising
  from a lady's glove might be sweeter to the man riding beside her
  than all the scents of Arcady in spring.  It depends on the lady--
  but there ARE!  Three miles may be three hundred miles, or it may
  be three feet.  When it is three feet you have not time to say a
  great deal before you reach the end of it.  Still, it may be that
  one should begin to speak.

  No one could help wishing to stay in a world that holds some of
  the people that are in this world.  There are some so wonderful
  you do not understand how the dead COULD die.  How could they let
  themselves?  A falling building does not care who falls with it.
  It does not choose who shall be upon its roof and who shall not.
  Silence CAN be golden?  Yes.  But perhaps if a woman of the world
  should find herself by accident sitting beside a man for the length
  of time it must necessarily take two slow old horses to jog three
  miles, she might expect that man to say something of some sort!
  Even if she thought him a feeble hypochondriac, even if she had
  heard from others that he was a disappointment to his own people,
  even if she had seen for herself that he was a useless and
  irritating encumbrance everywhere, she might expect him at least
  to speak--she might expect him to open his mouth and try to make
  sounds, if he only barked.  If he did not even try, but sat every
  step of the way as dumb as a frozen fish, she might THINK him a
  frozen fish.  And she might be right.  She might be right if she
  thought him about as pleasant a companion as--as Bildad the Shuhite!

Bibbs closed his note-book, replacing it in his trunk. Then, after a
period of melancholy contemplation, he undressed, put on a dressing-gown
and slippers, and went softly out into the hall--to his father's door.
Upon the floor was a tray which Bibbs had sent George, earlier in the
evening, to place upon a table in Sheridan's room--but the food was
untouched. Bibbs stood listening outside the door for several minutes.
There came no sound from within, and he went back to his own room and to
bed.

In the morning he woke to a state of being hitherto unknown in his
experience. Sometimes in the process of waking there is a little
pause--sleep has gone, but coherent thought has not begun. It is
a curious half-void, a glimpse of aphasia; and although the person
experiencing it may not know for that instant his own name or age or
sex, he may be acutely conscious of depression or elation. It is the
moment, as we say, before we "remember"; and for the first time in
Bibbs's life it came to him bringing a vague happiness. He woke to a
sense of new riches; he had the feeling of a boy waking to a birthday.
But when the next moment brought him his memory, he found nothing that
could explain his exhilaration. On the contrary, under the circumstances
it seemed grotesquely unwarranted. However, it was a brief visitation
and was gone before he had finished dressing. It left a little trail,
the pleased recollection of it and the puzzle of it, which remained
unsolved. And, in fact, waking happily in the morning is not usually
the result of a drive home from a funeral. No wonder the sequence evaded
Bibbs Sheridan!

His father had gone when he came down-stairs. "Went on down to 's
office, jes' same," Jackson informed him. "Came sat breakfas'-table, all
by 'mself; eat nothin'. George bring nice breakfas', but he di'n' eat
a thing. Yessuh, went on down-town, jes' same he yoosta do. Yessuh, I
reckon putty much ev'y-thing goin' go on same as it yoosta do."

It struck Bibbs that Jackson was right. The day passed as other days had
passed. Mrs. Sheridan and Edith were in black, and Mrs. Sheridan cried
a little, now and then, but no other external difference was to be
seen. Edith was quiet, but not noticeably depressed, and at lunch proved
herself able to argue with her mother upon the propriety of receiving
calls in the earliest stages of "mourning." Lunch was as usual--for Jim
and his father had always lunched down-town--and the afternoon was as
usual. Bibbs went for his drive, and his mother went with him, as she
sometimes did when the weather was pleasant. Altogether, the usualness
of things was rather startling to Bibbs.

During the drive Mrs. Sheridan talked fragmentarily of Jim's childhood.
"But you wouldn't remember about that," she said, after narrating an
episode. "You were too little. He was always a good boy, just like that.
And he'd save whatever papa gave him, and put it in the bank. I reckon
it'll just about kill your father to put somebody in his place as
president of the Realty Company, Bibbs. I know he can't move Roscoe
over; he told me last week he'd already put as much on Roscoe as any
one man could handle and not go crazy. Oh, it's a pity--" She stopped
to wipe her eyes. "It's a pity you didn't run more with Jim, Bibbs, and
kind o' pick up his ways. Think what it'd meant to papa now! You never
did run with either Roscoe or Jim any, even before you got sick. Of
course, you were younger; but it always DID seem queer--and you three
bein' brothers like that. I don't believe I ever saw you and Jim sit
down together for a good talk in my life."

"Mother, I've been away so long," Bibbs returned, gently. "And since I
came home I--"

"Oh, I ain't reproachin' you, Bibbs," she said. "Jim ain't been home
much of an evening since you got back--what with his work and callin'
and goin' to the theater and places, and often not even at the house for
dinner. Right the evening before he got hurt he had his dinner at some
miser'ble rest'rant down by the Pump Works, he was so set on overseein'
the night work and gettin' everything finished up right to the minute he
told papa he would. I reckon you might 'a' put in more time with Jim if
there'd been more opportunity, Bibbs. I expect you feel almost as if you
scarcely really knew him right well."

"I suppose I really didn't, mother. He was busy, you see, and I hadn't
much to say about the things that interested him, because I don't know
much about them."

"It's a pity! Oh, it's a pity!" she moaned. "And you'll have to learn to
know about 'em NOW, Bibbs! I haven't said much to you, because I felt it
was all between your father and you, but I honestly do believe it will
just kill him if he has to have any more trouble on top of all this!
You mustn't LET him, Bibbs--you mustn't! You don't know how he's grieved
over you, and now he can't stand any more--he just can't! Whatever he
says for you to do, you DO it, Bibbs, you DO it! I want you to promise
me you will."

"I would if I could," he said, sorrowfully.

"No, no! Why can't you?" she cried, clutching his arm. "He wants you to
go back to the machine-shop and--"

"And--'like it'!" said Bibbs.

"Yes, that's it--to go in a cheerful spirit. Dr. Gurney said it wouldn't
hurt you if you went in a cheerful spirit--the doctor said that himself,
Bibbs. So why can't you do it? Can't you do that much for your father?
You ought to think what he's done for YOU. You got a beautiful house
to live in; you got automobiles to ride in; you got fur coats and warm
clothes; you been taken care of all your life. And you don't KNOW how
he worked for the money to give all these things to you! You don't DREAM
what he had to go through and what he risked when we were startin' out
in life; and you never WILL know! And now this blow has fallen on him
out of a clear sky, and you make it out to be a hardship to do like he
wants you to! And all on earth he asks is for you to go back to the work
in a cheerful spirit, so it won't hurt you! That's all he asks. Look,
Bibbs, we're gettin' back near home, but before we get there I want you
to promise me that you'll do what he asks you to. Promise me!"

In her earnestness she cleared away her black veil that she might see
him better, and it blew out on the smoky wind. He readjusted it for her
before he spoke.

"I'll go back in as cheerful a spirit as I can, mother," he said.

"There!" she exclaimed, satisfied. "That's a good boy! That's all I
wanted you to say."

"Don't give me any credit," he said, ruefully. "There isn't anything
else for me to do."

"Now, don't begin talkin' THAT way!"

"No, no," he soothed her. "We'll have to begin to make the spirit a
cheerful one. We may--" They were turning into their own driveway as
he spoke, and he glanced at the old house next door. Mary Vertrees was
visible in the twilight, standing upon the front steps, bareheaded, the
door open behind her. She bowed gravely.

"'We may'--what?" asked Mrs. Sheridan, with a slight impatience.

"What is it, mother?"

"You said, 'We may,' and didn't finish what you were sayin'."

"Did I?" said Bibbs, blankly. "Well, what WERE we saying?"

"Of all the queer boys!" she cried. "You always were. Always! You
haven't forgot what you just promised me, have you?"

"No," he answered, as the car stopped. "No, the spirit will be as
cheerful as the flesh will let it, mother. It won't do to behave like--"

His voice was low, and in her movement to descend from the car she
failed to hear his final words.

"Behave like who, Bibbs?"

"Nothing."

But she was fretful in her grief. "You said it wouldn't do to behave
like SOMEBODY. Behave like WHO?"

"It was just nonsense," he explained, turning to go in. "An obscure
person I don't think much of lately."

"Behave like WHO?" she repeated, and upon his yielding to her petulant
insistence, she made up her mind that the only thing to do was to tell
Dr. Gurney about it.

"Like Bildad the Shuhite!" was what Bibbs said.



CHAPTER XIV

The outward usualness of things continued after dinner. It was
Sheridan's custom to read the evening paper beside the fire in the
library, while his wife, sitting near by, either sewed (from old habit)
or allowed herself to be repeatedly baffled by one of the simpler forms
of solitaire. To-night she did neither, but sat in her customary chair,
gazing at the fire, while Sheridan let the unfolded paper rest upon his
lap, though now and then he lifted it, as if to read, and let it fall
back upon his knees again. Bibbs came in noiselessly and sat in a
corner, doing nothing; and from a "reception-room" across the hall an
indistinct vocal murmur became just audible at intervals. Once, when
this murmur grew louder, under stress of some irrepressible merriment,
Edith's voice could be heard--"Bobby, aren't you awful!" and Sheridan
glanced across at his wife appealingly.

She rose at once and went into the "reception-room"; there was a flurry
of whispering, and the sound of tiptoeing in the hall--Edith and her
suitor changing quarters to a more distant room. Mrs. Sheridan returned
to her chair in the library.

"They won't bother you any more, papa," she said, in a comforting voice.
"She told me at lunch he'd 'phoned he wanted to come up this evening,
and I said I thought he'd better wait a few days, but she said she'd
already told him he could." She paused, then added, rather guiltily: "I
got kind of a notion maybe Roscoe don't like him as much as he used
to. Maybe--maybe you better ask Roscoe, papa." And as Sheridan nodded
solemnly, she concluded, in haste: "Don't say I said to. I might be
wrong about it, anyway."

He nodded again, and they sat for some time in a silence which Mrs.
Sheridan broke with a little sniff, having fallen into a reverie that
brought tears. "That Miss Vertrees was a good girl," she said. "SHE was
all right."

Her husband evidently had no difficulty in following her train of
thought, for he nodded once more, affirmatively.

"Did you--How did you fix it about the--the Realty Company?" she
faltered. "Did you--"

He rose heavily, helping himself to his feet by the arms of his chair.
"I fixed it," he said, in a husky voice. "I moved Cantwell up, and put
Johnston in Cantwell's place, and split up Johnston's work among the
four men with salaries high enough to take it." He went to her, put
his hand upon her shoulder, and drew a long, audible, tremulous breath.
"It's my bedtime, mamma; I'm goin' up." He dropped the hand from her
shoulder and moved slowly away, but when he reached the door he stopped
and spoke again, without turning to look at her. "The Realty Company'll
go right on just the same," he said. "It's like--it's like sand, mamma.
It puts me in mind of chuldern playin' in a sand-pile. One of 'em sticks
his finger in the sand and makes a hole, and another of 'em'll pat the
place with his hand, and all the little grains of sand run in and fill
it up and settle against one another; and then, right away it's flat on
top again, and you can't tell there ever was a hole there. The Realty
Company'll go on all right, mamma. There ain't anything anywhere, I
reckon, that wouldn't go right on--just the same."

And he passed out slowly into the hall; then they heard his heavy tread
upon the stairs.

Mrs. Sheridan, rising to follow him, turned a piteous face to her son.
"It's so forlone," she said, chokingly. "That's the first time he spoke
since he came in the house this evening. I know it must 'a' hurt him to
hear Edith laughin' with that Lamhorn. She'd oughtn't to let him come,
right the very first evening this way; she'd oughtn't to done it! She
just seems to lose her head over him, and it scares me. You heard what
Sibyl said the other day, and--and you heard what--what--"

"What Edith said to Sibyl?" Bibbs finished the sentence for her.

"We CAN'T have any trouble o' THAT kind!" she wailed. "Oh, it looks as
if movin' up to this New House had brought us awful bad luck! It scares
me!" She put both her hands over her face. "Oh, Bibbs, Bibbs! if you
only wasn't so QUEER! If you could only been a kind of dependable son!
I don't know what we're all comin' to!" And, weeping, she followed her
husband.

Bibbs gazed for a while at the fire; then he rose abruptly, like a man
who has come to a decision, and briskly sought the room--it was called
"the smoking-room"--where Edith sat with Mr. Lamhorn. They looked up in
no welcoming manner, at Bibbs's entrance, and moved their chairs to a
less conspicuous adjacency.

"Good evening," said Bibbs, pleasantly; and he seated himself in a
leather easy-chair near them.

"What is it?" asked Edith, plainly astonished.

"Nothing," he returned, smiling.

She frowned. "Did you want something?" she asked.

"Nothing in the world. Father and mother have gone up-stairs; I sha'n't
be going up for several hours, and there didn't seem to be anybody left
for me to chat with except you and Mr. Lamhorn."

"'CHAT with'!" she echoed, incredulously.

"I can talk about almost anything," said Bibbs with an air of
genial politeness. "It doesn't matter to ME. I don't know much about
business--if that's what you happened to be talking about. But you
aren't in business, are you, Mr. Lamhorn?"

"Not now," returned Lamhorn, shortly.

"I'm not, either," said Bibbs. "It was getting cloudier than usual, I
noticed, just before dark, and there was wind from the southwest. Rain
to-morrow, I shouldn't be surprised."

He seemed to feel that he had begun a conversation the support of
which had now become the pleasurable duty of other parties; and he
sat expectantly, looking first at his sister, then at Lamhorn, as if
implying that it was their turn to speak. Edith returned his gaze with
a mixture of astonishment and increasing anger, while Mr. Lamhorn was
obviously disturbed, though Bibbs had been as considerate as possible in
presenting the weather as a topic. Bibbs had perceived that Lamhorn had
nothing in his mind at any time except "personalities"--he could talk
about people and he could make love. Bibbs, wishing to be courteous,
offered the weather.

Lamhorn refused it, and concluded from Bibbs's luxurious attitude in the
leather chair that this half-crazy brother was a permanent fixture for
the rest of the evening. There was not reason to hope that he would
move, and Lamhorn found himself in danger of looking silly.

"I was just going," he said, rising.

"Oh NO!" Edith cried, sharply.

"Yes. Good night! I think I--"

"Too bad," said Bibbs, genially, walking to the door with the visitor,
while Edith stood staring as the two disappeared in the hall. She heard
Bibbs offering to "help" Lamhorn with his overcoat and the latter rather
curtly declining assistance, these episodes of departure being followed
by the closing of the outer door. She ran into the hall.

"What's the matter with you?" she cried, furiously. "What do you MEAN?
How did you dare come in there when you knew--"

Her voice broke; she made a gesture of rage and despair, and ran up the
stairs, sobbing. She fled to her mother's room, and when Bibbs came up,
a few minutes later, Mrs. Sheridan met him at his door.

"Oh, Bibbs," she said, shaking her head woefully, "you'd oughtn't to
distress your sister! She says you drove that young man right out of the
house. You'd ought to been more considerate."

Bibbs smiled faintly, noting that Edith's door was open, with Edith's
naive shadow motionless across its threshold. "Yes," he said. "He
doesn't appear to be much of a 'man's man.' He ran at just a glimpse of
one."

Edith's shadow moved; her voice came quavering: "You call yourself one?"

"No, no," he answered. "I said, 'just a glimpse of one.' I didn't
claim--" But her door slammed angrily; and he turned to his mother.

"There," he said, sighing. "That's almost the first time in my life I
ever tried to be a man of action, mother, and I succeeded perfectly in
what I tried to do. As a consequence I feel like a horse-thief!"

"You hurt her feelin's," she groaned. "You must 'a' gone at it too
rough, Bibbs."

He looked upon her wanly. "That's my trouble, mother," he murmured. "I'm
a plain, blunt fellow. I have rough ways, and I'm a rough man."

For once she perceived some meaning in his queerness. "Hush your
nonsense!" she said, good-naturedly, the astral of a troubled smile
appearing. "You go to bed."

He kissed her and obeyed.


Edith gave him a cold greeting the next morning at the breakfast-table.

"You mustn't do that under a misapprehension," he warned her, when they
were alone in the dining-room.

"Do what under a what?" she asked.

"Speak to me. I came into the smoking-room last night 'on purpose,'" he
told her, gravely. "I have a prejudice against that young man."

She laughed. "I guess you think it means a great deal who you have
prejudices against!" In mockery she adopted the manner of one who
implores. "Bibbs, for pity's sake PROMISE me, DON'T use YOUR influence
with papa against him!" And she laughed louder.

"Listen," he said, with peculiar earnestness. "I'll tell you now,
because--because I've decided I'm one of the family." And then, as
if the earnestness were too heavy for him to carry it further, he
continued, in his usual tone, "I'm drunk with power, Edith."

"What do you want to tell me?" she demanded, brusquely.

"Lamhorn made love to Sibyl," he said.

Edith hooted. "SHE did to HIM! And because you overheard that spat
between us the other day when I the same as accused her of it, and said
something like that to you afterward--"

"No," he said, gravely. "I KNOW."

"How?"

"I was there, one day a week ago, with Roscoe, and I heard Sibyl and
Lamhorn--"

Edith screamed with laughter. "You were with ROSCOE--and you heard
Lamhorn making love to Sibyl!"

"No. I heard them quarreling."

"You're funnier than ever, Bibbs!" she cried. "You say he made love to
her because you heard them quarreling!"

"That's it. If you want to know what's 'between' people, you can--by the
way they quarrel."

"You'll kill me, Bibbs! What were they quarreling about?"

"Nothing. That's how I knew. People who quarrel over nothing!--it's
always certain--"

Edith stopped laughing abruptly, but continued her mockery. "You ought
to know. You've had so much experience, yourself!"

"I haven't any, Edith," he said. "My life has been about as exciting as
an incubator chicken's. But I look out through the glass at things."

"Well, then," she said, "if you look out through the glass you must know
what effect such stuff would have upon ME!" She rose, visibly agitated.
"What if it WAS true?" she demanded, bitterly. "What if it was true a
hundred times over? You sit there with your silly face half ready to
giggle and half ready to sniffle, and tell me stories like that, about
Sibyl picking on Bobby Lamhorn and worrying him to death, and you think
it matters to ME? What if I already KNEW all about their 'quarreling'?
What if I understood WHY she--" She broke off with a violent gesture, a
sweep of her arm extended at full length, as if she hurled something to
the ground. "Do you think a girl that really cared for a man would pay
any attention to THAT? Or to YOU, Bibbs Sheridan!"

He looked at her steadily, and his gaze was as keen as it was steady.
She met it with unwavering pride. Finally he nodded slowly, as if she
had spoken and he meant to agree with what she said.

"Ah, yes," he said. "I won't come into the smoking-room again. I'm
sorry, Edith. Nobody can make you see anything now. You'll never see
until you see for yourself. The rest of us will do better to keep out of
it--especially me!"

"That's sensible," she responded, curtly. "You're most surprising of all
when you're sensible, Bibbs."

"Yes," he sighed. "I'm a dull dog. Shake hands and forgive me, Edith."

Thawing so far as to smile, she underwent this brief ceremony, and
George appeared, summoning Bibbs to the library; Dr. Gurney was waiting
there, he announced. And Bibbs gave his sister a shy but friendly touch
upon the shoulder as a complement to the handshaking, and left her.

Dr. Gurney was sitting by the log fire, alone in the room, and he merely
glanced over his shoulder when his patient came in. He was not over
fifty, in spite of Sheridan's habitual "ole Doc Gurney." He was gray,
however, almost as thin as Bibbs, and nearly always he looked drowsy.

"Your father telephoned me yesterday afternoon, Bibbs," he said, not
rising. "Wants me to 'look you over' again. Come around here in front of
me--between me and the fire. I want to see if I can see through you."

"You mean you're too sleepy to move," returned Bibbs, complying. "I
think you'll notice that I'm getting worse."

"Taken on about twelve pounds," said Gurney. "Thirteen, maybe."

"Twelve."

"Well, it won't do." The doctor rubbed his eyelids. "You're so much
better I'll have to use some machinery on you before we can know just
where you are. You come down to my place this afternoon. Walk down--all
the way. I suppose you know why your father wants to know."

Bibbs nodded. "Machine-shop."

"Still hate it?"

Bibbs nodded again.

"Don't blame you!" the doctor grunted. "Yes, I expect it'll make a lump
in your gizzard again. Well, what do you say? Shall I tell him you've
got the old lump there yet? You still want to write, do you?"

"What's the use?" Bibbs said, smiling ruefully. "My kind of writing!"

"Yes," the doctor agreed. "I suppose if you broke away and lived on
roots and berries until you began to 'attract the favorable attention of
editors' you might be able to hope for an income of four or five hundred
dollars a year by the time you're fifty."

"That's about it," Bibbs murmured.

"Of course I know what you want to do," said Gurney, drowsily. "You
don't hate the machine-shop only; you hate the whole show--the noise and
jar and dirt, the scramble--the whole bloomin' craze to 'get on.' You'd
like to go somewhere in Algiers, or to Taormina, perhaps, and bask on a
balcony, smelling flowers and writing sonnets. You'd grow fat on it and
have a delicate little life all to yourself. Well, what do you say? I
can lie like sixty, Bibbs! Shall I tell your father he'll lose another
of his boys if you don't go to Sicily?"

"I don't want to go to Sicily," said Bibbs. "I want to stay right here."

The doctor's drowsiness disappeared for a moment, and he gave his
patient a sharp glance. "It's a risk," he said. "I think we'll find
you're so much better he'll send you back to the shop pretty quick.
Something's got hold of you lately; you're not quite so lackadaisical as
you used to be. But I warn you: I think the shop will knock you just as
it did before, and perhaps even harder, Bibbs."

He rose, shook himself, and rubbed his eyelids. "Well, when we go over
you this afternoon what are we going to say about it?"

"Tell him I'm ready," said Bibbs, looking at the floor.

"Oh no," Gurney laughed. "Not quite yet; but you may be almost. We'll
see. Don't forget I said to walk down."

And when the examination was concluded, that afternoon, the doctor
informed Bibbs that the result was much too satisfactory to be pleasing.
"Here's a new 'situation' for a one-act farce," he said, gloomily, to
his next patient when Bibbs had gone. "Doctor tells a man he's well, and
that's his death sentence, likely. Dam' funny world!"

Bibbs decided to walk home, though Gurney had not instructed him upon
this point. In fact, Gurney seemed to have no more instructions on any
point, so discouraging was the young man's improvement. It was a dingy
afternoon, and the smoke was evident not only to Bibbs's sight, but to
his nostrils, though most of the pedestrians were so saturated with
the smell they could no longer detect it. Nearly all of them walked
hurriedly, too intent upon their destinations to be more than half aware
of the wayside; they wore the expressions of people under a vague yet
constant strain. They were all lightly powdered, inside and out, with
fine dust and grit from the hard-paved streets, and they were unaware of
that also. They did not even notice that they saw the smoke, though the
thickened air was like a shrouding mist. And when Bibbs passed the new
"Sheridan Apartments," now almost completed, he observed that the marble
of the vestibule was already streaky with soot, like his gloves, which
were new.

That recalled to him the faint odor of gasolene in the coupe on the way
from his brother's funeral, and this incited a train of thought which
continued till he reached the vicinity of his home. His route was by
a street parallel to that on which the New House fronted, and in his
preoccupation he walked a block farther than he intended, so that,
having crossed to his own street, he approached the New House from the
north, and as he came to the corner of Mr. Vertrees's lot Mr. Vertrees's
daughter emerged from the front door and walked thoughtfully down the
path to the old picket gate. She was unconscious of the approach of the
pedestrian from the north, and did not see him until she had opened the
gate and he was almost beside her. Then she looked up, and as she
saw him she started visibly. And if this thing had happened to
Robert Lamhorn, he would have had a thought far beyond the horizon of
faint-hearted Bibbs's thoughts. Lamhorn, indeed, would have spoken his
thought. He would have said: "You jumped because you were thinking of
me!"



CHAPTER XV

Mary was the picture of a lady flustered. She stood with one hand
closing the gate behind her, and she had turned to go in the direction
Bibbs was walking. There appeared to be nothing for it but that they
should walk together, at least as far as the New House. But Bibbs had
paused in his slow stride, and there elapsed an instant before either
spoke or moved--it was no longer than that, and yet it sufficed for each
to seem to say, by look and attitude, "Why, it's YOU!"

Then they both spoke at once, each hurriedly pronouncing the other's
name as if about to deliver a message of importance. Then both came to
a stop simultaneously, but Bibbs made a heroic effort, and as they began
to walk on together he contrived to find his voice.

"I--I--hate a frozen fish myself," he said. "I think three miles was too
long for you to put up with one."

"Good gracious!" she cried, turning to him a glowing face from which
restraint and embarrassment had suddenly fled. "Mr. Sheridan, you're
lovely to put it that way. But it's always the girl's place to say it's
turning cooler! I ought to have been the one to show that we didn't know
each other well enough not to say SOMETHING! It was an imposition for
me to have made you bring me home, and after I went into the house I
decided I should have walked. Besides, it wasn't three miles to the
car-line. I never thought of it!"

"No," said Bibbs, earnestly. "I didn't, either. I might have said
something if I'd thought of anything. I'm talking now, though; I must
remember that, and not worry about it later. I think I'm talking, though
it doesn't sound intelligent even to me. I made up my mind that if I
ever met you again I'd turn on my voice and keep it going, no mater what
it said. I--"

She interrupted him with laughter, and Mary Vertrees's laugh was one
which Bibbs's father had declared, after the house-warming, "a cripple
would crawl five miles to hear." And at the merry lilting of it Bibbs's
father's son took heart to forget some of his trepidation. "I'll be any
kind of idiot," he said, "if you'll laugh at me some more. It won't be
difficult for me."

She did; and Bibbs's cheeks showed a little actual color, which Mary
perceived. It recalled to her, by contrast, her careless and irritated
description of him to her mother just after she had seen him for the
first time. "Rather tragic and altogether impossible." It seemed to her
now that she must have been blind.

They had passed the New House without either of them showing--or
possessing--any consciousness that it had been the destination of one of
them.

"I'll keep on talking," Bibbs continued, cheerfully, "and you keep on
laughing. I'm amounting to something in the world this afternoon. I'm
making a noise, and that makes you make music. Don't be bothered by my
bleating out such things as that. I'm really frightened, and that makes
me bleat anything. I'm frightened about two things: I'm afraid of what
I'll think of myself later if I don't keep talking--talking now, I
mean--and I'm afraid of what I'll think of myself if I do. And besides
these two things, I'm frightened, anyhow. I don't remember talking as
much as this more than once or twice in my life. I suppose it was always
in me to do it, though, the first time I met any one who didn't know me
well enough not to listen."

"But you're not really talking to me," said Mary. "You're just thinking
aloud."

"No," he returned, gravely. "I'm not thinking at all; I'm only making
vocal sounds because I believe it's more mannerly. I seem to be the
subject of what little meaning they possess, and I'd like to change it,
but I don't know how. I haven't any experience in talking, and I don't
know how to manage it."

"You needn't change the subject on my account, Mr. Sheridan," she said.
"Not even if you really talked about yourself." She turned her
face toward him as she spoke, and Bibbs caught his breath; he was
pathetically amazed by the look she gave him. It was a glowing look,
warmly friendly and understanding, and, what almost shocked him, it was
an eagerly interested look. Bibbs was not accustomed to anything like
that.

"I--you--I--I'm--" he stammered, and the faint color in his cheeks grew
almost vivid.

She was still looking at him, and she saw the strange radiance that came
into his face. There was something about him, too, that explained how
"queer" many people might think him; but he did not seem "queer" to Mary
Vertrees; he seemed the most quaintly natural person she had ever met.

He waited, and became coherent. "YOU say something now," he said. "I
don't even belong in the chorus, and here I am, trying to sing the funny
man's solo! You--"

"No," she interrupted. "I'd rather play your accompaniment."

"I'll stop and listen to it, then."

"Perhaps--" she began, but after pausing thoughtfully she made a
gesture with her muff, indicating a large brick church which they were
approaching. "Do you see that church, Mr. Sheridan?"

"I suppose I could," he answered in simple truthfulness, looking at her.
"But I don't want to. Once, when I was ill, the nurse told me I'd better
say anything that was on my mind, and I got the habit. The other reason
I don't want to see the church is that I have a feeling it's where
you're going, and where I'll be sent back."

She shook her head in cheery negation. "Not unless you want to be. Would
you like to come with me?"

"Why--why--yes," he said. "Anywhere!" And again it was apparent that he
spoke in simple truthfulness.

"Then come--if you care for organ music. The organist is an old friend
of mine, and sometimes he plays for me. He's a dear old man. He had
a degree from Bonn, and was a professor afterward, but he gave up
everything for music. That's he, waiting in the doorway. He looks like
Beethoven, doesn't he? I think he knows that, perhaps and enjoys it a
little. I hope so."

"Yes," said Bibbs, as they reached the church steps. "I think Beethoven
would like it, too. It must be pleasant to look like other people."

"I haven't kept you?" Mary said to the organist.

"No, no," he answered, heartily. "I would not mind so only you should
shooer come!"

"This is Mr. Sheridan, Dr. Kraft. He has come to listen with me."

The organist looked bluntly surprised. "Iss that SO?" he exclaimed.
"Well, I am glad if you wish him, and if he can stant my liddle playink.
He iss musician himself, then, of course."

"No," said Bibbs, as the three entered the church together. "I--I played
the--I tried to play--" Fortunately he checked himself; he had been
about to offer the information that he had failed to master the
jews'-harp in his boyhood. "No, I'm not a musician," he contented
himself with saying.

"What?" Dr. Kraft's surprise increased. "Young man, you are fortunate!
I play for Miss Vertrees; she comes always alone. You are the first. You
are the first one EVER!"

They had reached the head of the central aisle, and as the organist
finished speaking Bibbs stopped short, turning to look at Mary Vertrees
in a dazed way that was not of her perceiving; for, though she stopped
as he did, her gaze followed the organist, who was walking away from
them toward the front of the church, shaking his white Beethovian mane
roguishly.

"It's false pretenses on my part," Bibbs said. "You mean to be kind to
the sick, but I'm not an invalid any more. I'm so well I'm going back
to work in a few days. I'd better leave before he begins to play, hadn't
I?"

"No," said Mary, beginning to walk forward. "Not unless you don't like
great music."

He followed her to a seat about half-way up the aisle while Dr. Kraft
ascended to the organ. It was an enormous one, the procession of pipes
ranging from long, starveling whistles to thundering fat guns; they
covered all the rear wall of the church, and the organist's figure,
reaching its high perch, looked like that of some Lilliputian magician
ludicrously daring the attempt to control a monster certain to overwhelm
him.

"This afternoon some Handel!" he turned to shout.

Mary nodded. "Will you like that?" she asked Bibbs.

"I don't know. I never heard any except 'Largo.' I don't know anything
about music. I don't even know how to pretend I do. If I knew enough to
pretend, I would."

"No," said Mary, looking at him and smiling faintly, "you wouldn't."

She turned away as a great sound began to swim and tremble in the air;
the huge empty space of the church filled with it, and the two people
listening filled with it; the universe seemed to fill and thrill with
it. The two sat intensely still, the great sound all round about them,
while the church grew dusky, and only the organist's lamp made a
tiny star of light. His white head moved from side to side beneath it
rhythmically, or lunged and recovered with the fierceness of a duelist
thrusting, but he was magnificently the master of his giant, and it sang
to his magic as he bade it.

Bibbs was swept away upon that mighty singing. Such a thing was wholly
unknown to him; there had been no music in his meager life. Unlike
the tale, it was the Princess Bedrulbudour who had brought him to the
enchanted cave, and that--for Bibbs--was what made its magic dazing. It
seemed to him a long, long time since he had been walking home drearily
from Dr. Gurney's office; it seemed to him that he had set out upon a
happy journey since then, and that he had reached another planet, where
Mary Vertrees and he sat alone together listening to a vast choiring of
invisible soldiers and holy angels. There were armies of voices about
them singing praise and thanksgiving; and yet they were alone. It was
incredible that the walls of the church were not the boundaries of
the universe, to remain so for ever; incredible that there was a smoky
street just yonder, where housemaids were bringing in evening papers
from front steps and where children were taking their last spins on
roller-skates before being haled indoors for dinner.

He had a curious sense of communication with his new friend. He knew
it could not be so, and yet he felt as if all the time he spoke to her,
saying: "You hear this strain? You hear that strain? You know the dream
that these sounds bring to me?" And it seemed to him as though she
answered continually: "I hear! I hear that strain, and I hear the new
one that you are hearing now. I know the dream that these sounds bring
to you. Yes, yes, I hear it all! We hear--together!"

And though the church grew so dim that all was mysterious shadow except
the vague planes of the windows and the organist's light, with the white
head moving beneath it, Bibbs had no consciousness that the girl sitting
beside him had grown shadowy; he seemed to see her as plainly as ever in
the darkness, though he did not look at her. And all the mighty chanting
of the organ's multitudinous voices that afternoon seemed to Bibbs to be
chorusing of her and interpreting her, singing her thoughts and singing
for him the world of humble gratitude that was in his heart because she
was so kind to him. It all meant Mary.



CHAPTER XVI

But when she asked him what it meant, on their homeward way, he was
silent. They had come a few paces from the church without speaking,
walking slowly.

"I'll tell you what it meant to me," she said, as he did not immediately
reply. "Almost any music of Handel's always means one thing above all
others to me: courage! That's it. It makes cowardice of whining seem so
infinitesimal--it makes MOST things in our hustling little lives seem
infinitesimal."

"Yes," he said. "It seems odd, doesn't it, that people down-town are
hurrying to trains and hanging to straps in trolley-cars, weltering
every way to get home and feed and sleep so they can get down-town
to-morrow. And yet there isn't anything down there worth getting to.
They're like servants drudging to keep the house going, and believing
the drudgery itself is the great thing. They make so much noise and fuss
and dirt they forget that the house was meant to live in. The housework
has to be done, but the people who do it have been so overpaid that
they're confused and worship the housework. They're overpaid, and yet,
poor things! they haven't anything that a chicken can't have. Of
course, when the world gets to paying its wages sensibly that will be
different."

"Do you mean 'communism'?" she asked, and she made their slow pace a
little slower--they had only three blocks to go.

"Whatever the word is, I only mean that things don't look very sensible
now--especially to a man that wants to keep out of 'em and can't!
'Communism'? Well, at least any 'decent sport' would say it's fair for
all the strong runners to start from the same mark and give the weak
ones a fair distance ahead, so that all can run something like even
on the stretch. And wouldn't it be pleasant, really, if they could all
cross the winning-line together? Who really enjoys beating anybody--if
he sees the beaten man's face? The only way we can enjoy getting ahead
of other people nowadays is by forgetting what the other people feel.
And that," he added, "is nothing of what the music meant to me. You see,
if I keep talking about what it didn't mean I can keep from telling you
what it did mean."

"Didn't it mean courage to you, too--a little?" she asked. "Triumph and
praise were in it, and somehow those things mean courage to me."

"Yes, they were all there," Bibbs said. "I don't know the name of what
he played, but I shouldn't think it would matter much. The man that
makes the music must leave it to you what it can mean to you, and the
name he puts to it can't make much difference--except to himself and
people very much like him, I suppose."

"I suppose that's true, though I'd never thought of it like that."

"I imagine music must make feelings and paint pictures in the minds of
the people who hear it," Bibbs went on, musingly, "according to their
own natures as much as according to the music itself. The musician might
compose something and play it, wanting you to think of the Holy Grail,
and some people who heard it would think of a prayer-meeting, and some
would think of how good they were themselves, and a boy might think of
himself at the head of a solemn procession, carrying a banner and riding
a white horse. And then, if there were some jubilant passages in the
music, he'd think of a circus."

They had reached her gate, and she set her hand upon it, but did
not open it. Bibbs felt that this was almost the kindest of her
kindnesses--not to be prompt in leaving him.

"After all," she said, "you didn't tell me whether you liked it."

"No. I didn't need to."

"No, that's true, and I didn't need to ask. I knew. But you said you
were trying to keep from telling me what it did mean."

"I can't keep from telling it any longer," he said. "The music meant to
me--it meant the kindness of--of you."

"Kindness? How?"

"You thought I was a sort of lonely tramp--and sick--"

"No," she said, decidedly. "I thought perhaps you'd like to hear Dr.
Kraft play. And you did."

"It's curious; sometimes it seemed to me that it was you who were
playing."

Mary laughed. "I? I strum! Piano. A little Chopin--Grieg--Chaminade. You
wouldn't listen!"

Bibbs drew a deep breath. "I'm frightened again," he said, in an
unsteady voice. "I'm afraid you'll think I'm pushing, but--" He paused,
and the words sank to a murmur.

"Oh, if you want ME to play for you!" she said. "Yes, gladly. It will be
merely absurd after what you heard this afternoon. I play like a hundred
thousand other girls, and I like it. I'm glad when any one's willing to
listen, and if you--" She stopped, checked by a sudden recollection,
and laughed ruefully. "But my piano won't be here after to-night. I--I'm
sending it away to-morrow. I'm afraid that if you'd like me to play to
you you'd have to come this evening."

"You'll let me?" he cried.

"Certainly, if you care to."

"If I could play--" he said, wistfully, "if I could play like that old
man in the church I could thank you."

"Ah, but you haven't heard me play. I KNOW you liked this afternoon,
but--"

"Yes," said Bibbs. "It was the greatest happiness I've ever known."

It was too dark to see his face, but his voice held such plain honesty,
and he spoke with such complete unconsciousness of saying anything
especially significant, that she knew it was the truth. For a moment she
was nonplussed, then she opened the gate and went in. "You'll come after
dinner, then?"

"Yes," he said, not moving. "Would you mind if I stood here until time
to come in?"

She had reached the steps, and at that she turned, offering him the
response of laughter and a gay gesture of her muff toward the lighted
windows of the New House, as though bidding him to run home to his
dinner.

That night, Bibbs sat writing in his note-book.

  Music can come into a blank life, and fill it.  Everything that
  is beautiful is music, if you can listen.

  There is no gracefulness like that of a graceful woman at a grand
  piano.  There is a swimming loveliness of line that seems to merge
  with the running of the sound, and you seem, as you watch her, to
  see what you are hearing and to hear what you are seeing.

  There are women who make you think of pine woods coming down to
  a sparkling sea.  The air about such a woman is bracing, and when
  she is near you, you feel strong and ambitious; you forget that
  the world doesn't like you.  You think that perhaps you are a great
  fellow, after all.  Then you come away and feel like a boy who has
  fallen in love with his Sunday-school teacher.  You'll be whipped
  for it--and ought to be.

  There are women who make you think of Diana, crowned with the moon.
  But they do not have the "Greek profile."  I do not believe Helen
  of Troy had a "Greek profile"; they would not have fought about her
  if her nose had been quite that long.  The Greek nose is not the
  adorable nose.  The adorable nose is about an eighth of an inch
  shorter.

  Much of the music of Wagner, it appears, is not suitable to the
  piano.  Wagner was a composer who could interpret into music such
  things as the primitive impulses of humanity--he could have made a
  machine-shop into music.  But not if he had to work in it.  Wagner
  was always dealing in immensities--a machine-shop would have put a
  majestic lump in so grand a gizzard as that.

  There is a mystery about pianos, it seems.  Sometimes they have to
  be "sent away."  That is how some people speak of the penitentiary.
  "Sent away" is a euphuism for "sent to prison."  But pianos are not
  sent to prison, and they are not sent to the tuner--the tuner is
  sent to them.  Why are pianos "sent away"--and where?

  Sometimes a glorious day shines into the most ordinary and useless
  life.  Happiness and beauty come caroling out of the air into the
  gloomy house of that life as if some stray angel just happened to
  perch on the roof-tree, resting and singing.  And the night after
  such a day is lustrous and splendid with the memory of it.  Music
  and beauty and kindness--those are the three greatest things God
  can give us.  To bring them all in one day to one who expected
  nothing--ah! the heart  that received them should be as humble as
  it is thankful.  But it is hard  to be humble when one is so rich
  with new memories.  It is impossible to be humble after a day of
  glory.

  Yes--the adorable nose is more than an eighth of an inch shorter
  than the Greek nose.  It is a full quarter of an inch shorter.

  There are women who will be kinder to a sick tramp than to a
  conquering hero.  But the sick tramp had better remember that's
  what he is.  Take care, take care!  Humble's the word!



CHAPTER XVII

That "mystery about pianos" which troubled Bibbs had been a mystery to
Mr. Vertrees, and it was being explained to him at about the time Bibbs
scribbled the reference to it in his notes. Mary had gone up-stairs upon
Bibbs's departure at ten o'clock, and Mr. and Mrs. Vertrees sat until
after midnight in the library, talking. And in all that time they found
not one cheerful topic, but became more depressed with everything and
with every phase of everything that they discussed--no extraordinary
state of affairs in a family which has always "held up its head,"
only to arrive in the end at a point where all it can do is to look on
helplessly at the processes of its own financial dissolution. For that
was the point which this despairing couple had reached--they could do
nothing except look on and talk about it. They were only vaporing, and
they knew it.

"She needn't to have done that about her piano," vapored Mr. Vertrees.
"We could have managed somehow without it. At least she ought to have
consulted me, and if she insisted I could have arranged the details with
the--the dealer."

"She thought that it might be--annoying for you," Mrs. Vertrees
explained. "Really, she planned for you not to know about it until
they had removed--until after to-morrow, that is, but I decided to--to
mention it. You see, she didn't even tell me about it until this
morning. She has another idea, too, I'm afraid. It's--it's--"

"Well?" he urged, as she found it difficult to go on.

"Her other idea is--that is, it was--I think it can be avoided, of
course--it was about her furs."

"No!" he exclaimed, quickly. "I won't have it! You must see to that. I'd
rather not talk to her about it, but you mustn't let her."

"I'll try not," his wife promised. "Of course, they're very handsome."

"All the more reason for her to keep them!" he returned, irritably.
"We're not THAT far gone, I think!"

"Perhaps not yet," Mrs. Vertrees said. "She seems to be troubled about
the--the coal matter and--about Tilly. Of course the piano will take
care of some things like those for a while and--"

"I don't like it. I gave her the piano to play on, not to--"

"You mustn't be distressed about it in ONE way," she said, comfortingly.
"She arranged with the--with the purchaser that the men will come for it
about half after five in the afternoon. The days are so short now it's
really quite winter."

"Oh, yes," he agreed, moodily. "So far as that goes people have a
right to move a piece of furniture without stirring up the neighbors, I
suppose, even by daylight. I don't suppose OUR neighbors are paying much
attention just now, though I hear Sheridan was back in his office early
the morning after the funeral."

Mrs. Vertrees made a little sound of commiseration. "I don't believe
that was because he wasn't suffering, though. I'm sure it was only
because he felt his business was so important. Mary told me he seemed
wrapped up in his son's succeeding; and that was what he bragged about
most. He isn't vulgar in his boasting, I understand; he doesn't talk a
great deal about his--his actual money--though there was something about
blades of grass that I didn't comprehend. I think he meant something
about his energy--but perhaps not. No, his bragging usually seemed to be
not so much a personal vainglory as about his family and the greatness
of this city."

"'Greatness of this city'!" Mr. Vertrees echoed, with dull bitterness.
"It's nothing but a coal-hole! I suppose it looks 'great' to the man who
has the luck to make it work for him. I suppose it looks 'great' to any
YOUNG man, too, starting out to make his fortune out of it. The fellows
that get what they want out of it say it's 'great,' and everybody else
gets the habit. But you have a different point of view if it's the
city that got what it wanted out of you! Of course Sheridan says it's
'great'."

Mrs. Vertrees seemed unaware of this unusual outburst. "I believe," she
began, timidly, "he doesn't boast of--that is, I understand he has never
seemed so interested in the--the other one."

Her husband's face was dark, but at that a heavier shadow fell upon
it; he looked more haggard than before. "'The other one'," he repeated,
averting his eyes. "You mean--you mean the third son--the one that was
here this evening?"

"Yes, the--the youngest," she returned, her voice so feeble it was
almost a whisper.

And then neither of them spoke for several long minutes. Nor did either
look at the other during that silence.

At last Mr. Vertrees contrived to cough, but not convincingly.
"What--ah--what was it Mary said about him out in the hall, when she
came in this afternoon? I heard you asking her something about him, but
she answered in such a low voice I didn't--ah--happen to catch it."

"She--she didn't say much. All she said was this: I asked her if she had
enjoyed her walk with him, and she said, 'He's the most wistful creature
I've ever known.'"

"Well?"

"That was all. He IS wistful-looking; and so fragile--though he doesn't
seem quite so much so lately. I was watching Mary from the window when
she went out to-day, and he joined her, and if I hadn't known about him
I'd have thought he had quite an interesting face."

"If you 'hadn't known about him'? Known what?"

"Oh, nothing, of course," she said, hurriedly. "Nothing definite, that
is. Mary said decidely, long ago, that he's not at all insane, as we
thought at first. It's only--well, of course it IS odd, their attitude
about him. I suppose it's some nervous trouble that makes him--perhaps
a little queer at times, so that he can't apply himself to anything--or
perhaps does odd things. But, after all, of course, we only have an
impression about it. We don't know--that is, positively. I--" She
paused, then went on: "I didn't know just how to ask--that is--I didn't
mention it to Mary. I didn't--I--" The poor lady floundered pitifully,
concluding with a mumble. "So soon after--after the--the shock."

"I don't think I've caught more than a glimpse of him," said Mr.
Vertrees. "I wouldn't know him if I saw him, but your impression of
him is--" He broke off suddenly, springing to his feet in agitation. "I
can't imagine her--oh, NO!" he gasped. And he began to pace the floor.
"A half-witted epileptic!"

"No, no!" she cried. "He may be all right. We--"

"Oh, it's horrible! I can't--" He threw himself back into his chair
again, sweeping his hands across his face, then letting them fall limply
at his sides.

Mrs. Vertrees was tremulous. "You mustn't give way so," she said,
inspired for once almost to direct discourse. "Whatever Mary might think
of doing, it wouldn't be on her own account; it would be on ours. But if
WE should--should consider it, that wouldn't be on OUR own account. It
isn't because we think of ourselves."

"Oh God, no!" he groaned. "Not for us! We can go to the poorhouse, but
Mary can't be a stenographer!"

Sighing, Mrs. Vertrees resumed her obliqueness. "Of course," she
murmured, "it all seems very premature, speculating about such things,
but I had a queer sort of feeling that she seemed quite interested in
this--" She had almost said "in this one," but checked herself. "In this
young man. It's natural, of course; she is always so strong and well,
and he is--he seems to be, that is--rather appealing to the--the
sympathies."

"Yes!" he agreed, bitterly. "Precisely. The sympathies!"

"Perhaps," she faltered, "perhaps you might feel easier if I could have
a little talk with some one?"

"With whom?"

"I had thought of--not going about it too brusquely, of course, but
perhaps just waiting for his name to be mentioned, if I happened to
be talking with somebody that knew the family--and then I might find
a chance to say that I was sorry to hear he'd been ill so much,
and--Something of that kind perhaps?"

"You don't know anybody that knows the family."

"Yes. That is--well, in a way, of course, one OF the family. That Mrs.
Roscoe Sheridan is not a--that is, she's rather a pleasant-faced little
woman, I think, and of course rather ordinary. I think she is interested
about--that is, of course, she'd be anxious to be more intimate with
Mary, naturally. She's always looking over here from her house; she
was looking out the window this afternoon when Mary went out, I
noticed--though I don't think Mary saw her. I'm sure she wouldn't think
it out of place to--to be frank about matters. She called the other day,
and Mary must rather like her--she said that evening that the call had
done her good. Don't you think it might be wise?"

"Wise? I don't know. I feel the whole matter is impossible."

"Yes, so do I," she returned, promptly. "It isn't really a thing we
should be considering seriously, of course. Still--"

"I should say not! But possibly--"

Thus they skirmished up and down the field, but before they turned the
lights out and went up-stairs it was thoroughly understood between
them that Mrs. Vertrees should seek the earliest opportunity to obtain
definite information from Sibyl Sheridan concerning the mental and
physical status of Bibbs. And if he were subject to attacks of lunacy,
the unhappy pair decided to prevent the sacrifice they supposed their
daughter intended to make of herself. Altogether, if there were spiteful
ghosts in the old house that night, eavesdropping upon the woeful
comedy, they must have died anew of laughter!

Mrs. Vertrees's opportunity occurred the very next afternoon. Darkness
had fallen, and the piano-movers had come. They were carrying the piano
down the front steps, and Mrs. Vertrees was standing in the open doorway
behind them, preparing to withdraw, when she heard a sharp exclamation;
and Mrs. Roscoe Sheridan, bareheaded, emerged from the shadow into the
light of the doorway.

"Good gracious!" she cried. "It did give me a fright!"

"It's Mrs. Sheridan, isn't it?" Mrs. Vertrees was perplexed by this
informal appearance, but she reflected that it might be providential.
"Won't you come in?"

"No. Oh no, thank you!" Sibyl panted, pressing her hand to her side.
"You don't know what a fright you've given me! And it was nothing but
your piano!" She laughed shrilly. "You know, since our tragedy coming
so suddenly the other day, you have no idea how upset I've been--almost
hysterical! And I just glanced out of the window, a minute or so ago,
and saw your door wide open and black figures of men against the light,
carrying something heavy, and I almost fainted. You see, it was just the
way it looked when I saw them bringing my poor brother-in-law in,
next door, only such a few short days ago. And I thought I'd seen your
daughter start for a drive with Bibbs Sheridan in a car about three
o'clock--and-- They aren't back yet, are they?"

"No. Good heavens!"

"And the only thing I could think of was that something must have
happened to them, and I just dashed over--and it was only your PIANO!"
She broke into laughter again. "I suppose you're just sending it
somewhere to be repaired, aren't you?"

"It's--it's being taken down-town," said Mrs. Vertrees. "Won't you come
in and make me a little visit. I was SO sorry, the other day, that I
was--ah--" She stopped inconsequently, then repeated her invitation.
"Won't you come in? I'd really--"

"Thank you, but I must be running back. My husband usually gets home
about this time, and I make a little point of it always to be there."

"That's very sweet." Mrs. Vertrees descended the steps and walked toward
the street with Sibyl. "It's quite balmy for so late in November, isn't
it? Almost like a May evening."

"I'm afraid Miss Vertrees will miss her piano," said Sibyl, watching
the instrument disappear into the big van at the curb. "She plays
wonderfully, Mrs. Kittersby tells me."

"Yes, she plays very well. One of your relatives came to hear her
yesterday, after dinner, and I think she played all evening for him."

"You mean Bibbs?" asked Sibyl.

"The--the youngest Mr. Sheridan. Yes. He's very musical, isn't he?"

"I never heard of it. But I shouldn't think it would matter much whether
he was or not, if he could get Miss Vertrees to play to him. Does your
daughter expect the piano back soon?"

"I--I believe not immediately. Mr. Sheridan came last evening to hear
her play because she had arranged with the--that is, it was to be
removed this afternoon. He seems almost well again."

"Yes." Sibyl nodded. "His father's going to try to start him to work."

"He seems very delicate," said Mrs. Vertrees. "I shouldn't think he
would be able to stand a great deal, either physically or--" She paused
and then added, glowing with the sense of her own adroitness--"or
mentally."

"Oh, mentally Bibbs is all right," said Sibyl, in an odd voice.

"Entirely?" Mrs. Vertrees asked, breathlessly.

"Yes, entirely."

"But has he ALWAYS been?" This question came with the same anxious
eagerness.

"Certainly. He had a long siege of nervous dyspepsia, but he's over it."

"And you think--"

"Bibbs is all right. You needn't wor--" Sibyl choked, and pressed
her handkerchief to her mouth. "Good night, Mrs. Vertrees," she said,
hurriedly, as the head-lights of an automobile swung round the corner
above, sending a brightening glare toward the edge of the pavement where
the two ladies were standing.

"Won't you come in?" urged Mrs. Vertrees, cordially, hearing the sound
of a cheerful voice out of the darkness beyond the approaching glare.
"Do! There's Mary now, and she--"

But Sibyl was half-way across the street. "No, thanks," she called.
"I hope she won't miss her piano!" And she ran into her own house
and plunged headlong upon a leather divan in the hall, holding her
handkerchief over her mouth.

The noise of her tumultuous entrance was evidently startling in the
quiet house, for upon the bang of the door there followed the crash of
a decanter, dropped upon the floor of the dining-room at the end of the
hall; and, after a rumble of indistinct profanity, Roscoe came forth,
holding a dripping napkin in his hand.

"What's your excitement?" he demanded. "What do you find to go into
hysterics over? Another death in the family?"

"Oh, it's funny!" she gasped. "Those old frost-bitten people! I guess
THEY'RE getting their come-uppance!" Lying prone, she elevated her feet
in the air, clapped her heels together repeatedly, in an ecstasy.

"Come through, come through!" said her husband, crossly. "What you been
up to?"

"Me?" she cried, dropping her feet and swinging around to face him.
"Nothing. It's them! Those Vertreeses!" She wiped her eyes. "They've had
to sell their piano!"

"Well, what of it?"

"That Mrs. Kittersby told me all about 'em a week ago," said Sibyl.
"They've been hard up for a long time, and she says as long ago as
last winter she knew that girl got a pair of walking-shoes re-soled and
patched, because she got it done the same place Mrs. Kittersby's cook
had HERS! And the night of the house-warming I kind of got suspicious,
myself. She didn't have one single piece of any kind of real jewelry,
and you could see her dress was an old one done over. Men can't tell
those things, and you all made a big fuss over her, but I thought she
looked a sight, myself! Of course, EDITH was crazy to have her, and--"

"Well, well?" he urged, impatiently.

"Well, I'm TELLING you! Mrs. Kittersby says they haven't got a THING!
Just absolutely NOTHING--and they don't know anywhere to turn! The
family's all died out but them, and all the relatives they got are very
distant, and live East and scarcely know 'em. She says the whole town's
been wondering what WOULD become of 'em. The girl had plenty chances to
marry up to a year or so ago, but she was so indifferent she scared the
men off, and the ones that had wanted to went and married other girls.
Gracious! they were lucky! Marry HER? The man that found himself tied up
to THAT girl--"

"Terrible funny, terrible funny!" said Roscoe, with sarcasm. "It's so
funny I broke a cut-glass decanter and spilled a quart of--"

"Wait!" she begged. "You'll see. I was sitting by the window a little
while ago, and I saw a big wagon drive up across the street and some men
go into the house. It was too dark to make out much, and for a minute
I got the idea they were moving out--the house has been foreclosed on,
Mrs. Kittersby says. It seemed funny, too, because I knew that girl was
out riding with Bibbs. Well, I thought I'd see, so I slipped over--and
it was their PIANO! They'd sold it and were trying to sneak it out after
dark, so nobody'd catch on!" Again she gave way to her enjoyment, but
resumed, as her husband seemed about to interrupt the narrative. "Wait a
minute, can't you? The old lady was superintending, and she gave it all
away. I sized her up for one of those old churchy people that tell
all kinds of lies except when it comes to so many words, and then they
can't. She might just as well told me outright! Yes, they'd sold it;
and I hope they'll pay some of their debts. They owe everybody, and last
week a coal-dealer made an awful fuss at the door with Mr. Vertrees.
Their cook told our upstairs girl, and she said she didn't know WHEN
she'd seen any money, herself! Did you ever hear of such a case as that
girl in your LIFE?"

"What girl? Their cook?"

"That Vertrees girl! Don't you see they looked on our coming up into
this neighborhood as their last chance? They were just going down and
out, and here bobs up the green, rich Sheridan family! So they doll
the girl up in her old things, made over, and send her out to get a
Sheridan--she's GOT to get one! And she just goes in blind; and she
tries it on first with YOU. You remember, she just plain TOLD you she
was going to mash you, and then she found out you were the married one,
and turned right square around to Jim and carried him off his feet.
Oh, Jim was landed--there's no doubt about THAT! But Jim was lucky;
he didn't live to STAY landed, and it's a good thing for him!" Sibyl's
mirth had vanished, and she spoke with virulent rapidity. "Well, she
couldn't get you, because you were married, and she couldn't get Jim,
because Jim died. And there they were, dead broke! Do you know what she
did? Do you know what she's DOING?"

"No, I don't," said Roscoe, gruffly.

Sibyl's voice rose and culminated in a scream of renewed hilarity.
"BIBBS! She waited in the grave-yard, and drove home with him from JIM'S
FUNERAL! Never spoke to him before! Jim wasn't COLD!"

She rocked herself back and forth upon the divan. "Bibbs!" she shrieked.
"Bibbs! Roscoe, THINK of it! BIBBS!"

He stared unsympathetically, but her mirth was unabated for all that.
"And yesterday," she continued, between paroxysms--"yesterday she came
out of the house--just as he was passing. She must have been looking
out--waiting for the chance; I saw the old lady watching at the window!
And she got him there last night--to 'PLAY' to him; the old lady gave
that away! And to-day she made him take her out in a machine! And the
cream of it is that they didn't even know whether he was INSANE or
not--they thought maybe he was, but she went after him just the same!
The old lady set herself to pump me about it to-day. BIBBS! Oh, my Lord!
BIBBS!"

But Roscoe looked grim. "So it's funny to you, is it? It sounds kind of
pitiful to me. I should think it would to a woman, too."

"Oh, it might," she returned, sobering. "It might, if those people
weren't such frozen-faced smart Alecks. If they'd had the decency to
come down off the perch a little I probably wouldn't think it was funny,
but to see 'em sit up on their pedestal all the time they're eating
dirt--well, I think it's funny! That girl sits up as if she was Queen
Elizabeth, and expects people to wallow on the ground before her until
they get near enough for her to give 'em a good kick with her old
patched shoes--oh, she'd do THAT, all right!--and then she powders up
and goes out to mash--BIBBS SHERIDAN!"

"Look here," said Roscoe, heavily; "I don't care about that one way or
another. If you're through, I got something I want to talk to you about.
I was going to, that day just before we heard about Jim."

At this Sibyl stiffened quickly; her eyes became intensely bright. "What
is it?"

"Well," he began, frowning, "what I was going to say then--" He broke
off, and, becoming conscious that he was still holding the wet napkin in
his hand, threw it pettishly into a corner. "I never expected I'd have
to say anything like this to anybody I MARRIED; but I was going to ask
you what was the matter between you and Lamhorn."

Sibyl uttered a sharp monosyllable. "Well?"

"I felt the time had come for me to know about it," he went on. "You
never told me anything--"

"You never asked," she interposed, curtly.

"Well, we'd got in a way of not talking much," said Roscoe. "It looks to
me now as if we'd pretty much lost the run of each other the way a good
many people do. I don't say it wasn't my fault. I was up early and down
to work all day, and I'd come home tired at night, and want to go to bed
soon as I'd got the paper read--unless there was some good musical show
in town. Well, you seemed all right until here lately, the last month or
so, I began to see something was wrong. I couldn't help seeing it."

"Wrong?" she said. "What like?"

"You changed; you didn't look the same. You were all strung up and
excited and fidgety; you got to looking peakid and run down. Now then,
Lamhorn had been going with us a good while, but I noticed that not long
ago you got to picking on him about every little thing he did; you got
to quarreling with him when I was there and when I wasn't. I could see
you'd been quarreling whenever I came in and he was here."

"Do you object to that?" asked Sibyl, breathing quickly.

"Yes--when it injures my wife's health!" he returned, with a quick lift
of his eyes to hers. "You began to run down just about the time you
began falling out with him." He stepped close to her. "See here, Sibyl,
I'm going to know what it means."

"Oh, you ARE?" she snapped.

"You're trembling," he said, gravely.

"Yes. I'm angry enough to do more than tremble, you'll find. Go on!"

"That was all I was going to say the other day," he said. "I was going
to ask you--"

"Yes, that was all you were going to say THE OTHER DAY. Yes. What else
have you to say to-night?"

"To-night," he replied, with grim swiftness, "I want to know why you
keep telephoning him you want to see him since he stopped coming here."

She made a long, low sound of comprehension before she said, "And what
else did Edith want you to ask me?"

"I want to know what you say over the telephone to Lamhorn," he said,
fiercely.

"Is that all Edith told you to ask me? You saw her when you stopped in
there on your way home this evening, didn't you? Didn't she tell you
then what I said over the telephone to Mr. Lamhorn?"

"No, she didn't!" he vociferated, his voice growing louder. "She said,
'You tell your wife to stop telephoning Robert Lamhorn to come and see
her, because he isn't going to do it!' That's what she said! And I want
to know what it means. I intend--"

A maid appeared at the lower end of the hall. "Dinner is ready," she
said, and, giving the troubled pair one glance, went demurely into the
dining-room. Roscoe disregarded the interruption.

"I intend to know exactly what has been going on," he declared. "I mean
to know just what--"

Sibyl jumped up, almost touching him, standing face to face with him.

"Oh, you DO!" she cried, shrilly. "You mean to know just what's what, do
you? You listen to your sister insinuating ugly things about your
wife, and then you come home making a scene before the servants and
humiliating me in their presence! Do you suppose that Irish girl didn't
hear every word you said? You go in there and eat your dinner alone! Go
on! Go and eat your dinner alone--because I won't eat with you!"

And she broke away from the detaining grasp he sought to fasten upon
her, and dashed up the stairway, panting. He heard the door of her room
slam overhead, and the sharp click of the key in the lock.



CHAPTER XVIII

At seven o'clock on the last morning of that month, Sheridan, passing
through the upper hall on his way to descend the stairs for breakfast,
found a couple of scribbled sheets of note-paper lying on the floor. A
window had been open in Bibbs's room the evening before; he had left his
note-book on the sill--and the sheets were loose. The door was open, and
when Bibbs came in and closed it, he did not notice that the two sheets
had blown out into the hall. Sheridan recognized the handwriting and
put the sheets in his coat pocket, intending to give them to George
or Jackson for return to the owner, but he forgot and carried them
down-town with him. At noon he found himself alone in his office, and,
having a little leisure, remembered the bits of manuscript, took them
out, and glanced at them. A glance was enough to reveal that they were
not epistolary. Sheridan would not have read a "private letter" that
came into his possession in that way, though in a "matter of business"
he might have felt it his duty to take advantage of an opportunity
afforded in any manner whatsoever. Having satisfied himself that Bibbs's
scribblings were only a sample of the kind of writing his son preferred
to the machine-shop, he decided, innocently enough, that he would be
justified in reading them.

  It appears that a lady will nod pleasantly upon some windy
  generalization of a companion, and will wear the most agreeable
  expression of accepting it as the law, and then--days afterward,
  when the thing is a mummy to its promulgator--she will inquire out
  of a clear sky:  "WHY did you say that the people down-town have
  nothing in life that a chicken hasn't?  What did you mean?"  And she
  may say it in a manner that makes a sensible reply very difficult
  --you will be so full of wonder that she remembered so seriously.

  Yet, what does the rooster lack?  He has food and shelter; he is
  warm in winter; his wives raise not one fine family for him, but
  dozens.  He has a clear sky over him; he breathes sweet air; he
  walks in his April orchard under a roof of flowers.  He must die,
  violently perhaps, but quickly.  Is Midas's cancer a better way?
  The rooster's wives and children must die.  Are those of Midas
  immortal?  His life is shorter than the life of Midas, but Midas's
  life is only a sixth as long as that of the Galapagos tortoise.

  The worthy money-worker takes his vacation so that he may refresh
  himself anew for the hard work of getting nothing that the rooster
  doesn't get.  The office-building has an elevator, the rooster
  flies up to the bough.  Midas has a machine to take him to his work;
  the rooster finds his worm underfoot.  The "business man" feels
  a pressure sometimes, without knowing why, and sits late at wine
  after the day's labor; next morning he curses his head because it
  interferes with the work--he swears never to relieve that pressure
  again.  The rooster has no pressure and no wine; this difference is
  in his favor.

  The rooster is a dependent; he depends upon the farmer and the
  weather.  Midas is a dependent; he depends upon the farmer and the
  weather.  The rooster thinks only of the moment; Midas provides for
  to-morrow.  What does he provide for to-morrow?  Nothing that the
  rooster will not have without providing.

  The rooster and the prosperous worker:  they are born, they grub,
  they love; they grub and love grubbing; they grub and they die.
  Neither knows beauty; neither knows knowledge.  And after all, when
  Midas dies and the rooster dies, there is one thing Midas has had
  and rooster has not.  Midas has had the excitement of accumulating
  what he has grubbed, and that has been his life and his love and
  his god.  He cannot take that god with him when he dies.  I wonder
  if the worthy gods are those we can take with us.

  Midas must teach all to be as Midas; the young must be raised in
  his religion--

The manuscript ended there, and Sheridan was not anxious for more.
He crumpled the sheets into a ball, depositing it (with vigor) in a
waste-basket beside him; then, rising, he consulted a Cyclopedia of
Names, which a book-agent had somehow sold to him years before; a
volume now first put to use for the location of "Midas." Having read the
legend, Sheridan walked up and down the spacious office, exhaling
the breath of contempt. "Dam' fool!" he mumbled. But this was no new
thought, nor was the contrariness of Bibbs's notes a surpise to him; and
presently he dismissed the matter from his mind.

He felt very lonely, and this was, daily, his hardest hour. For a long
time he and Jim had lunched together habitually. Roscoe preferred a
club luncheon, but Jim and his father almost always went to a small
restaurant near the Sheridan Building, where they spent twenty minutes
in the consumption of food, and twenty in talk, with cigars. Jim came
for his father every day, at five minutes after twelve, and Sheridan
was again in his office at five minutes before one. But now that Jim no
longer came, Sheridan remained alone in his office; he had not gone out
to lunch since Jim's death, nor did he have anything sent to him--he
fasted until evening.

It was the time he missed Jim personally the most--the voice and eyes
and handshake, all brisk and alert, all business-like. But these things
were not the keenest in Sheridan's grief; his sense of loss went far
deeper. Roscoe was dependable, a steady old wheel-horse, and that was
a great comfort; but it was in Jim that Sheridan had most happily
perceived his own likeness. Jim was the one who would have been surest
to keep the great property growing greater, year by year. Sheridan had
fallen asleep, night after night, picturing what the growth would be
under Jim. He had believed that Jim was absolutely certain to be one of
the biggest men in the country. Well, it was all up to Roscoe now!

That reminded him of a question he had in mind to ask Roscoe. It was a
question Sheridan considered of no present importance, but his wife had
suggested it--though vaguely--and he had meant to speak to Roscoe about
it. However, Roscoe had not come into his father's office for several
days, and when Sheridan had seen his son at home there had been no
opportunity.

He waited until the greater part of his day's work was over, toward four
o'clock, and then went down to Roscoe's office, which was on a lower
floor. He found several men waiting for business interviews in an outer
room of the series Roscoe occupied; and he supposed that he would
find his son busy with others, and that his question would have to
be postponed, but when he entered the door marked "R. C. Sheridan.
Private," Roscoe was there alone.

He was sitting with his back to the door, his feet on a window-sill, and
he did not turn as his father opened the door.

"Some pretty good men out there waitin' to see you, my boy," said
Sheridan. "What's the matter?"

"Nothing," Roscoe answered indistinctly, not moving.

"Well, I guess that's all right, too. I let 'em wait sometimes myself!
I just wanted to ask you a question, but I expect it'll keep, if you're
workin' something out in your mind!"

Roscoe made no reply; and his father, who had turned to the door, paused
with his hand on the knob, staring curiously at the motionless figure in
the chair. Usually the son seemed pleased and eager when he came to the
office. "You're all right, ain't you?" said Sheridan. "Not sick, are
you?"

"No."

Sheridan was puzzled; then, abruptly, he decided to ask his question. "I
wanted to talk to you about that young Lamhorn," he said. "I guess your
mother thinks he's comin' to see Edith pretty often, and you known him
longer'n any of us, so--"

"I won't," said Roscoe, thickly--"I won't say a dam' thing about him!"

Sheridan uttered an exclamation and walked quickly to a position
near the window where he could see his son's face. Roscoe's eyes were
bloodshot and vacuous; his hair was disordered, his mouth was distorted,
and he was deathly pale. The father stood aghast.

"By George!" he muttered. "ROSCOE!"

"My name," said Roscoe. "Can' help that."

"ROSCOE!" Blank astonishment was Sheridan's first sensation. Probably
nothing in the world could have more amazed his than to find Roscoe--the
steady old wheel-horse--in this condition. "How'd you GET this way?" he
demanded. "You caught cold and took too much for it?"

For reply Roscoe laughed hoarsely. "Yeuh! Cold! I been drinkun all time,
lately. Firs' you notice it?"

"By George!" cried Sheridan. "I THOUGHT I'd smelt it on you a good deal
lately, but I wouldn't 'a' believed you'd take more'n was good for you.
Boh! To see you like a common hog!"

Roscoe chuckled and threw out his right arm in a meaningless gesture.
"Hog!" he repeated, chuckling.

"Yes, a hog!" said Sheridan, angrily. "In business hours! I don't object
to anybody's takin' a drink if you wants to, out o' business hours; nor,
if a man keeps his work right up to the scratch, I wouldn't be the one
to baste him if he got good an' drunk once in two, three years, maybe.
It ain't MY way. I let it alone, but I never believed in forcin' my way
on a grown-up son in moral matters. I guess I was wrong! You think them
men out there are waitin' to talk business with a drunkard? You think
you can come to your office and do business drunk? By George! I wonder
how often this has been happening and me not on to it! I'll have a look
over your books to-morrow, and I'll--"

Roscoe stumbled to his feet, laughing wildly, and stood swaying,
contriving to hold himself in position by clutching the back of the
heavy chair in which he had been sitting.

"Hoo--hoorah!" he cried. "'S my principles, too. Be drunkard all you
want to--outside business hours. Don' for Gossake le'n'thing innerfere
business hours! Business! Thassit! You're right, father. Drink! Die!
L'everything go to hell, but DON' let innerfere business!"

Sheridan had seized the telephone upon Roscoe's desk, and was calling
his own office, overhead. "Abercrombie? Come down to my son Roscoe's
suite and get rid of some gentlemen that are waitin' there to see him in
room two-fourteen. There's Maples and Schirmer and a couple o' fellows
on the Kinsey business. Tell 'em something's come up I have to go over
with Roscoe, and tell 'em to come back day after to-morrow at two.
You needn't come in to let me know they're gone; we don't want to be
disturbed. Tell Pauly to call my house and send Claus down here with a
closed car. We may have to go out. Tell him to hustle, and call me at
Roscoe's room as soon as the car gets here. 'T's all!"

Roscoe had laughed bitterly throughout this monologue. "Drunk in
business hours! Thass awf'l! Mus'n' do such thing! Mus'n' get drunk,
mus'n' gamble, mus'n' kill 'nybody--not in business hours! All right any
other time. Kill 'nybody you want to--'s long 'tain't in business
hours! Fine! Mus'n' have any trouble 't'll innerfere business. Keep your
trouble 't home. Don' bring it to th' office. Might innerfere business!
Have funerals on Sunday--might innerfere business! Don' let your wife
innerfere business! Keep all, all, ALL your trouble an' your meanness,
an' your trad--your tradegy--keep 'em ALL for home use! If you got die,
go on die 't home--don' die round th' office! Might innerfere business!"

Sheridan picked up a newspaper from Roscoe's desk, and sat down with his
back to his son, affecting to read. Roscoe seemed to be unaware of his
father's significant posture.

"You know wh' I think?" he went on. "I think Bibbs only one the fam'ly
any 'telligence at all. Won' work, an' di'n' get married. Jim worked,
an' he got killed. I worked, an' I got married. Look at me! Jus' look at
me, I ask you. Fine 'dustriss young business man. Look whass happen' to
me! Fine!" He lifted his hand from the sustaining chair in a deplorable
gesture, and, immediately losing his balance, fell across the chair
and caromed to the floor with a crash, remaining prostrate for several
minutes, during which Sheridan did not relax his apparent attention to
the newspaper. He did not even look round at the sound of Roscoe's fall.

Roscoe slowly climbed to an upright position, pulling himself up
by holding to the chair. He was slightly sobered outwardly, having
progressed in the prostrate interval to a state of befuddlement less
volatile. He rubbed his dazed eyes with the back of his left hand.

"What--what you ask me while ago?" he said.

"Nothin'."

"Yes, you did. What--what was it?"

"Nothin'. You better sit down."

"You ask' me what I thought about Lamhorn. You did ask me that. Well, I
won't tell you. I won't say dam' word 'bout him!"

The telephone-bell tinkled. Sheridan placed the receiver to his ear and
said, "Right down." Then he got Roscoe's coat and hat from a closet and
brought them to his son. "Get into this coat," he said. "You're goin'
home."

"All ri'," Roscoe murmured, obediently.

They went out into the main hall by a side door, not passing through the
outer office; and Sheridan waited for an empty elevator, stopped it, and
told the operator to take on no more passengers until they reached
the ground floor. Roscoe walked out of the building and got into the
automobile without lurching, and twenty minutes later walked into his
own house in the same manner, neither he nor his father having spoken a
word in the interval.

Sheridan did not go in with him; he went home, and to his own room
without meeting any of his family. But as he passed Bibbs's door he
heard from within the sound of a cheerful young voice humming jubilant
fragments of song:

  WHO looks a mustang in the eye?...
  With a leap from the ground
  To the saddle in a bound.
      And away--and away!
      Hi-yay!

It was the first time in Sheridan's life that he had ever detected
any musical symptom whatever in Bibbs--he had never even heard him
whistle--and it seemed the last touch of irony that the useless fool
should be merry to-day.

To Sheridan it was Tom o' Bedlam singing while the house burned; and he
did not tarry to enjoy the melody, but went into his own room and locked
the door.



CHAPTER XIX

He emerged only upon a second summons to dinner, two hours later, and
came to the table so white and silent that his wife made her anxiety
manifest and was but partially reassured by his explanation that his
lunch had "disagreed" with him a little.

Presently, however, he spoke effectively. Bibbs, whose appetite had
become hearty, was helping himself to a second breast of capon from
white-jacket's salver. "Here's another difference between Midas and
chicken," Sheridan remarked, grimly. "Midas can eat rooster, but rooster
can't eat Midas. I reckon you overlooked that. Midas looks to me like he
had the advantage there."

Bibbs retained enough presence of mind to transfer the capon breast to
his plate without dropping it and to respond, "Yes--he crows over it."

Having returned his antagonists's fire in this fashion, he blushed--for
he could blush distinctly now--and his mother looked upon him with
pleasure, though the reference to Midas and roosters was of course
jargon to her. "Did you ever see anybody improve the way that child
has!" she exclaimed. "I declare, Bibbs, sometimes lately you look right
handsome!"

"He's got to be such a gadabout," Edith giggled.

"I found something of his on the floor up-stairs this morning, before
anybody was up," said Sheridan. "I reckon if people lose things in this
house and expect to get 'em back, they better get up as soon as I do."

"What was it he lost?" asked Edith.

"He knows!" her father returned. "Seems to me like I forgot to bring it
home with me. I looked it over--thought probably it was something pretty
important, belongin' to a busy man like him." He affected to search
his pockets. "What DID I do with it, now? Oh yes! Seems to me like I
remember leavin' it down at the office--in the waste-basket."

"Good place for it," Bibbs murmured, still red.

Sheridan gave him a grin. "Perhaps pretty soon you'll be gettin' up
early enough to find things before I do!"

It was a threat, and Bibbs repeated the substance of it, later in the
evening, to Mary Vertrees--they had come to know each other that well.

"My time's here at last," he said, as they sat together in the
melancholy gas-light of the room which had been denuded of its piano.
That removal had left an emptiness so distressing to Mr. and Mrs.
Vertrees that neither of them had crossed the threshold since the dark
day; but the gas-light, though from a single jet, shed no melancholy
upon Bibbs, nor could any room seem bare that knew the glowing presence
of Mary. He spoke lightly, not sadly.

"Yes, it's come. I've shirked and put off, but I can't shirk and put off
any longer. It's really my part to go to him--at least it would save my
face. He means what he says, and the time's come to serve my sentence.
Hard labor for life, I think."

Mary shook her head. "I don't think so. He's too kind."

"You think my father's KIND?" And Bibbs stared at her.

"Yes. I'm sure of it. I've felt that he has a great, brave heart. It's
only that he has to be kind in his own way--because he can't understand
any other way."

"Ah yes," said Bibbs. "If that's what you mean by 'kind'!"

She looked at him gravely, earnest concern in her friendly eyes. "It's
going to be pretty hard for you, isn't it?"

"Oh--self-pity!" he returned, smiling. "This has been just the last
flicker of revolt. Nobody minds work if he likes the kind of work.
There'd be no loafers in the world if each man found the thing that he
could do best; but the only work I happen to want to do is useless--so I
have to give it up. To-morrow I'll be a day-laborer."

"What is it like--exactly?"

"I get up at six," he said. "I have a lunch-basket to carry with me,
which is aristocratic and no advantage. The other workmen have tin
buckets, and tin buckets are better. I leave the house at six-thirty,
and I'm at work in my overalls at seven. I have an hour off at noon, and
work again from one till five."

"But the work itself?"

"It wasn't muscularly exhausting--not at all. They couldn't give me a
heavier job because I wasn't good enough."

"But what will you do? I want to know."

"When I left," said Bibbs, "I was 'on' what they call over there a
'clipping-machine,' in one of the 'by-products' departments, and that's
what I'll be sent back to."

"But what is it?" she insisted.

Bibbs explained. "It's very simple and very easy. I feed long strips of
zinc into a pair of steel jaws, and the jaws bite the zinc into little
circles. All I have to do is to see that the strip goes into the jaws at
a certain angle--and yet I was a very bad hand at it."

He had kept his voice cheerful as he spoke, but he had grown a shade
paler, and there was a latent anguish deep in his eyes. He may have
known it and wished her not to see it, for he turned away.

"You do that all day long?" she asked, and as he nodded, "It seems
incredible!" she exclaimed. "YOU feeding a strip of zinc into a machine
nine hours a day! No wonder--" She broke off, and then, after a keen
glance at his face, she said: "I should think you WOULD have been a 'bad
hand at it'!"

He laughed ruefully. "I think it's the noise, though I'm ashamed to
say it. You see, it's a very powerful machine, and there's a sort of
rhythmical crashing--a crash every time the jaws bite off a circle."

"How often is that?"

"The thing should make about sixty-eight disks a minute--a little more
than one a second."

"And you're close to it?"

"Oh, the workman has to sit in its lap," he said, turning to her more
gaily. "The others don't mind. You see, it's something wrong with me. I
have an idiotic way of flinching from the confounded thing--I flinch and
duck a little every time the crash comes, and I couldn't get over it. I
was a treat to the other workmen in that room; they'll be glad to see me
back. They used to laugh at me all day long."

Mary's gaze was averted from Bibbs now; she sat with her elbow resting
on the arm of the chair, her lifted hand pressed against her cheek. She
was staring at the wall, and her eyes had a burning brightness in them.

"It doesn't seem possible any one could do that to you," she said, in a
low voice. "No. He's not kind. He ought to be proud to help you to the
leisure to write books; it should be his greatest privilege to have them
published for you--"

"Can't you SEE him?" Bibbs interrupted, a faint ripple of hilarity in
his voice. "If he could understand what you're saying--and if you can
imagine his taking such a notion, he'd have had R. T. Bloss put up
posters all over the country: 'Read B. Sheridan. Read the Poet with a
Punch!' No. It's just as well he never got the--But what's the use? I've
never written anything worth printing, and I never shall."

"You could!" she said.

"That's because you've never seen the poor little things I've tried to
do."

"You wouldn't let me, but I KNOW you could! Ah, it's a pity!"

"It isn't," said BIBBS, honestly. "I never could--but you're the kindest
lady in this world, Miss Vertrees."

She gave him a flashing glance, and it was as kind as he said she was.
"That sounds wrong," she said, impulsively. "I mean 'Miss Vertrees.'
I've thought of you by your first name ever since I met you. Wouldn't
you rather call me 'Mary'?"

Bibbs was dazzled; he drew a long, deep breath and did not speak.

"Wouldn't you?" she asked, without a trace of coquetry.

"If I CAN!" he said, in a low voice.

"Ah, that's very pretty!" she laughed. "You're such an honest person,
it's pleasant to have you gallant sometimes, by way of variety." She
became grave again immediately. "I hear myself laughing as if it were
some one else. It sounds like laughter on the eve of a great calamity."
She got up restlessly, crossed the room and leaned against the wall,
facing him. "You've GOT to go back to that place?"

He nodded.

"And the other time you did it--"

"Just over it," said Bibbs. "Two years. But I don't mind the prospect of
a repetition so much as--"

"So much as what?" she prompted, as he stopped.

Bibbs looked up at her shyly. "I want to say it, but--but I come to a
dead balk when I try. I--"

"Go on. Say it, whatever it is," she bade him. "You wouldn't know how to
say anything I shouldn't like."

"I doubt if you'd either like or dislike what I want to say," he
returned, moving uncomfortably in his chair and looking at his feet--he
seemed to feel awkward, thoroughly. "You see, all my life--until I met
you--if I ever felt like saying anything, I wrote it instead. Saying
things is a new trick for me, and this--well, it's just this: I used to
feel as if I hadn't ever had any sort of a life at all. I'd never been
of use to anything or anybody, and I'd never had anything, myself,
except a kind of haphazard thinking. But now it's different--I'm still
of no use to anybody, and I don't see any prospect of being useful,
but I have had something for myself. I've had a beautiful and happy
experience, and it makes my life seem to be--I mean I'm glad I've lived
it! That's all; it's your letting me be near you sometimes, as you have,
this strange, beautiful, happy little while!"

He did not once look up, and reached silence, at the end of what he had
to say, with his eyes still awkwardly regarding his feet. She did not
speak, but a soft rustling of her garments let him know that she had
gone back to her chair again. The house was still; the shabby old room
was so quiet that the sound of a creaking in the wall seemed sharp and
loud.

And yet, when Mary spoke at last, her voice was barely audible. "If you
think it has been--happy--to be friends with me--you'd want to--to make
it last."

"Yes," said Bibbs, as faintly.

"You'd want to go on being my friend as long as we live, wouldn't you?"

"Yes," he gulped.

"But you make that kind of speech to me because you think it's over."

He tried to evade her. "Oh, a day-laborer can't come in his overalls--"

"No," she interrupted, with a sudden sharpness. "You said what you did
because you think the shop's going to kill you."

"No, no!"

"Yes, you do think that!" She rose to her feet again and came and stood
before him. "Or you think it's going to send you back to the sanitarium.
Don't deny it, Bibbs. There! See how easily I call you that! You see I'm
a friend, or I couldn't do it. Well, if you meant what you said--and you
did mean it, I know it!--you're not going to go back to the sanitarium.
The shop sha'n't hurt you. It sha'n't!"

And now Bibbs looked up. She stood before him, straight and tall,
splendid in generous strength, her eyes shining and wet.

"If I mean THAT much to you," she cried, "they can't harm you! Go
back to the shop--but come to me when your day's work is done. Let the
machines crash their sixty-eight times a minute, but remember each crash
that deafens you is that much nearer the evening and me!"

He stumbled to his feet. "You say--" he gasped.

"Every evening, dear Bibbs!"

He could only stare, bewildered.

"EVERY evening. I want you. They sha'n't hurt you again!" And she held
out her hand to him; it was strong and warm in his tremulous clasp. "If
I could, I'd go and feed the strips of zinc to the machine with you,"
she said. "But all day long I'll send my thoughts to you. You must keep
remembering that your friend stands beside you. And when the work is
done--won't the night make up for the day?"

Light seemed to glow from her; he was blinded by that radiance
of kindness. But all he could say was, huskily, "To think you're
there--with me--standing beside the old zinc-eater--"

And they laughed and looked at each other, and at last Bibbs found what
it meant not to be alone in the world. He had a friend.



CHAPTER XX

When he came into the New House, a few minutes later, he found his
father sitting alone by the library fire. Bibbs went in and stood before
him. "I'm cured, father," he said. "When do I go back to the shop? I'm
ready."

The desolate and grim old man did not relax. "I was sittin' up to give
you a last chance to say something like that. I reckon it's about time!
I just wanted to see if you'd have manhood enough not to make me take
you over there by the collar. Last night I made up my mind I'd give you
just one more day. Well, you got to it before I did--pretty close to
the eleventh hour! All right. Start in to-morrow. It's the first o' the
month. Think you can get up in time?"

"Six o'clock," Bibbs responded, briskly. "And I want to tell you--I'm
going in a 'cheerful spirit.' As you said, I'll go and I'll 'like it'!"

"That's YOUR lookout!" his father grunted. "They'll put you back on the
clippin'-machine. You get nine dollars a week."

"More than I'm worth, too," said Bibbs, cheerily. "That reminds me, I
didn't mean YOU by 'Midas' in that nonsense I'd been writing. I meant--"

"Makes a hell of a lot o' difference what you meant!"

"I just wanted you to know. Good night, father."

"G'night!"

The sound of the young man's footsteps ascending the stairs became
inaudible, and the house was quiet. But presently, as Sheridan sat
staring angrily at the fire, the shuffling of a pair of slippers could
be heard descending, and Mrs. Sheridan made her appearance, her oblique
expression and the state of her toilette being those of a person who,
after trying unsuccessfully to sleep on one side, has got up to look for
burglars.

"Papa!" she exclaimed, drowsily. "Why'n't you go to bed? It must be
goin' on 'leven o'clock!"

She yawned, and seated herself near him, stretching out her hands to
the fire. "What's the matter?" she asked, sleep and anxiety striving
sluggishly with each other in her voice. "I knew you were worried all
dinner-time. You got something new on your mind besides Jim's bein'
taken away like he was. What's worryin' you now, papa?"

"Nothin'."

She jeered feebly. "N' tell ME that! You sat up to see Bibbs, didn't
you?"

"He starts in at the shop again to-morrow morning," said Sheridan.

"Just the same as he did before?"

"Just pre-CISELY!"

"How--how long you goin' to keep him at it, papa?" she asked, timidly.

"Until he KNOWS something!" The unhappy man struck his palms together,
then got to his feet and began to pace the room, as was his wont when he
talked. "He'll go back to the machine he couldn't learn to tend properly
in the six months he was there, and he'll stick to it till he DOES learn
it! Do you suppose that lummix ever asked himself WHY I want him to
learn it? No! And I ain't a-goin' to tell him, either! When he went
there I had 'em set him on the simplest machine we got--and he stuck
there! How much prospect would there be of his learnin' to run the whole
business if he can't run the easiest machine in it? I sent him there
to make him THOROUGH. And what happened? He didn't LIKE it! That boy's
whole life, there's been a settin' up o' something mulish that's against
everything I want him to do. I don't know what it is, but it's got to be
worked out of him. Now, labor ain't any more a simple question than what
it was when we were young. My idea is that, outside o' union troubles,
the man that can manage workin'-men is the man that's been one himself.
Well, I set Bibbs to learn the men and to learn the business, and HE
set himself to balk on the first job! That's what he did, and the balk's
lasted close on to three years. If he balks again I'm just done with
him! Sometimes I feel like I was pretty near done with everything,
anyhow!"

"I knew there was something else," said Mrs. Sheridan, blinking over
a yawn. "You better let it go till to-morrow and get to bed now--'less
you'll tell me?"

"Suppose something happened to Roscoe," he said. "THEN what'd I have to
look forward to? THEN what could I depend on to hold things together? A
lummix! A lummix that hasn't learned how to push a strip o' zinc along a
groove!"

"Roscoe?" she yawned. "You needn't worry about Roscoe, papa. He's the
strongest child we had. I never did know anybody keep better health than
he does. I don't believe he's even had a cold in five years. You better
go up to bed, papa."

"Suppose something DID happen to him, though. You don't know what it
means, keepin' property together these days--just keepin' it ALIVE, let
alone makin' it grow the way I do. I've seen too many estates hacked
away in chunks, big and little. I tell you when a man dies the wolves
come out o' the woods, pack after pack, to see what they can tear off
for themselves; and if that dead man's chuldern ain't on the job, night
and day, everything he built'll get carried off. Carried off? I've seen
a big fortune behave like an ash-barrel in a cyclone--there wasn't even
a dust-heap left to tell where it stood! I've seen it, time and again.
My Lord! when I think o' such things comin' to ME! It don't seem like
I deserved it--no man ever tried harder to raise his boys right than I
have. I planned and planned and planned how to bring 'em up to be guards
to drive the wolves off, and how to be builders to build, and build
bigger. I tell you this business life is no fool's job nowadays--a man's
got to have eyes in the back of his head. You hear talk, sometimes, 'd
make you think the millennium had come--but right the next breath you'll
hear somebody hollerin' about 'the great unrest.' You BET there's a
'great unrest'! There ain't any man alive smart enough to see what it's
goin' to do to us in the end, nor what day it's got set to bust loose,
but it's frothin' and bubblin' in the boiler. This country's been
fillin' up with it from all over the world for a good many years, and
the old camp-meetin' days are dead and done with. Church ain't what it
used to be. Nothin's what it used to be--everything's turned up from the
bottom, and the growth is so big the roots stick out in the air. There's
an awful ruction goin' on, and you got to keep hoppin' if you're goin'
to keep your balance on the top of it. And the schemers! They run like
bugs on the bottom of a board--after any piece o' money they hear is
loose. Fool schemes and crooked schemes; the fool ones are the most and
the worst! You got to FIGHT to keep your money after you've made it. And
the woods are full o' mighty industrious men that's got only one motto:
'Get the other fellow's money before he gets yours!' And when a man's
built as I have, when he's built good and strong, and made good things
grow and prosper--THOSE are the fellows that lay for the chance to slide
in and sneak the benefit of it and put their names to it! And what's
the use of my havin' ever been born, if such a thing as that is goin'
to happen? What's the use of my havin' worked my life and soul into my
business, if it's all goin' to be dispersed and scattered soon as I'm in
the ground?"

He strode up and down the long room, gesticulating--little regarding
the troubled and drowsy figure by the fireside. His throat rumbled
thunderously; the words came with stormy bitterness. "You think this is
a time for young men to be lyin' on beds of ease? I tell you there never
was such a time before; there never was such opportunity. The sluggard
is despoiled while he sleeps--yes, by George! if a man lays down they'll
eat him before he wakes!--but the live man can build straight up till
he touches the sky! This is the business man's day; it used to be the
soldier's day and the statesman's day, but this is OURS! And it ain't a
Sunday to go fishin'--it's turmoil! turmoil!--and you got to go out and
live it and breathe it and MAKE it yourself, or you'll only be a dead
man walkin' around dreamin' you're alive. And that's what my son Bibbs
has been doin' all his life, and what he'd rather do now than go out and
do his part by me. And if anything happens to Roscoe--"

"Oh, do stop worryin' over such nonsense," Mrs. Sheridan interrupted,
irritated into sharp wakefulness for the moment. "There isn't anything
goin' to happen to Roscoe, and you're just tormentin' yourself about
nothin'. Aren't you EVER goin' to bed?"

Sheridan halted. "All right, mamma," he said, with a vast sigh. "Let's
go up." And he snapped off the electric light, leaving only the rosy
glow of the fire.

"Did you speak to Roscoe?" she yawned, rising lopsidedly in her
drowsiness. "Did you mention about what I told you the other evening?"

"No. I will to-morrow."


But Roscoe did not come down-town the next day, nor the next; nor did
Sheridan see fit to enter his son's house. He waited. Then, on the
fourth day of the month, Roscoe walked into his father's office at nine
in the morning, when Sheridan happened to be alone.

"They told me down-stairs you'd left word you wanted to see me."

"Sit down," said Sheridan, rising.

Roscoe sat. His father walked close to him, sniffed suspiciously, and
then walked away, smiling bitterly. "Boh!" he exclaimed. "Still at it!"

"Yes," said Roscoe. "I've had a couple of drinks this morning. What
about it?"

"I reckon I better adopt some decent young man," his father returned.
"I'd bring Bibbs up here and put him in your place if he was fit. I
would!"

"Better do it," Roscoe assented, sullenly.

"When'd you begin this thing?"

"I always did drink a little. Ever since I grew up, that is."

"Leave that talk out! You know what I mean."

"Well, I don't know as I ever had too much in office hours--until the
other day."

Sheridan began cutting. "It's a lie. I've had Ray Wills up from your
office. He didn't want to give you away, but I put the hooks into him,
and he came through. You were drunk twice before and couldn't work. You
been leavin' your office for drinks every few hours for the last three
weeks. I been over your books. Your office is way behind. You haven't
done any work, to count, in a month."

"All right," said Roscoe, drooping under the torture. "It's all true."

"What you goin' to do about it?"

Roscoe's head was sunk between his shoulders. "I can't stand very much
talk about it, father," he said, pleadingly.

"No!" Sheridan cried. "Neither can I! What do you think it means to ME?"
He dropped into the chair at his big desk, groaning. "I can't stand to
talk about it any more'n you can to listen, but I'm goin' to find out
what's the matter with you, and I'm goin' to straighten you out!"

Roscoe shook his head helplessly.

"You can't straighten me out."

"See here!" said Sheridan. "Can you go back to your office and stay
sober to-day, while I get my work done, or will I have to hire a couple
o' huskies to follow you around and knock the whiskey out o' your hand
if they see you tryin' to take it?"

"You needn't worry about that," said Roscoe, looking up with a faint
resentment. "I'm not drinking because I've got a thirst."

"Well, what have you got?"

"Nothing. Nothing you can do anything about. Nothing, I tell you."

"We'll see about that!" said Sheridan, harshly. "Now I can't fool with
you to-day, and you get up out o' that chair and get out o' my
office. You bring your wife to dinner to-morrow. You didn't come last
Sunday--but you come to-morrow. I'll talk this out with you when the
women-folks are workin' the phonograph, after dinner. Can you keep sober
till then? You better be sure, because I'm going to send Abercrombie
down to your office every little while, and he'll let me know."

Roscoe paused at the door. "You told Abercrombie about it?" he asked.

"TOLD him!" And Sheridan laughed hideously. "Do you suppose there's an
elevator-boy in the whole dam' building that ain't on to you?"

Roscoe settled his hat down over his eyes and went out.



CHAPTER XXI

  "WHO looks a mustang in the eye?
  Changety, chang, chang!  Bash! Crash! BANG!"

So sang Bibbs, his musical gaieties inaudible to his fellow-workmen
because of the noise of the machinery. He had discovered long ago that
the uproar was rhythmical, and it had been intolerable; but now, on the
afternoon of the fourth day of his return, he was accompanying the
swing and clash of the metals with jubilant vaquero fragments, mingling
improvisations of his own among them, and mocking the zinc-eater's crash
with vocal imitations:

  Fearless and bold,
  Chang!  Bash!  Behold!
  With a leap from the ground
  To the saddle in a bound,
      And away--and away!
      Hi-YAY!
  WHO looks a chang, chang, bash, crash, bang!
  WHO cares a dash how you bash and you crash?
      NIGHT'S on the way
      EACH time I say,
      Hi-YAY!
  Crash, chang!  Bash, chang!  Chang, bang, BANG!

The long room was ceaselessly thundering with metallic sound; the
air was thick with the smell of oil; the floor trembled perpetually;
everything was implacably in motion--nowhere was there a rest for the
dizzied eye. The first time he had entered the place Bibbs had become
dizzy instantly, and six months of it had only added increasing nausea
to faintness. But he felt neither now. "ALL DAY LONG I'LL SEND MY
THOUGHTS TO YOU. YOU MUST KEEP REMEMBERING THAT YOUR FRIEND STANDS
BESIDE YOU." He saw her there beside him, and the greasy, roaring place
became suffused with radiance. The poet was happy in his machine-shop;
he was still a poet there. And he fed his old zinc-eater, and sang:

      Away--and away!
      Hi-YAY!
  Crash, bash, crash, bash, CHANG!
    Wild are his eyes,
    Fiercely he dies!
      Hi-YAH!
  Crash, bash, bang!  Bash, CHANG!
    Ready to fling
    Our gloves in the ring--

He was unaware of a sensation that passed along the lines of workmen.
Their great master had come among them, and they grinned to see him
standing with Dr. Gurney behind the unconscious Bibbs. Sheridan nodded
to those nearest him--he had personal acquaintance with nearly all of
them--but he kept his attention upon his son. Bibbs worked steadily,
never turning from his machine. Now and then he varied his musical
programme with remarks addressed to the zinc-eater.

"Go on, you old crash-basher! Chew it up! It's good for you, if
you don't try to bolt your vittles. Fletcherize, you pig! That's
right--YOU'LL never get a lump in your gizzard. Want some more? Here's a
nice, shiny one."

The words were indistinguishable, but Sheridan inclined his head to
Gurney's ear and shouted fiercely: "Talkin' to himself! By George!"

Gurney laughed reassuringly, and shook his head.

Bibbs returned to song:

  Chang!  Chang, bash, chang!  It's I!
  WHO looks a mustang in the eye?
    Fearless and bo--

His father grasped him by the arm. "Here!" he shouted. "Let ME show you
how to run a strip through there. The foreman says you're some better'n
you used to be, but that's no way to handle--Get out the way and let me
show you once."

"Better be careful," Bibbs warned him, stepping to one side.

"Careful? Boh!" Sheridan seized a strip of zinc from the box. "What
you talkin' to yourself about? Tryin' to make yourself think you're so
abused you're goin' wrong in the head?"

"'Abused'? No!" shouted Bibbs. "I was SINGING--because I 'like it'! I
told you I'd come back and 'like it.'"

Sheridan may not have understood. At all events, he made no reply,
but began to run the strip of zinc through the machine. He did it
awkwardly--and with bad results.

"Here!" he shouted. "This is the way. Watch how I do it. There's nothin'
to it, if you put your mind on it." By his own showing then his mind was
not upon it. He continued to talk. "All you got to look out for is to
keep it pressed over to--"

"Don't run your hand up with it," Bibbs vociferated, leaning toward him.

"Run nothin'! You GOT to--"

"Look out!" shouted Bibbs and Gurney together, and they both sprang
forward. But Sheridan's right hand had followed the strip too far, and
the zinc-eater had bitten off the tips of the first and second fingers.
He swore vehemently, and wrung his hand, sending a shower of red drops
over himself and Bibbs, but Gurney grasped his wrist, and said, sharply:

"Come out of here. Come over to the lavatory in the office. Bibbs, fetch
my bag. It's in my machine, outside."

And when Bibbs brought the bag to the washroom he found the doctor
still grasping Sheridan's wrist, holding the injured hand over a basin.
Sheridan had lost color, and temper, too. He glared over his shoulder at
his son as the latter handed the bag to Gurney.

"You go on back to your work," he said. "I've had worse snips than that
from a pencil-sharpener."

"Oh no, you haven't!" said Gurney.

"I have, too!" Sheridan retorted, angrily. "Bibbs, you go on back to
your work. There's no reason to stand around here watchin' ole Doc
Gurney tryin' to keep himself awake workin' on a scratch that only needs
a little court-plaster. I slipped, or it wouldn't happened. You get back
on your job."

"All right," said Bibbs.

"HERE!" Sheridan bellowed, as his son was passing out of the door.
"You watch out when you're runnin' that machine! You hear what I say? I
slipped, or I wouldn't got scratched, but you--YOU'RE liable to get your
whole hand cut off! You keep your eyes open!"

"Yes, sir." And Bibbs returned to the zinc-eater thoughtfully.

Half an hour later, Gurney touched him on the shoulder and beckoned him
outside, where conversation was possible. "I sent him home, Bibbs. He'll
have to be careful of that hand. Go get your overalls off. I'll take you
for a drive and leave you at home."

"Can't," said Bibbs. "Got to stick to my job till the whistle blows."

"No, you don't," the doctor returned, smothering a yawn. "He wants me to
take you down to my office and give you an overhauling to see how much
harm these four days on the machine have done you. I guess you folks
have got that old man pretty thoroughly upset, between you, up at your
house! But I don't need to go over you. I can see with my eyes half
shut--"

"Yes," Bibbs interrupted, "that's what they are."

"I say I can see you're starting out, at least, in good shape. What's
made the difference?"

"I like the machine," said Bibbs. "I've made a friend of it. I serenade
it and talk to it, and then it talks back to me."

"Indeed, indeed? What does it say?"

"What I want to hear."

"Well, well!" The doctor stretched himself and stamped his foot
repeatedly. "Better come along and take a drive with me. You can take
the time off that he allowed for the examination, and--"

"Not at all," said Bibbs. "I'm going to stand by my old zinc-eater till
five o'clock. I tell you I LIKE it!"

"Then I suppose that's the end of your wanting to write."

"I don't know about that," Bibbs said, thoughtfully; "but the zinc-eater
doesn't interfere with my thinking, at least. It's better than being
in business; I'm sure of that. I don't want anything to change. I'd be
content to lead just the life I'm leading now to the end of my days."

"You do beat the devil!" exclaimed Gurney. "Your father's right when he
tells me you're a mystery. Perhaps the Almighty knew what He was doing
when He made you, but it takes a lot of faith to believe it! Well, I'm
off. Go on back to your murdering old machine." He climbed into his car,
which he operated himself, but he refrained from setting it immediately
in motion. "Well, I rubbed it in on the old man that you had warned him
not to slide his hand along too far, and that he got hurt because he
didn't pay attention to your warning, and because he was trying to show
you how to do something you were already doing a great deal better
than he could. You tell him I'll be around to look at it and change the
dressing to-morrow morning. Good-by."

But when he paid the promised visit, the next morning, he did more than
change the dressing upon the damaged hand. The injury was severe of
its kind, and Gurney spent a long time over it, though Sheridan was
rebellious and scornful, being brought to a degree of tractability
only by means of horrible threats and talk of amputation. However, he
appeared at the dinner-table with his hand supported in a sling, which
he seemed to regard as an indignity, while the natural inquiries upon
the subject evidently struck him as deliberate insults. Mrs. Sheridan,
having been unable to contain her solicitude several times during the
day, and having been checked each time in a manner that blanched her
cheek, hastened to warn Roscoe and Sibyl, upon their arrival at five, to
omit any reference to the injury and to avoid even looking at the sling
if they possibly could.

The Sheridans dined on Sundays at five. Sibyl had taken pains not to
arrive either before or after the hand was precisely on the hour;
and the members of the family were all seated at the table within two
minutes after she and Roscoe had entered the house.

It was a glum gathering, overhung with portents. The air seemed charged,
awaiting any tiny ignition to explode; and Mrs. Sheridan's expression,
as she sat with her eyes fixed almost continually upon her husband, was
that of a person engaged in prayer. Edith was pale and intent.
Roscoe looked ill; Sibyl looked ill; and Sheridan looked both ill and
explosive. Bibbs had more color than any of these, and there was a
strange brightness, like a light, upon his face. It was curious to see
anything so happy in the tense gloom of that household.

Edith ate little, but gazed nearly all the time at her plate. She never
once looked at Sibyl, though Sibyl now and then gave her a quick glance,
heavily charged, and then looked away. Roscoe ate nothing, and, like
Edith, kept his eyes upon his plate and made believe to occupy himself
with the viands thereon, loading his fork frequently, but not lifting
it to his mouth. He did not once look at his father, though his father
gazed heavily at him most of the time. And between Edith and Sibyl, and
between Roscoe and his father, some bitter wireless communication seemed
continually to be taking place throughout the long silences prevailing
during this enlivening ceremony of Sabbath refection.

"Didn't you go to church this morning, Bibbs?" his mother asked, in the
effort to break up one of those ghastly intervals.

"What did you say, mother?"

"Didn't you go to church this morning?"

"I think so," he answered, as from a roseate trance.

"You THINK so! Don't you know?"

"Oh yes. Yes, I went to church!"

"Which one?"

"Just down the street. It's brick."

"What was the sermon about?"

"What, mother?"

"Can't you hear me?" she cried. "I asked you what the sermon was about?"

He roused himself. "I think it was about--" He frowned, seeming to
concentrate his will to recollect. "I think it was about something in
the Bible."

White-jacket George was glad of an opportunity to leave the room and
lean upon Mist' Jackson's shoulder in the pantry. "He don't know they
WAS any suhmon!" he concluded, having narrated the dining-room dialogue.
"All he know is he was with 'at lady lives nex' do'!" George was right.

"Did you go to church all by yourself, Bibbs?" Sibyl asked.

"No," he answered. "No, I didn't go alone."

"Oh?" Sibyl gave the ejaculation an upward twist, as of mocking inquiry,
and followed it by another, expressive of hilarious comprehension. "OH!"

Bibbs looked at her studiously, but she spoke no further. And that
completed the conversation at the lugubrious feast.

Coffee came finally, was disposed of quickly, and the party dispersed to
other parts of the house. Bibbs followed his father and Roscoe into the
library, but was not well received.

"YOU go and listen to the phonograph with the women-folks," Sheridan
commanded.

Bibbs retreated. "Sometimes you do seem to be a hard sort of man!" he
said.

However, he went obediently to the gilt-and-brocade room in which his
mother and his sister and his sister-in-law had helplessly withdrawn,
according to their Sabbatical custom. Edith sat in a corner, tapping her
feet together and looking at them; Sibyl sat in the center of the room,
examining a brooch which she had detached from her throat; and Mrs.
Sheridan was looking over a collection of records consisting exclusively
of Caruso and rag-time. She selected one of the latter, remarking that
she thought it "right pretty," and followed it with one of the former
and the same remark.

As the second reached its conclusion, George appeared in the broad
doorway, seeming to have an errand there, but he did not speak. Instead,
he favored Edith with a benevolent smile, and she immediately left
the room, George stepping aside for her to precede him, and then
disappearing after her in the hall with an air of successful diplomacy.
He made it perfectly clear that Edith had given him secret instructions
and that it had been his pride and pleasure to fulfil them to the
letter.

Sibyl stiffened in her chair; her lips parted, and she watched with
curious eyes the vanishing back of the white jacket.

"What's that?" she asked, in a low voice, but sharply.

"Here's another right pretty record," said Mrs. Sheridan,
affecting--with patent nervousness--not to hear. And she unloosed the
music.

Sibyl bit her lip and began to tap her chin with the brooch. After a
little while she turned to Bibbs, who reposed at half-length in a gold
chair, with his eyes closed.

"Where did Edith go?" she asked, curiously.

"Edith?" he repeated, opening his eyes blankly. "Is she gone?"

Sibyl got up and stood in the doorway. She leaned against the casing,
still tapping her chin with the brooch. Her eyes were dilating; she was
suddenly at high tension, and her expression had become one of sharp
excitement. She listened intently.

When the record was spun out she could hear Sheridan rumbling in the
library, during the ensuing silence, and Roscoe's voice, querulous and
husky: "I won't say anything at all. I tell you, you might just as well
let me alone!"

But there were other sounds: a rustling and murmur, whispering, low
protesting cadences in a male voice. And as Mrs. Sheridan started
another record, a sudden, vital resolve leaped like fire in the eyes of
Sibyl. She walked down the hall and straight into the smoking-room.

Lamhorn and Edith both sprang to their feet, separating. Edith became
instantly deathly white with a rage that set her shaking from head to
foot, and Lamhorn stuttered as he tried to speak.

But Edith's shaking was not so violent as Sibyl's, nor was her face so
white. At sight of them and of their embrace, all possible consequences
became nothing to Sibyl. She courtesied, holding up her skirts and
contorting her lips to the semblance of a smile.

"Sit just as you were--both of you!" she said. And then to Edith: "Did
you tell my husband I had been telephoning to Lamhorn?"

"You march out of here!" said Edith, fiercely. "March straight out of
here!"

Sibyl leveled a forefinger at Lamhorn.

"Did you tell her I'd been telephoning you I wanted you to come?"

"Oh, good God!" Lamhorn said. "Hush!"

"You knew she'd tell my husband, DIDN'T you?" she cried. "You knew
that!"

"HUSH!" he begged, panic-stricken.

"That was a MANLY thing to do! Oh, it was like a gentleman! You wouldn't
come--you wouldn't even come for five minutes to hear what I had to say!
You were TIRED of what I had to say! You'd heard it all a thousand times
before, and you wouldn't come! No! No! NO!" she stormed. "You wouldn't
even come for five minutes, but you could tell that little cat! And SHE
told my husband! You're a MAN!"

Edith saw in a flash that the consequences of battle would be ruinous to
Sibyl, and the furious girl needed no further temptation to give way
to her feelings. "Get out of this house!" she shrieked. "This is my
father's house. Don't you dare speak to Robert like that!"

"No! No! I mustn't SPEAK--"

"Don't you DARE!"

Edith and Sibyl began to scream insults at each other simultaneously,
fronting each other, their furious faces close. Their voices shrilled
and rose and cracked--they screeched. They could be heard over the noise
of the phonograph, which was playing a brass-band selection. They could
be heard all over the house. They were heard in the kitchen; they could
have been heard in the cellar. Neither of them cared for that.

"You told my husband!" screamed Sibyl, bringing her face still closer to
Edith's. "You told my husband! This man put THAT in your hands to strike
me with! HE did!"

"I'll tell your husband again! I'll tell him everything I know! It's
TIME your husband--"

They were swept asunder by a bandaged hand. "Do you want the neighbors
in?" Sheridan thundered.

There fell a shocking silence. Frenzied Sibyl saw her husband and his
mother in the doorway, and she understood what she had done. She moved
slowly toward the door; then suddenly she began to run. She ran into the
hall, and through it, and out of the house. Roscoe followed her heavily,
his eyes on the ground.

"NOW THEN!" said Sheridan to Lamhorn.

The words were indefinite, but the voice was not. Neither was the
vicious gesture of the bandaged hand, which concluded its orbit in the
direction of the door in a manner sufficient for the swift dispersal of
George and Jackson and several female servants who hovered behind Mrs.
Sheridan. They fled lightly.

"Papa, papa!" wailed Mrs. Sheridan. "Look at your hand! You'd oughtn't
to been so rough with Edie; you hurt your hand on her shoulder. Look!"

There was, in fact, a spreading red stain upon the bandages at the tips
of the fingers, and Sheridan put his hand back in the sling. "Now then!"
he repeated. "You goin' to leave my house?"

"He will NOT!" sobbed Edith. "Don't you DARE order him out!"

"Don't you bother, dear," said Lamhorn, quietly. "He doesn't understand.
YOU mustn't be troubled." Pallor was becoming to him; he looked very
handsome, and as he left the room he seemed in the girl's distraught
eyes a persecuted noble, indifferent to the rabble yawping insult at his
heels--the rabble being enacted by her father.

"Don't come back, either!" said, Sheridan, realistic in this
impersonation. "Keep off the premises!" he called savagely into the
hall. "This family's through with you!"

"It is NOT!" Edith cried, breaking from her mother. "You'll SEE about
that! You'll find out! You'll find out what'll happen! What's HE done?
I guess if I can stand it, it's none of YOUR business, is it? What's
HE done, I'd like to know? You don't know anything about it. Don't you
s'pose he told ME? She was crazy about him soon as he began going there,
and he flirted with her a little. That's everything he did, and it
was before he met ME! After that he wouldn't, and it wasn't anything,
anyway--he never was serious a minute about it. SHE wanted it to be
serious, and she was bound she wouldn't give him up. He told her long
ago he cared about me, but she kept persecuting him and--"

"Yes," said Sheridan, sternly; "that's HIS side of it! That'll do! He
doesn't come in this house again!"

"You look out!" Edith cried.

"Yes, I'll look out! I'd 'a' told you to-day he wasn't to be allowed on
the premises, but I had other things on my mind. I had Abercrombie
look up this young man privately, and he's no 'count. He's no 'count
on earth! He's no good! He's NOTHIN'! But it wouldn't matter if he was
George Washington, after what's happened and what I've heard to-night!"

"But, papa," Mrs. Sheridan began, "if Edie says it was all Sibyl's
fault, makin' up to him, and he never encouraged her much, nor--"

"'S enough!" he roared. "He keeps off these premises! And if any of you
so much as ever speak his name to me again--"

But Edith screamed, clapping her hands over her ears to shut out the
sound of his voice, and ran up-stairs, sobbing loudly, followed by her
mother. However, Mrs. Sheridan descended a few minutes later and joined
her husband in the library. Bibbs, still sitting in his gold chair, saw
her pass, roused himself from reverie, and strolled in after her.

"She locked her door," said Mrs. Sheridan, shaking her head woefully.
"She wouldn't even answer me. They wasn't a sound from her room."

"Well," said her husband, "she can settle her mind to it. She
never speaks to that fellow again, and if he tries to telephone her
to-morrow--Here! You tell the help if he calls up to ring off and say
it's my orders. No, you needn't. I'll tell 'em myself."

"Better not," said Bibbs, gently.

His father glared at him.

"It's no good," said Bibbs. "Mother, when you were in love with
father--"

"My goodness!" she cried. "You ain't a-goin' to compare your father to
that--"

"Edith feels about him just what you did about father," said Bibbs. "And
if YOUR father had told you--"

"I won't LISTEN to such silly talk!" she declared, angrily.

"So you're handin' out your advice, are you, Bibbs?" said Sheridan.
"What is it?"

"Let her see him all she wants."

"You're a--" Sheridan gave it up. "I don't know what to call you!"

"Let her see him all she wants," Bibbs repeated, thoughtfully. "You're
up against something too strong for you. If Edith were a weakling
you'd have a chance this way, but she isn't. She's got a lot of your
determination, father, and with what's going on inside of her she'll
beat you. You can't keep her from seeing him, as long as she feels about
him the way she does now. You can't make her think less of him, either.
Nobody can. Your only chance is that she'll do it for herself, and if
you give her time and go easy she probably will. Marriage would do it
for her quickest, but that's just what you don't want, and as you DON'T
want it, you'd better--"

"I can't stand any more!" Sheridan burst out. "If it's come to BIBBS
advisin' me how to run this house I better resign. Mamma, where's that
nigger George? Maybe HE'S got some plan how I better manage my family.
Bibbs, for God's sake go and lay down! 'Let her see him all she wants'!
Oh, Lord! here's wisdom; here's--"

"Bibbs," said Mrs. Sheridan, "if you haven't got anything to do, you
might step over and take Sibyl's wraps home--she left 'em in the hall. I
don't think you seem to quiet your poor father very much just now."

"All right." And Bibbs bore Sibyl's wraps across the street and
delivered them to Roscoe, who met him at the door. Bibbs said only,
"Forgot these," and, "Good night, Roscoe," cordially and cheerfully, and
returned to the New House. His mother and father were still talking in
the library, but with discretion he passed rapidly on and upward to his
own room, and there he proceeded to write in his note-book.



CHAPTER XXII

   There seems to be another curious thing about Love [Bibbs wrote].
   Love is blind while it lives and only opens its eyes and becomes
   very wide awake when it dies.  Let it alone until then.

   You cannot reason with love or with any other passion.  The wise
   will not wish for love--nor for ambition.  These are passions
   and bring others in their train--hatreds and jealousies--all
   blind.  Friendship and a quiet heart for the wise.

   What a turbulence is love!  It is dangerous for a blind thing to
   be turbulent; there are precipices in life.  One would not cross
   a mountain-pass with a thick cloth over his eyes.  Lovers do.
   Friendship walks gently and with open eyes.

   To walk to church with a friend!  To sit beside her there!  To rise
   when she rises, and to touch with one's thumb and fingers the other
   half of the hymn-book that she holds!  What lover, with his fierce
   ways, could know this transcendent happiness?

   Friendship brings everything that heaven could bring.  There is no
   labor that cannot become a living rapture if you know that a friend
   is thinking of you as you labor.  So you sing at your work.  For
   the work is part of the thoughts of your friend; so you love it!

   Love is demanding and claiming and insistent.  Friendship is all
   kindness--it makes the world glorious with kindness.  What color
   you see when you walk with a friend!  You see that the gray sky
   is brilliant and shimmering; you see that the smoke has warm
   browns and is marvelously sculptured--the air becomes iridescent.
   You see the gold in brown hair.  Light floods everything.

   When you walk to church with a friend you know that life can give
   you nothing richer.  You pray that there will be no change in
   anything for ever.

   What an adorable thing it is to discover a little foible in your
   friend, a bit of vanity that gives you one thing more about her to
   adore!  On a cold morning she will perhaps walk to church with you
   without her furs, and she will blush and return an evasive answer
   when you ask her why she does not wear them.  You will say no
   more, because you understand.  She looks beautiful in her furs;
   you love their darkness against her cheek; but you comprehend that
   they conceal the loveliness of her throat and the fine line of her
   chin, and that she also has comprehended this, and, wishing to
   look still more bewitching, discards her furs at the risk of
   taking cold.  So you hold your peace, and try to look as if you
   had not thought it out.

   This theory is satisfactory except that it does not account for
   the absence of the muff.  Ah, well, there must always be a mystery
   somewhere!  Mystery is a part of enchantment.

   Manual labor is best.  Your heart can sing and your mind can dream
   while your hands are working.  You could not have a singing heart
   and a dreaming mind all day if you had to scheme out dollars,
   or if you had to add columns of figures.  Those things take your
   attention.  You cannot be thinking of your friend while you write
   letters beginning "Yours of the 17th inst. rec'd and contents
   duly noted."  But to work with your hands all day, thinking and
   singing, and then, after nightfall, to hear the ineffable kindness
   of your friend's greeting--always there--for you!  Who would wake
   from such a dream as this?

   Dawn and the sea--music in moonlit gardens--nightingales
   serenading through almond-groves in bloom--what could bring such
   things into the city's turmoil?  Yet they are here, and roses
   blossom in the soot.  That is what it means not to be alone!
   That is what a friend gives you!

Having thus demonstrated that he was about twenty-five and had formed a
somewhat indefinite definition of friendship, but one entirely his own
(and perhaps Mary's) Bibbs went to bed, and was the only Sheridan to
sleep soundly through the night and to wake at dawn with a light heart.

His cheerfulness was vaguely diminished by the troublous state of
affairs of his family. He had recognized his condition when he wrote,
"Who would wake from such a dream as this?" Bibbs was a sympathetic
person, easily touched, but he was indeed living in a dream, and all
things outside of it were veiled and remote--for that is the way of
youth in a dream. And Bibbs, who had never before been of any age,
either old or young, had come to his youth at last.

He went whistling from the house before even his father had come
down-stairs. There was a fog outdoors, saturated with a fine powder of
soot, and though Bibbs noticed absently the dim shape of an automobile
at the curb before Roscoe's house, he did not recognize it as Dr.
Gurney's, but went cheerily on his way through the dingy mist. And when
he was once more installed beside his faithful zinc-eater he whistled
and sang to it, as other workmen did to their own machines sometimes,
when things went well. His comrades in the shop glanced at him amusedly
now and then. They liked him, and he ate his lunch at noon with a group
of Socialists who approved of his ideas and talked of electing him to
their association.

The short days of the year had come, and it was dark before the whistles
blew. When the signal came, Bibbs went to the office, where he divested
himself of his overalls--his single divergence from the routine of his
fellow-workmen--and after that he used soap and water copiously. This
was his transformation scene: he passed into the office a rather frail
young working-man noticeably begrimed, and passed out of it to the
pavement a cheerfully pre-occupied sample of gentry, fastidious to the
point of elegance.

The sidewalk was crowded with the bearers of dinner-pails, men and
boys and women and girls from the work-rooms that closed at five. Many
hurried and some loitered; they went both east and west, jostling one
another, and Bibbs, turning his face homeward, was forced to go slowly.

Coming toward him, as slowly, through the crowd, a tall girl caught
sight of his long, thin figure and stood still until he had almost
passed her, for in the thick crowd and the thicker gloom he did not
recognize her, though his shoulder actually touched hers. He would have
gone by, but she laughed delightedly; and he stopped short, startled.
Two boys, one chasing the other, swept between them, and Bibbs stood
still, peering about him in deep perplexity. She leaned toward him.

"I knew YOU!" she said.

"Good heavens!" cried Bibbs. "I thought it was your voice coming out of
a star!"

"There's only smoke overhead," said Mary, and laughed again. "There
aren't any stars."

"Oh yes, there were--when you laughed!"

She took his arm, and they went on. "I've come to walk home with you,
Bibbs. I wanted to."

"But were you here in the--"

"In the dark? Yes! Waiting? Yes!"

Bibbs was radiant; he felt suffocated with happiness. He began to scold
her.

"But it's not safe, and I'm not worth it. You shouldn't have--you ought
to know better. What did--"

"I only waited about twelve seconds," she laughed. "I'd just got here."

"But to come all this way and to this part of town in the dark, you--"

"I was in this part of town already," she said. "At least, I was only
seven or eight blocks away, and it was dark when I came out, and I'd
have had to go home alone--and I preferred going home with you."

"It's pretty beautiful for me," said Bibbs, with a deep breath. "You'll
never know what it was to hear your laugh in the darkness--and then
to--to see you standing there! Oh, it was like--it was like--how can I
TELL you what it was like?" They had passed beyond the crowd now, and
a crossing-lamp shone upon them, which revealed the fact that again she
was without her furs. Here was a puzzle. Why did that adorable little
vanity of hers bring her out without them in the DARK? But of course she
had gone out long before dark. For undefinable reasons this explanation
was not quite satisfactory; however, allowing it to stand, his
solicitude for her took another turn. "I think you ought to have a car,"
he said, "especially when you want to be out after dark. You need one in
winter, anyhow. Have you ever asked your father for one?"

"No," said Mary. "I don't think I'd care for one particularly."

"I wish you would." Bibbs's tone was earnest and troubled. "I think in
winter you--"

"No, no," she interrupted, lightly. "I don't need--"

"But my mother tried to insist on sending one over here every afternoon
for me. I wouldn't let her, because I like the walk, but a girl--"

"A girl likes to walk, too," said Mary. "Let me tell you where I've been
this afternoon and how I happened to be near enough to make you take me
home. I've been to see a little old man who makes pictures of the smoke.
He has a sort of warehouse for a studio, and he lives there with his
mother and his wife and their seven children, and he's gloriously happy.
I'd seen one of his pictures at an exhibition, and I wanted to see
more of them, so he showed them to me. He has almost everthing he ever
painted; I don't suppose he's sold more than four or five pictures in
his life. He gives drawing-lessons to keep alive."

"How do you mean he paints the smoke?" Bibbs asked.

"Literally. He paints from his studio window and from the
street--anywhere. He just paints what's around him--and it's beautiful."

"The smoke?"

"Wonderful! He sees the sky through it, somehow. He does the ugly roofs
of cheap houses through a haze of smoke, and he does smoky sunsets and
smoky sunrises, and he has other things with the heavy, solid, slow
columns of smoke going far out and growing more ethereal and mixing
with the hazy light in the distance; and he has others with the broken
sky-line of down-town, all misted with the smoke and puffs and jets of
vapor that have colors like an orchard in mid-April. I'm going to take
you there some Sunday afternoon, Bibbs."

"You're showing me the town," he said. "I didn't know what was in it at
all."

"There are workers in beauty here," she told him, gently. "There are
other painters more prosperous than my friend. There are all sorts of
things."

"I didn't know."

"No. Since the town began growing so great that it called itself
'greater,' one could live here all one's life and know only the side of
it that shows."

"The beauty-workers seem buried very deep," said Bibbs. "And I imagine
that your friend who makes the smoke beautiful must be buried deepest
of all. My father loves the smoke, but I can't imagine his buying one
of your friend's pictures. He'd buy the 'Bay of Naples,' but he wouldn't
get one of those. He'd think smoke in a picture was horrible--unless he
could use it for an advertisement."

"Yes," she said, thoughtfully. "And really he's the town. They ARE
buried pretty deep, it seems, sometimes, Bibbs."

"And yet it's all wonderful," he said. "It's wonderful to me."

"You mean the town is wonderful to you?"

"Yes, because everything is, since you called me your friend. The city
is only a rumble on the horizon for me. It can't come any closer than
the horizon so long as you let me see you standing by my old zinc-eater
all day long, helping me. Mary--" He stopped with a gasp. "That's the
first time I've called you 'Mary'!"

"Yes." She laughed, a little tremuously. "Though I wanted you to!"

"I said it without thinking. It must be because you came there to walk
home with me. That must be it."

"Women like to have things said," Mary informed him, her tremulous
laughter continuing. "Were you glad I came for you?"

"No--not 'glad.' I felt as if I were being carried straight up and up
and up--over the clouds. I feel like that still. I think I'm that way
most of the time. I wonder what I was like before I knew you. The person
I was then seems to have been somebody else, not Bibbs Sheridan at
all. It seems long, long ago. I was gloomy and sickly--somebody
else--somebody I don't understand now, a coward afraid of
shadows--afraid of things that didn't exist--afraid of my old
zinc-eater! And now I'm only afraid of what might change anything."

She was silent a moment, and then, "You're happy, Bibbs?" she asked.

"Ah, don't you see?" he cried. "I want it to last for a thousand,
thousand years, just as it is! You've made me so rich, I'm a miser. I
wouldn't have one thing different--nothing, nothing!"

"Dear Bibbs!" she said, and laughed happily.



CHAPTER XXIII

Bibbs continued to live in the shelter of his dream. He had told Edith,
after his ineffective effort to be useful in her affairs, that he had
decided that he was "a member of the family"; but he appeared to have
relapsed to the retired list after that one attempt at participancy--he
was far enough detached from membership now. These were turbulent days
in the New House, but Bibbs had no part whatever in the turbulence--he
seemed an absent-minded stranger, present by accident and not wholly
aware that he was present. He would sit, faintly smiling over pleasant
imaginings and dear reminiscences of his own, while battle raged between
Edith and her father, or while Sheridan unloosed jeremiads upon the
sullen Roscoe, who drank heavily to endure them. The happy dreamer
wandered into storm-areas like a somnambulist, and wandered out again
unawakened. He was sorry for his father and for Roscoe, and for Edith
and for Sibyl, but their sufferings and outcries seemed far away.

Sibyl was under Gurney's care. Roscoe had sent for him on Sunday night,
not long after Bibbs returned the abandoned wraps; and during the first
days of Sibyl's illness the doctor found it necessary to be with her
frequently, and to install a muscular nurse. And whether he would or
no, Gurney received from his hysterical patient a variety of pungent
information which would have staggered anybody but a family physician.
Among other things he was given to comprehend the change in Bibbs, and
why the zinc-eater was not putting a lump in the operator's gizzard as
of yore.

Sibyl was not delirious--she was a thin little ego writhing and
shrieking in pain. Life had hurt her, and had driven her into hurting
herself; her condition was only the adult's terrible exaggeration of
that of a child after a bad bruise--there must be screaming and telling
mother all about the hurt and how it happened. Sibyl babbled herself
hoarse when Gurney withheld morphine. She went from the beginning to the
end in a breath. No protest stopped her; nothing stopped her.

"You ought to let me die!" she wailed. "It's cruel not to let me die!
What harm have I ever done to anybody that you want to keep me alive?
Just look at my life! I only married Roscoe to get away from home, and
look what that got me into!--look where I am now! He brought me to this
town, and what did I have in my life but his FAMILY? And they didn't
even know the right crowd! If they had, it might have been SOMETHING!
I had nothing--nothing--nothing in the world! I wanted to have a good
time--and how could I? Where's any good time among these Sheridans? They
never even had wine on the table! I thought I was marrying into a rich
family where I'd meet attractive people I'd read about, and travel, and
go to dances--and, oh, my Lord! all I got was these Sheridans! I did
the best I could; I did, indeed! Oh, I DID! I just tried to live. Every
woman's got a right to live, some time in her life, I guess! Things were
just beginning to look brighter--we'd moved up here, and that frozen
crowd across the street were after Jim for their daughter, and they'd
have started us with the right people--and then I saw how Edith was
getting him away from me. She did it, too! She got him! A girl with
money can do that to a married woman--yes, she can, every time! And what
could I do? What can any woman do in my fix? I couldn't do ANYTHING but
try to stand it--and I couldn't stand it! I went to that icicle--that
Vertrees girl--and she could have helped me a little, and it wouldn't
have hurt her. It wouldn't have done her any harm to help me THAT
little! She treated me as if I'd been dirt that she wouldn't even take
the trouble to sweep out of her house! Let her WAIT!"

Sibyl's voice, hoarse from babbling, became no more than a husky
whisper, though she strove to make it louder. She struggled half
upright, and the nurse restrained her. "I'd get up out of this bed to
show her she can't do such things to me! I was absolutely ladylike, and
she walked out and left me there alone! She'll SEE! She started after
Bibbs before Jim's casket was fairly underground, and she thinks she's
landed that poor loon--but she'll see! She'll see! If I'm ever able
to walk across the street again I'll show her how to treat a woman in
trouble that comes to her for help! It wouldn't have hurt her any--it
wouldn't--it wouldn't. And Edith needn't have told what she told
Roscoe--it wouldn't have hurt her to let me alone. And HE told her I
bored him--telephoning him I wanted to see him. He needn't have done
it! He needn't--needn't--" Her voice grew fainter, for that while,
with exhaustion, though she would go over it all again as soon as her
strength returned. She lay panting. Then, seeing her husband standing
disheveled in the doorway, "Don't come in, Roscoe," she murmured. "I
don't want to see you." And as he turned away she added, "I'm kind of
sorry for you, Roscoe."

Her antagonist, Edith, was not more coherent in her own wailings,
and she had the advantage of a mother for listener. She had also the
disadvantage of a mother for duenna, and Mrs. Sheridan, under her
husband's sharp tutelage, proved an effective one. Edith was reduced to
telephoning Lamhorn from shops whenever she could juggle her mother into
a momentary distraction over a counter.

Edith was incomparably more in love than before Lamhorn's expulsion. Her
whole being was nothing but the determination to hurdle everything that
separated her from him. She was in a state that could be altered by only
the lightest and most delicate diplomacy of suggestion, but Sheridan,
like legions of other parents, intensified her passion and fed it hourly
fuel by opposing to it an intolerable force. He swore she should cool,
and thus set her on fire.

Edith planned neatly. She fought hard, every other evening, with her
father, and kept her bed betweentimes to let him see what his violence
had done to her. Then, when the mere sight of her set him to breathing
fast, she said pitiably that she might bear her trouble better if she
went away; it was impossible to be in the same town with Lamhorn and not
think always of him. Perhaps in New York she might forget a little.
She had written to a school friend, established quietly with an aunt in
apartments--and a month or so of theaters and restaurants might bring
peace. Sheridan shouted with relief; he gave her a copious cheque, and
she left upon a Monday morning wearing violets with her mourning and
having kissed everybody good-by except Sibyl and Bibbs. She might have
kissed Bibbs, but he failed to realize that the day of her departure
had arrived, and was surprised, on returning from his zinc-eater, that
evening, to find her gone. "I suppose they'll be maried there," he said,
casually.

Sheridan, seated, warming his stockinged feet at the fire, jumped up,
fuming. "Either you go out o' here, or I will, Bibbs!" he snorted. "I
don't want to be in the same room with the particular kind of idiot you
are! She's through with that riff-raff; all she needed was to be kept
away from him a few weeks, and I KEPT her away, and it did the business.
For Heaven's sake, go on out o' here!"

Bibbs obeyed the gesture of a hand still bandaged. And the black silk
sling was still round Sheridan's neck, but no word of Gurney's and no
excruciating twinge of pain could keep Sheridan's hand in the sling. The
wounds, slight enough originally, had become infected the first time he
had dislodged the bandages, and healing was long delayed. Sheridan had
the habit of gesture; he could not "take time to remember," he said,
that he must be careful, and he had also a curious indignation with his
hurt; he refused to pay it the compliment of admitting its existence.

The Saturday following Edith's departure Gurney came to the Sheridan
Building to dress the wounds and to have a talk with Sheridan which
the doctor felt had become necessary. But he was a little before
the appointed time and was obliged to wait a few minutes in an
anteroom--there was a directors' meeting of some sort in Sheridan's
office. The door was slightly ajar, leaking cigar-smoke and oratory, the
latter all Sheridan's, and Gurney listened.

"No, sir; no, sir; no, sir!" he heard the big voice rumbling, and then,
breaking into thunder, "I tell you NO! Some o' you men make me sick!
You'd lose your confidence in Almighty God if a doodle-bug flipped his
hind leg at you! You say money's tight all over the country. Well, what
if it is? There's no reason for it to be tight, and it's not goin' to
keep OUR money tight! You're always runnin' to the woodshed to hide
your nickels in a crack because some fool newspaper says the market's a
little skeery! You listen to every street-corner croaker and then
come and set here and try to scare ME out of a big thing! We're IN on
this--understand? I tell you there never WAS better times. These are
good times and big times, and I won't stand for any other kind o' talk.
This country's on its feet as it never was before, and this city's on
its feet and goin' to stay there!" And Gurney heard a series of whacks
and thumps upon the desk. "'Bad times'!" Sheridan vociferated, with
accompanying thumps. "Rabbit talk! These times are glorious, I tell you!
We're in the promised land, and we're goin' to STAY there! That's all,
gentlemen. The loan goes!"

The directors came forth, flushed and murmurous, and Gurney hastened
in. His guess was correct: Sheridan had been thumping the desk with his
right hand. The physician scolded wearily, making good the fresh damage
as best he might; and then he said what he had to say on the subject of
Roscoe and Sibyl, his opinion meeting, as he expected, a warmly hostile
reception. But the result of this conversation was that by telephonic
command Roscoe awaited his father, an hour later, in the library at the
New House.

"Gurney says your wife's able to travel," Sheridan said brusquely, as he
came in.

"Yes." Roscoe occupied a deep chair and sat in the dejected attitude
which had become his habit. "Yes, she is."

"Edith had to leave town, and so Sibyl thinks she'll have to, too!"

"Oh, I wouldn't put it that way," Roscoe protested, drearily.

"No, I hear YOU wouldn't!" There was a bitter gibe in the father's
voice, and he added: "It's a good thing she's goin' abroad--if she'll
stay there. I shouldn't think any of us want her here any more--you
least of all!"

"It's no use your talking that way," said Roscoe. "You won't do any
good."

"Well, when are you comin' back to your office?" Sheridan used a
brisker, kinder tone. "Three weeks since you showed up there at all.
When you goin' to be ready to cut out whiskey and all the rest o' the
foolishness and start in again? You ought to be able to make up for a
lot o' lost time and a lot o' spilt milk when that woman takes herself
out o' the way and lets you and all the rest of us alone."

"It's no use, father, I tell you. I know what Gurney was going to say to
you. I'm not going back to the office. I'm DONE!"

"Wait a minute before you talk that way!" Sheridan began his sentry-go
up and down the room. "I suppose you know it's taken two pretty good
men about sixteen hours a day to set things straight and get 'em runnin'
right again, down in your office?"

"They must be good men." Roscoe nodded indifferently. "I thought I was
doing about eight men's work. I'm glad you found two that could handle
it."

"Look here! If I worked you it was for your own good. There are plenty
men drive harder'n I do, and--"

"Yes. There are some that break down all the other men that work with
'em. They either die, or go crazy, or have to quit, and are no use
the rest of their lives. The last's my case, I guess--'complicated by
domestic difficulties'!"

"You set there and tell me you give up?" Sheridan's voice shook, and
so did the gesticulating hand which he extended appealingly toward the
despondent figure. "Don't do it, Roscoe! Don't say it! Say you'll come
down there again and be a man! This woman ain't goin' to trouble you any
more. The work ain't goin' to hurt you if you haven't got her to worry
you, and you can get shut o' this nasty whiskey-guzzlin'; it ain't
fastened on you yet. Don't say--"

"It's no use on earth," Roscoe mumbled. "No use on earth."

"Look here! If you want another month's vacation--"

"I know Gurney told you, so what's the use talking about 'vacations'?"

"Gurney!" Sheridan vociferated the name savagely. "It's Gurney, Gurney,
Gurney! Always Gurney! I don't know what the world's comin' to with
everybody runnin' around squealin', 'The doctor says this,' and, 'The
doctor says that'! It makes me sick! How's this country expect to get
its Work done if Gurney and all the other old nanny-goats keep up this
blattin'--'Oh, oh! Don't lift that stick o' wood; you'll ruin your
NERVES!' So he says you got 'nervous exhaustion induced by overwork and
emotional strain.' They always got to stick the Work in if they see a
chance! I reckon you did have the 'emotional strain,' and that's all's
the matter with you. You'll be over it soon's this woman's gone, and
Work's the very thing to make you quit frettin' about her."

"Did Gurney tell you I was fit to work?"

"Shut up!" Sheridan bellowed. "I'm so sick o' that man's name I feel
like shootin' anybody that says it to me!" He fumed and chafed, swearing
indistinctly, then came and stood before his son. "Look here; do you
think you're doin' the square thing by me? Do you? How much you worth?"

"I've got between seven and eight thousand a year clear, of my own,
outside the salary. That much is mine whether I work or not."

"It is? You could'a pulled it out without me, I suppose you think, at
your age?"

"No. But it's mine, and it's enough."

"My Lord! It's about what a Congressman gets, and you want to quit
there! I suppose you think you'll get the rest when I kick the bucket,
and all you have to do is lay back and wait! You let me tell you right
here, you'll never see one cent of it. You go out o' business now, and
what would you know about handlin' it five or ten or twenty years from
now? Because I intend to STAY here a little while yet, my boy! They'd
either get it away from you or you'd sell for a nickel and let it be
split up and--" He whirled about, marched to the other end of the room,
and stood silent a moment. Then he said, solemnly: "Listen. If you go
out now, you leave me in the lurch, with nothin' on God's green earth
to depend on but your brother--and you know what he is. I've depended on
you for it ALL since Jim died. Now you've listened to that dam' doctor,
and he says maybe you won't ever be as good a man as you were, and that
certainly you won't be for a year or so--probably more. Now, that's all
a lie. Men don't break down that way at your age. Look at ME! And I tell
you, you can shake this thing off. All you need is a little GET-up and
a little gumption. Men don't go away for YEARS and then come back into
MOVING businesses like ours--they lose the strings. And if you could, I
won't let you--if you lay down on me now, I won't--and that's because if
you lay down you prove you ain't the man I thought you were." He cleared
his throat and finished quietly: "Roscoe, will you take a month's
vacation and come back and go to it?"

"No," said Roscoe, listlessly. "I'm through."

"All right," said Sheridan. He picked up the evening paper from a
table, went to a chair by the fire and sat down, his back to his son.
"Good-by."

Roscoe rose, his head hanging, but there was a dull relief in his eyes.
"Best I can do," he muttered, seeming about to depart, yet lingering. "I
figure it out a good deal like this," he said. "I didn't KNOW my job
was any strain, and I managed all right, but from what Gur--from what
I hear, I was just up to the limit of my nerves from overwork, and
the--the trouble at home was the extra strain that's fixed me the way I
am. I tried to brace, so I could stand the work and the trouble too, on
whiskey--and that put the finish to me! I--I'm not hitting it as hard as
I was for a while, and I reckon pretty soon, if I can get to feeling a
little more energy, I better try to quit entirely--I don't know. I'm all
in--and the doctor says so. I thought I was running along fine up to a
few months ago, but all the time I was ready to bust, and didn't know
it. Now, then, I don't want you to blame Sibyl, and if I were you
I wouldn't speak of her as 'that woman,' because she's your
daughter-in-law and going to stay that way. She didn't do anything
wicked. It was a shock to me, and I don't deny it, to find what she had
done--encouraging that fellow to hang around her after he began trying
to flirt with her, and losing her head over him the way she did. I don't
deny it was a shock and that it'll always be a hurt inside of me I'll
never get over. But it was my fault; I didn't understand a woman's
nature." Poor Roscoe spoke in the most profound and desolate earnest.
"A woman craves society, and gaiety, and meeting attractive people, and
traveling. Well, I can't give her the other things, but I can give her
the traveling--real traveling, not just going to Atlantic City or
New Orleans, the way she has, two, three times. A woman has to have
something in her life besides a business man. And that's ALL I was. I
never understood till I heard her talking when she was so sick, and I
believe if you'd heard her then you wouldn't speak so hard-heartedly
about her; I believe you might have forgiven her like I have. That's
all. I never cared anything for any girl but her in my life, but I was
so busy with business I put it ahead of her. I never THOUGHT about her,
I was so busy thinking business. Well, this is where it's brought us
to--and now when you talk about 'business' to me I feel the way you do
when anybody talks about Gurney to you. The word 'business' makes me
dizzy--it makes me honestly sick at the stomach. I believe if I had
to go down-town and step inside that office door I'd fall down on the
floor, deathly sick. You talk about a 'month's vacation'--and I get just
as sick. I'm rattled--I can't plan--I haven't got any plans--can't make
any, except to take my girl and get just as far away from that office as
I can--and stay. We're going to Japan first, and if we--"

His father rustled the paper. "I said good-by, Roscoe."

"Good-by," said Roscoe, listlessly.



CHAPTER XXIV

Sheridan waited until he heard the sound of the outer door closing; then
he rose and pushed a tiny disk set in the wall. Jackson appeared.

"Has Bibbs got home from work?"

"Mist' Bibbs? No, suh."

"Tell him I want to see him, soon as he comes."

"Yessuh."

Sheridan returned to his chair and fixed his attention fiercely upon
the newspaper. He found it difficult to pursue the items beyond
their explanatory rubrics--there was nothing unusual or startling to
concentrate his attention:

  "Motorman Puts Blame on Brakes.  Three Killed when Car Slides."
  "Burglars Make Big Haul."
  "Board Works Approve Big Car-line Extension."
  "Hold-up Men Injure Two.  Man Found in Alley, Skull Fractured."
  "Sickening Story Told in Divorce Court."
  "Plan New Eighteen-story Structure."
  "School-girl Meets Death under Automobile."
  "Negro Cuts Three.  One Dead."
  "Life Crushed Out.  Third Elevator Accident in Same Building Causes
    Action by Coroner."
  "Declare Militia will be Menace.  Polish Societies Protest to
    Governor in Church Rioting Case."
  "Short $3,500 in Accounts, Trusted Man Kills Self with Drug."
  "Found Frozen.  Family Without Food or Fuel.  Baby Dead when
    Parents Return Home from Seeking Work."
  "Minister Returned from Trip Abroad Lectures on Big Future of Our
    City.  Sees Big Improvement during Short Absence.  Says No
    European City Holds Candle." (Sheridan nodded approvingly here.)

Bibbs came through the hall whistling, and entered the room briskly.
"Well, father, did you want me?"

"Yes. Sit down." Sheridan got up, and Bibbs took a seat by the fire,
holding out his hands to the crackling blaze, for it was cold outdoors.

"I came within seven of the shop record to-day," he said. "I handled
more strips than any other workman has any day this month. The nearest
to me is sixteen behind."

"There!" exclaimed his father, greatly pleased. "What'd I tell you?
I'd like to hear Gurney hint again that I wasn't right in sending you
there--I would just like to hear him! And you--ain't you ashamed of
makin' such a fuss about it? Ain't you?"

"I didn't go at it in the right spirit the other time," Bibbs said,
smiling brightly, his face ruddy in the cheerful firelight. "I didn't
know the difference it meant to like a thing."

"Well, I guess I've pretty thoroughly vindicated my judgement. I guess I
HAVE! I said the shop'd be good for you, and it was. I said it wouldn't
hurt you, and it hasn't. It's been just exactly what I said it would be.
Ain't that so?"

"Looks like it!" Bibbs agreed, gaily.

"Well, I'd like to know any place I been wrong, first and last! Instead
o' hurting you, it's been the makin' of you--physically. You're a good
inch taller'n what I am, and you'd be a bigger man than what I am
if you'd get some flesh on your bones; and you ARE gettin' a little.
Physically, it's started you out to be the huskiest one o' the whole
family. Now, then, mentally--that's different. I don't say it unkindly,
Bibbs, but you got to do something for yourself mentally, just like
what's begun physically. And I'm goin' to help you."

Sheridan decided to sit down again. He brought his chair close to his
son's, and, leaning over, tapped Bibbs's knee confidentially. "I got
plans for you, Bibbs," he said.

Bibbs instantly looked thoroughly alarmed. He drew back. "I--I'm all
right now, father."

"Listen." Sheridan settled himself in his chair, and spoke in the tone
of a reasonable man reasoning. "Listen here, Bibbs. I had another blow
to-day, and it was a hard one and right in the face, though I HAVE been
expectin' it some little time back. Well, it's got to be met. Now I'll
be frank with you. As I said a minute ago, mentally I couldn't ever
called you exactly strong. You been a little weak both ways, most of
your life. Not but what I think you GOT a mentality, if you'd learn to
use it. You got will-power, I'll say that for you. I never knew boy or
man that could be stubborner--never one in my life! Now, then, you've
showed you could learn to run that machine best of any man in the shop,
in no time at all. That looks to me like you could learn to do other
things. I don't deny but what it's an encouragin' sign. I don't deny
that, at all. Well, that helps me to think the case ain't so hopeless as
it looks. You're all I got to meet this blow with, but maybe you ain't
as poor material as I thought. Your tellin' me about comin' within
seven strips of the shop's record to-day looks to me like encouragin'
information brought in at just about the right time. Now, then, I'm
goin' to give you a raise. I wanted to send you straight on up through
the shops--a year or two, maybe--but I can't do it. I lost Jim, and now
I've lost Roscoe. He's quit. He's laid down on me. If he ever comes back
at all, he'll be a long time pickin' up the strings, and, anyway, he
ain't the man I thought he was. I can't count on him. I got to have
SOMEBODY I KNOW I can count on. And I'm down to this: you're my last
chance. Bibbs, I got to learn you to use what brains you got and see if
we can't develop 'em a little. Who knows? And I'm goin' to put my time
in on it. I'm goin' to take you right down-town with ME, and I won't be
hard on you if you're a little slow at first. And I'm goin' to do the
big thing for you. I'm goin' to make you feel you got to do the big
thing for me, in return. I've vindicated my policy with you about the
shop, and now I'm goin' to turn right around and swing you 'way over
ahead of where the other boys started, and I'm goin' to make an appeal
to your ambition that'll make you dizzy!" He tapped his son on the knee
again. "Bibbs, I'm goin' to start you off this way: I'm goin' to
make you a director in the Pump Works Company; I'm goin' to make you
vice-president of the Realty Company and a vice-president of the Trust
Company!"

Bibbs jumped to his feet, blanched. "Oh no!" he cried.

Sheridan took his dismay to be the excitement of sudden joy. "Yes,
sir! And there's some pretty fat little salaries goes with those
vice-presidencies, and a pinch o' stock in the Pump Company with the
directorship. You thought I was pretty mean about the shop--oh, I know
you did!--but you see the old man can play it both ways. And so right
now, the minute you've begun to make good the way I wanted you to,
I deal from the new deck. And I'll keep on handin' it out bigger and
bigger every time you show me you're big enough to play the hand I deal
you. I'm startin' you with a pretty big one, my boy!"

"But I don't--I don't--I don't want it!" Bibbs stammered.

"What'd you say?" Sheridan thought he had not heard aright.

"I don't want it, father. I thank you--I do thank you--"

Sheridan looked perplexed. "What's the matter with you? Didn't you
understand what I was tellin' you?"

"Yes."

"You sure? I reckon you didn't. I offered--"

"I know, I know! But I can't take it."

"What's the matter with you?" Sheridan was half amazed, half suspicious.
"Your head feel funny?"

"I've never been quite so sane in my life," said Bibbs, "as I have
lately. And I've got just what I want. I'm living exactly the right
life. I'm earning my daily bread, and I'm happy in doing it. My wages
are enough. I don't want any more money, and I don't deserve any--"

"Damnation!" Sheridan sprang up. "You've turned Socialist! You been
listening to those fellows down there, and you--"

"No, sir. I think there's a great deal in what they say, but that isn't
it."

Sheridan tried to restrain his growing fury, and succeeded partially.
"Then what is it? What's the matter?"

"Nothing," his son returned, nervously. "Nothing--except that I'm
content. I don't want to change anything."

"Why not?"

Bibbs had the incredible folly to try to explain. "I'll tell you,
father, if I can. I know it may be hard to understand--"

"Yes, I think it may be," said Sheridan, grimly. "What you say usually
is a LITTLE that way. Go on!"

Perturbed and distressed, Bibbs rose instinctively; he felt himself at
every possible disadvantage. He was a sleeper clinging to a dream--a
rough hand stretched to shake him and waken him. He went to a table and
made vague drawings upon it with a finger, and as he spoke he kept his
eyes lowered. "You weren't altogether right about the shop--that is,
in one way you weren't, father." He glanced up apprehensively. Sheridan
stood facing him, expressionless, and made no attempt to interrupt.
"That's difficult to explain," Bibbs continued, lowering his eyes again,
to follow the tracings of his finger. "I--I believe the shop might have
done for me this time if I hadn't--if something hadn't helped me to--oh,
not only to bear it, but to be happy in it. Well, I AM happy in it.
I want to go on just as I am. And of all things on earth that I don't
want, I don't want to live a business life--I don't want to be drawn
into it. I don't think it IS living--and now I AM living. I have the
healthful toil--and I can think. In business as important as yours I
couldn't think anything but business. I don't--I don't think making
money is worth while."

"Go on," said Sheridan, curtly, as Bibbs paused timidly.

"It hasn't seemed to get anywhere, that I can see," said Bibbs. "You
think this city is rich and powerful--but what's the use of its being
rich and powerful? They don't teach the children any more in the schools
because the city is rich and powerful. They teach them more than they
used to because some people--not rich and powerful people--have thought
the thoughts to teach the children. And yet when you've been reading
the paper I've heard you objecting to the children being taught anything
except what would help them to make money. You said it was wasting the
taxes. You want them taught to make a living, but not to live. When I
was a little boy this wasn't an ugly town; now it's hideous. What's the
use of being big just to be hideous? I mean I don't think all this has
meant really going ahead--it's just been getting bigger and dirtier and
noisier. Wasn't the whole country happier and in many ways wiser when it
was smaller and cleaner and quieter and kinder? I know you think I'm an
utter fool, father, but, after all, though, aren't business and politics
just the housekeeping part of life? And wouldn't you despise a woman
that not only made her housekeeping her ambition, but did it so noisily
and dirtily that the whole neighborhood was in a continual turmoil over
it? And suppose she talked and thought about her housekeeping all
the time, and was always having additions built to her house when she
couldn't keep clean what she already had; and suppose, with it all, she
made the house altogether unpeaceful and unlivable--"

"Just one minute!" Sheridan interrupted, adding, with terrible courtesy,
"If you will permit me? Have you ever been right about anything?"

"I don't quite--"

"I ask the simple question: Have you ever been right about anything
whatever in the course of your life? Have you ever been right upon
any subject or question you've thought about and talked about? Can you
mention one single time when you were proved to be right?"

He was flourishing the bandaged hand as he spoke, but Bibbs said only,
"If I've always been wrong before, surely there's more chance that I'm
right about this. It seems reasonable to suppose something would be due
to bring up my average."

"Yes, I thought you wouldn't see the point. And there's another you
probably couldn't see, but I'll take the liberty to mention it. You been
balkin' all your life. Pretty much everything I ever wanted you to do,
you'd let out SOME kind of a holler, like you are now--and yet I can't
seem to remember once when you didn't have to lay down and do what I
said. But go on with your remarks about our city and the business of
this country. Go on!"

"I don't want to be a part of it," said Bibbs, with unwonted decision.
"I want to keep to myself, and I'm doing it now. I couldn't, if I went
down there with you. I'd be swallowed into it. I don't care for money
enough to--"

"No," his father interrupted, still dangerously quiet. "You've never had
to earn a living. Anybody could tell that by what you say. Now, let me
remind you: you're sleepin' in a pretty good bed; you're eatin' pretty
fair food; you're wearin' pretty fine clothes. Just suppose one o' these
noisy housekeepers--me, for instance--decided to let you do your own
housekeepin'. May I ask what your proposition would be?"

"I'm earning nine dollars a week," said Bibbs, sturdily. "It's enough. I
shouldn't mind at all."

"Who's payin' you that nine dollars a week?"

"My work!" Bibbs answered. "And I've done so well on that
clipping-machine I believe I could work up to fifteen or even twenty
a week at another job. I could be a fair plumber in a few months,
I'm sure. I'd rather have a trade than be in business--I should,
infinitely!"

"You better set about learnin' one pretty dam' quick!" But Sheridan
struggled with his temper and again was partially successful in
controlling it. "You better learn a trade over Sunday, because you're
either goin' down with me to my office Monday morning--or--you can go to
plumbing!"

"All right," said Bibbs, gently. "I can get along."

Sheridan raised his hands sardonically, as in prayer. "O God," he said,
"this boy was crazy enough before he began to earn his nine dollars a
week, and now his money's gone to his head! Can't You do nothin' for
him?" Then he flung his hands apart, palms outward, in a furious gesture
of dismissal. "Get out o' this room! You got a skull that's thicker'n a
whale's thigh-bone, but it's cracked spang all the way across! You hated
the machine-shop so bad when I sent you there, you went and stayed sick
for over two years--and now, when I offer to take you out of it and give
you the mint, you holler for the shop like a calf for its mammy! You're
cracked! Oh, but I got a fine layout here! One son died, one quit, and
one's a loon! The loon's all I got left! H. P. Ellersly's wife had
a crazy brother, and they undertook to keep him at the house. First
morning he was there he walked straight though a ten-dollar plate-glass
window out into the yard. He says, 'Oh, look at the pretty dandelion!'
That's what you're doin'! You want to spend your life sayin', 'Oh, look
at the pretty dandelion!' and you don't care a tinker's dam' what you
bust! Well, mister, loon or no loon, cracked and crazy or whatever you
are, I'll take you with me Monday morning, and I'll work you and learn
you--yes, and I'll lam you, if I got to--until I've made something out
of you that's fit to be called a business man! I'll keep at you while
I'm able to stand, and if I have to lay down to die I'll be whisperin'
at you till they get the embalmin'-fluid into me! Now go on, and don't
let me hear from you again till you can come and tell me you've waked
up, you poor, pitiful, dandelion-pickin' SLEEP-WALKER!"

Bibbs gave him a queer look. There was something like reproach in it,
for once; but there was more than that--he seemed to be startled by his
father's last word.



CHAPTER XXV

There was sleet that evening, with a whopping wind, but neither this
storm nor that other which so imminently threatened him held place
in the consciousness of Bibbs Sheridan when he came once more to the
presence of Mary. All was right in his world as he sat with her, reading
Maurice Maeterlinck's Alladine and Palomides. The sorrowful light of
the gas-jet might have been May morning sunshine flashing amber and rose
through the glowing windows of the Sainte-Chapelle, it was so bright for
Bibbs. And while the zinc-eater held out to bring him such golden nights
as these, all the king's horses and all the king's men might not serve
to break the spell.

Bibbs read slowly, but in a reasonable manner, as if he were talking;
and Mary, looking at him steadily from beneath her curved fingers,
appeared to discover no fault. It had grown to be her habit to look at
him whenever there was an opportunity. It may be said, in truth, that
while they were together, and it was light, she looked at him all the
time.

When he came to the end of Alladine and Palomides they were silent a
little while, considering together; then he turned back the pages and
said: "There's something I want to read over. This:"

   You would think I threw a window open on the dawn....  She has a
   soul that can be seen around her--that takes you in its arms like
   an ailing child and without saying anything to you consoles you
   for everything....  I shall never understand it all.  I do not know
   how it can all be, but my knees bend in spite of me when I speak
   of it....

He stopped and looked at her.

"You boy!" said Mary, not very clearly.

"Oh yes," he returned. "But it's true--especially my knees!"

"You boy!" she murmured again, blushing charmingly. "You might read
another line over. The first time I ever saw you, Bibbs, you were
looking into a mirror. Do it again. But you needn't read it--I can give
it to you: 'A little Greek slave that came from the heart of Arcady!'"

"I! I'm one of the hands at the Pump Works--and going to stay one,
unless I have to decide to study plumbing."

"No." She shook her head. "You love and want what's beautiful and
delicate and serene; it's really art that you want in your life, and
have always wanted. You seemed to me, from the first, the most wistful
person I had ever known, and that's what you were wistful for."

Bibbs looked doubtful and more wistful than ever; but after a moment or
two the matter seemed to clarify itself to him. "Why, no," he said; "I
wanted something else more than that. I wanted you."

"And here I am!" she laughed, completely understanding. "I think we're
like those two in The Cloister and the Hearth. I'm just the rough
Burgundian cross-bow man, Denys, who followed that gentle Gerard and
told everybody that the devil was dead."

"He isn't, though," said Bibbs, as a hoarse little bell in the next room
began a series of snappings which proved to be ten, upon count. "He gets
into the clock whenever I'm with you." And, sighing deeply he rose to
go.

"You're always very prompt about leaving me."

"I--I try to be," he said. "It isn't easy to be careful not to risk
everything by giving myself a little more at a time. If I ever saw you
look tired--"

"Have you ever?"

"Not yet. You always look--you always look--"

"How?"

"Care-free. That's it. Except when you feel sorry for me about
something, you always have that splendid look. It puts courage into
people to see it. If I had a struggle to face I'd keep remembering that
look--and I'd never give up! It's a brave look, too, as though gaiety
might be a kind of gallantry on your part, and yet I don't quite
understand why it should be, either." He smiled quizzically, looking
down upon her. "Mary, you haven't a 'secret sorrow,' have you?"

For answer she only laughed.

"No," he said; "I can't imagine you with a care in the world. I think
that's why you were so kind to me--you have nothing but happiness in
your own life, and so you could spare time to make my troubles turn to
happiness, too. But there's one little time in the twenty-four hours
when I'm not happy. It's now, when I have to say good night. I feel
dismal every time it comes--and then, when I've left the house, there's
a bad little blankness, a black void, as though I were temporarily
dead; and it lasts until I get it established in my mind that I'm really
beginning another day that's to end with YOU again. Then I cheer up. But
now's the bad time--and I must go through it, and so--good night." And
he added with a pungent vehemence of which he was little aware, "I hate
it!"

"Do you?" she said, rising to go to the door with him. But he stood
motionless, gazing at her wonderingly.

"Mary! Your eyes are so--" He stopped.

"Yes?" But she looked quickly away.

"I don't know," he said. "I thought just then--"

"What did you think?"

"I don't know--it seemed to me that there was something I ought to
understand--and didn't."

She laughed and met his wondering gaze again frankly. "My eyes are
pleased," she said. "I'm glad that you miss me a little after you go."

"But to-morrow's coming faster than other days if you'll let it," he
said.

She inclined her head. "Yes. I'll--'let it'!"

"Going to church," said Bibbs. "It IS going to church when I go with
you!"

She went to the front door with him; she always went that far. They had
formed a little code of leave-taking, by habit, neither of them ever
speaking of it; but it was always the same. She always stood in the
doorway until he reached the sidewalk, and there he always turned and
looked back, and she waved her hand to him. Then he went on, halfway to
the New House, and looked back again, and Mary was not in the doorway,
but the door was open and the light shone. It was as if she meant to
tell him that she would never shut him out; he could always see that
friendly light of the open doorway--as if it were open for him to come
back, if he would. He could see it until a wing of the New House came
between, when he went up the path. The open doorway seemed to him the
beautiful symbol of her friendship--of her thought of him; a symbol of
herself and of her ineffable kindness.

And she kept the door open--even to-night, though the sleet and fine
snow swept in upon her bare throat and arms, and her brown hair was
strewn with tiny white stars. His heart leaped as he turned and saw that
she was there, waving her hand to him, as if she did not know that the
storm touched her. When he had gone on, Mary did as she always did--she
went into an unlit room across the hall from that in which they had
spent the evening, and, looking from the window, watched him until he
was out of sight. The storm made that difficult to-night, but she
caught a glimpse of him under the street-lamp that stood between the two
houses, and saw that he turned to look back again. Then, and not before,
she looked at the upper windows of Roscoe's house across the street.
They were dark. Mary waited, but after a little while she closed the
front door and returned to her window. A moment later two of the upper
windows of Roscoe's house flashed into light and a hand lowered the
shade of one of them. Mary felt the cold then--it was the third night
she had seen those windows lighted and the shade lowered, just after
Bibbs had gone.

But Bibbs had no glance to spare for Roscoe's windows. He stopped for
his last look back at the open door, and, with a thin mantle of white
already upon his shoulders, made his way, gasping in the wind, to the
lee of the sheltering wing of the New House.

A stricken George, muttering hoarsely, admitted him, and Bibbs became
aware of a paroxysm within the house. Terrible sounds came from the
library: Sheridan cursing as never before; his wife sobbing, her voice
rising to an agonized squeal of protest upon each of a series of muffled
detonations--the outrageous thumping of a bandaged hand upon wood; then
Gurney, sharply imperious, "Keep your hand in that sling! Keep your hand
in that sling, I say!"

"LOOK!" George gasped, delighted to play herald for so important a
tragedy; and he renewed upon his face the ghastly expression with which
he had first beheld the ruins his calamitous gesture laid before the
eyes of Bibbs. "Look at 'at lamidal statue!"

Gazing down the hall, Bibbs saw heroic wreckage, seemingly
Byzantine--painted colossal fragments of the shattered torso,
appallingly human; and gilded and silvered heaps of magnificence strewn
among ruinous palms like the spoil of a barbarians' battle. There had
been a massacre in the oasis--the Moor had been hurled headlong from his
pedestal.

"He hit 'at ole lamidal statue," said George. "POW!"

"My father?"

"YESsuh! POW! he hit 'er! An' you' ma run tell me git doctuh quick 's
I kin telefoam--she sho' you' pa goin' bus' a blood-vessel. He ain't
takin' on 'tall NOW. He ain't nothin' 'tall to what he was 'while ago.
You done miss' it, Mist' Bibbs. Doctuh got him all quiet' down, to what
he was. POW! he hit'er! Yessuh!" He took Bibbs's coat and proffered a
crumpled telegraph form. "Here what come," he said. "I pick 'er up when
he done stompin' on 'er. You read 'er, Mist' Bibbs--you' ma tell me tuhn
'er ovuh to you soon's you come in."

Bibbs read the telegram quickly. It was from New York and addressed to
Mrs. Sheridan.

   Sure you will all approve step have taken as was so wretched my
   health would probably suffered severely Robert and I were married
   this afternoon thought best have quiet wedding absolutely sure
   you will understand wisdom of step when you know Robert better am
   happiest woman in world are leaving for Florida will wire address
   when settled will remain till spring love to all father will like
   him too when knows him like I do he is just ideal.
                                                     Edith Lamhorn.



CHAPTER XXVI

George departed, and Bibbs was left gazing upon chaos and listening to
thunder. He could not reach the stairway without passing the open doors
of the library, and he was convinced that the mere glimpse of him, just
then, would prove nothing less than insufferable for his father. For
that reason he was about to make his escape into the gold-and-brocade
room, intending to keep out of sight, when he heard Sheridan
vociferously demanding his presence.

"Tell him to come in here! He's out there. I heard George just let him
in. Now you'll SEE!" And tear-stained Mrs. Sheridan, looking out into
the hall, beckoned to her son.

Bibbs went as far as the doorway. Gurney sat winding a strip of white
cotton, his black bag open upon a chair near by; and Sheridan was
striding up and down, his hand so heavily wrapped in fresh bandages that
he seemed to be wearing a small boxing-glove. His eyes were bloodshot;
his forehead was heavily bedewed; one side of his collar had broken
loose, and there were blood-stains upon his right cuff.

"THERE'S our little sunshine!" he cried, as Bibbs appeared. "THERE'S the
hope o' the family--my lifelong pride and joy! I want--"

"Keep you hand in that sling," said Gurney, sharply.

Sheridan turned upon him, uttering a sound like a howl. "For God's sake,
sing another tune!" he cried. "You said you 'came as a doctor but stay
as a friend,' and in that capacity you undertake to sit up and criticize
ME--"

"Oh, talk sense," said the doctor, and yawned intentionally. "What do
you want Bibbs to say?"

"You were sittin' up there tellin' me I got 'hysterical'--'hysterical,'
oh Lord! You sat up there and told me I got 'hysterical' over nothin'!
You sat up there tellin' me I didn't have as heavy burdens as many
another man you knew. I just want you to hear THIS. Now listen!" He
swung toward the quiet figure waiting in the doorway. "Bibbs, will you
come down-town with me Monday morning and let me start you with two
vice-presidencies, a directorship, stock, and salaries? I ask you."

"No, father," said Bibbs, gently.

Sheridan looked at Gurney and then faced his son once more.

"Bibbs, you want to stay in the shop, do you, at nine dollars a week,
instead of takin' up my offer?"

"Yes, sir."

"And I'd like the doctor to hear: What'll you do if I decide you're
too high-priced a workin'-man either to live in my house or work in my
shop?"

"Find other work," said Bibbs.

"There! You hear him for yourself!" Sheridan cried. "You hear what--"

"Keep you hand in that sling! Yes, I hear him."

Sheridan leaned over Gurney and shouted, in a voice that cracked and
broke, piping into falsetto: "He thinks of bein' a PLUMBER! He wants to
be a PLUMBER! He told me he couldn't THINK if he went into business--he
wants to be a plumber so he can THINK!"

He fell back a step, wiping his forhead with the back of his left hand.
"There! That's my son! That's the only son I got now! That's my chance
to live," he cried, with a bitterness that seemed to leave ashes in his
throat. "That's my one chance to live--that thing you see in the doorway
yonder!"

Dr. Gurney thoughtfully regarded the bandage strip he had been winding,
and tossed it into the open bag. "What's the matter with giving Bibbs a
chance to live?" he said, coolly. "I would if I were you. You've had TWO
that went into business."

Sheridan's mouth moved grotesquely before he could speak. "Joe Gurney,"
he said, when he could command himself so far, "are you accusin' me of
the responsibility for the death of my son James?"

"I accuse you of nothing," said the doctor. "But just once I'd like
to have it out with you on the question of Bibbs--and while he's here,
too." He got up, walked to the fire, and stood warming his hands behind
his back and smiling. "Look here, old fellow, let's be reasonable," he
said. "You were bound Bibbs should go to the shop again, and I gave you
and him, both, to understand pretty plainly that if he went it was at
the risk of his life. Well, what did he do? He said he wanted to go. And
he did go, and he's made good there. Now, see: Isn't that enough? Can't
you let him off now? He wants to write, and how do you know that he
couldn't do it if you gave him a chance? How do you know he hasn't some
message--something to say that might make the world just a little
bit happier or wiser? He MIGHT--in time--it's a possibility not to be
denied. Now he can't deliver any message if he goes down there with you,
and he won't HAVE any to deliver. I don't say going down with you is
likely to injure his health, as I thought the shop would, and as the
shop did, the first time. I'm not speaking as doctor now, anyhow. But
I tell you one thing I know: if you take him down there you'll kill
something that I feel is in him, and it's finer, I think, than his
physical body, and you'll kill it deader than a door-nail! And so
why not let it live? You've about come to the end of your string, old
fellow. Why not stop this perpetual devilish fighting and give Bibbs his
chance?"

Sheridan stood looking at him fixedly. "What 'fighting?'"

"Yours--with nature." Gurney sustained the daunting gaze of his fierce
antagonist equably. "You don't seem to understand that you've been
struggling against actual law."

"What law?"

"Natural law," said Gurney. "What do you think beat you with Edith? Did
Edith, herself, beat you? Didn't she obey without question something
powerful that was against you? EDITH wasn't against you, and you weren't
against HER, but you set yourself against the power that had her in its
grip, and it shot out a spurt of flame--and won in a walk! What's taken
Roscoe from you? Timbers bear just so much strain, old man; but YOU
wanted to send the load across the broken bridge, and you thought you
could bully or coax the cracked thing into standing. Well, you couldn't!
Now here's Bibbs. There are thousands of men fit for the life you want
him to lead--and so is he. It wouldn't take half of Bibbs's brains to be
twice as good a business man as Jim and Roscoe put together."

"WHAT!" Sheridan goggled at him like a zany.

"Your son Bibbs," said the doctor, composedly, "Bibbs Sheridan has
the kind and quantity of 'gray matter' that will make him a success in
anything--if he ever wakes up! Personally I should prefer him to remain
asleep. I like him that way. But the thousands of men fit for the life
you want him to lead aren't fit to do much with the life he OUGHT
to lead. Blindly, he's been fighting for the chance to lead it--he's
obeying something that begs to stay alive within him; and, blindly, he
knows you'll crush it out. You've set your will to do it. Let me tell
you something more. You don't know what you've become since Jim's going
thwarted you--and that's what was uppermost, a bafflement stronger than
your normal grief. You're half mad with a consuming fury against the
very self of the law--for it was the very self of the law that took Jim
from you. That was a law concerning the cohesion of molecules. The very
self of the law took Roscoe from you and gave Edith the certainty of
beating you; and the very self of the law makes Bibbs deny you to-night.
The LAW beats you. Haven't you been whipped enough? But you want to whip
the law--you've set yourself against it, to bend it to your own ends, to
wield it and twist it--"

The voice broke from Sheridan's heaving chest in a shout. "Yes! And by
God, I will!"

"So Ajax defied the lightning," said Gurney.

"I've heard that dam'-fool story, too," Sheridan retorted, fiercely.
"That's for chuldern and niggers. It ain't twentieth century, let me
tell you! 'Defied the lightning,' did he, the jackass! If he'd been half
a man he'd 'a' got away with it. WE don't go showin' off defyin' the
lightning--we hitch it up and make it work for us like a black-steer! A
man nowadays would just as soon think o' defyin' a wood-shed!"

"Well, what about Bibbs?" said Gurney. "Will you be a really big man now
and--"

"Gurney, you know a lot about bigness!" Sheridan began to walk to and
fro again, and the doctor returned gloomily to his chair. He had shot
his bolt the moment he judged its chance to strike center was best, but
the target seemed unaware of the marksman.

"I'm tryin' to make a big man out o' that poor truck yonder," Sheridan
went on, "and you step in, beggin' me to let him be Lord knows what--I
don't! I suppose you figure it out that now I got a SON-IN-LAW, I
mightn't need a son! Yes, I got a son-in-law now--a spender!"

"Oh, put your hand back!" said Gurney, wearily.

There was a bronze inkstand upon the table. Sheridan put his right hand
in the sling, but with his left he swept the inkstand from the table
and half-way across the room--a comet with a destroying black tail. Mrs.
Sheridan shrieked and sprang toward it.

"Let it lay!" he shouted, fiercely. "Let it lay!" And, weeping, she
obeyed. "Yes, sir," he went on, in a voice the more ominous for the
sudden hush he put upon it. "I got a spender for a son-in-law! It's
wonderful where property goes, sometimes. There was ole man Tracy--you
remember him, Doc--J. R. Tracy, solid banker. He went into the bank as
messenger, seventeen years old; he was president at forty-three, and he
built that bank with his life for forty years more. He was down there
from nine in the morning until four in the afternoon the day before he
died--over eighty! Gilt edge, that bank? It was diamond edge! He used
to eat a bag o' peanuts and an apple for lunch; but he wasn't
stingy--he was just livin' in his business. He didn't care for pie or
automobiles--he had his bank. It was an institution, and it come pretty
near bein' the beatin' heart o' this town in its time. Well, that ole
man used to pass one o' these here turned-up-nose and turned-up-pants
cigarette boys on the streets. Never spoke to him, Tracy didn't. Speak
to him? God! he wouldn't 'a' coughed on him! He wouldn't 'a' let him
clean the cuspidors at the bank! Why, if he'd 'a' just seen him standin'
in FRONT the bank he'd 'a' had him run off the street. And yet all Tracy
was doin' every day of his life was workin' for that cigarette boy!
Tracy thought it was for the bank; he thought he was givin' his life and
his life-blood and the blood of his brain for the bank, but he wasn't.
It was every bit--from the time he went in at seventeen till he died in
harness at eighty-three--it was every last lick of it just slavin' for
that turned-up-nose, turned-up-pants cigarette boy. AND TRACY DIDN'T
EVEN KNOW HIS NAME! He died, not ever havin' heard it, though he chased
him off the front steps of his house once. The day after Tracy died his
old-maid daughter married the cigarette--and there AIN'T any Tracy bank
any more! And now"--his voice rose again--"and now I got a cigarette
son-in-law!"

Gurney pointed to the flourishing right hand without speaking, and
Sheridan once more returned it to the sling.

"My son-in-law likes Florida this winter," Sheridan went on. "That's
good, and my son-in-law better enjoy it, because I don't think he'll be
there next winter. They got twelve-thousand dollars to spend, and I hear
it can be done in Florida by rich sons-in-law. When Roscoe's woman got
me to spend that much on a porch for their new house, Edith wouldn't
give me a minute's rest till I turned over the same to her. And she's
got it, besides what I gave her to go East on. It'll be gone long before
this time next year, and when she comes home and leaves the cigarette
behind--for good--she'll get some more. MY name ain't Tracy, and there
ain't goin' to be any Tracy business in the Sheridan family. And there
ain't goin' to be any college foundin' and endowin' and trusteein',
nor God-knows-what to keep my property alive when I'm gone! Edith'll
be back, and she'll get a girl's share when she's through with that
cigarette, but--"

"By the way," interposed Gurney, "didn't Mrs. Sheridan tell me that
Bibbs warned you Edith would marry Lamhorn in New York?"

Sheridan went completely to pieces: he swore, while his wife screamed
and stopped her ears. And as he swore he pounded the table with his
wounded hand, and when the doctor, after storming at him ineffectively,
sprang to catch and protect that hand, Sheridan wrenched it away,
tearing the bandage. He hammered the table till it leaped.

"Fool!" he panted, choking. "If he's shown gumption enough to guess
right the first time in his life, it's enough for me to begin learnin'
him on!" And, struggling with the doctor, he leaned toward Bibbs,
thrusting forward his convulsed face, which was deathly pale. "My name
ain't Tracy, I tell you!" he screamed, hoarsely. "You give in, you
stubborn fool! I've had my way with you before, and I'll have my way
with you now!"

Bibbs's face was as white as his father's, but he kept remembering that
"splendid look" of Mary's which he had told her would give him courage
in a struggle, so that he would "never give up."

"No. You can't have your way," he said. And then, obeying a significant
motion of Gurney's head, he went out quickly, leaving them struggling.



CHAPTER XXVII

Mrs. Sheridan, in a wrapper, noiselessly opened the door of her
husband's room at daybreak the next morning, and peered within the
darkened chamber. At the "old" house they had shared a room, but the
architect had chosen to separate them at the New, and they had not known
how to formulate an objection, although to both of them something seemed
vaguely reprehensible in the new arrangement.

Sheridan did not stir, and she was withdrawing her head from the
aperture when he spoke.

"Oh, I'm AWAKE! Come in, if you want to, and shut the door."

She came and sat by the bed. "I woke up thinkin' about it," she
explained. "And the more I thought about it the surer I got I must
be right, and I knew you'd be tormentin' yourself if you was awake,
so--well, you got plenty other troubles, but I'm just sure you ain't
goin' to have the worry with Bibbs it looks like."

"You BET I ain't!" he grunted.

"Look how biddable he was about goin' back to the Works," she continued.
"He's a right good-hearted boy, really, and sometimes I honestly have to
say he seems right smart, too. Now and then he'll say something sounds
right bright. 'Course, most always it doesn't, and a good deal of the
time, when he says things, why, I have to feel glad we haven't got
company, because they'd think he didn't have any gumption at all. Yet,
look at the way he did when Jim--when Jim got hurt. He took right hold
o' things. 'Course he'd been sick himself so much and all--and the rest
of us never had, much, and we were kind o' green about what to do in
that kind o' trouble--still, he did take hold, and everything went off
all right; you'll have to say that much, papa. And Dr. Gurney says he's
got brains, and you can't deny but what the doctor's right considerable
of a man. He acts sleepy, but that's only because he's got such a large
practice--he's a pretty wide-awake kind of a man some ways. Well, what
he says last night about Bibbs himself bein' asleep, and how much he'd
amount to if he ever woke up--that's what I got to thinkin' about. You
heard him, papa; he says, 'Bibbs'll be a bigger business man than what
Jim and Roscoe was put together--if he ever wakes up,' he says. Wasn't
that exactly what he says?"

"I suppose so," said Sheridan, without exhibiting any interest.
"Gurney's crazier'n Bibbs, but if he wasn't--if what he says was
true--what of it?"

"Listen, papa. Just suppose Bibbs took it into his mind to get married.
You know where he goes all the time--"

"Oh, Lord, yes!" Sheridan turned over in the bed, his face to the wall,
leaving visible of himself only the thick grizzle of his hair. "You
better go back to sleep. He runs over there--every minute she'll let
him, I suppose. Go back to bed. There's nothin' in it."

"WHY ain't there?" she urged. "I know better--there is, too! You wait
and see. There's just one thing in the world that'll wake the sleepiest
young man alive up--yes, and make him JUMP up--and I don't care who he
is or how sound asleep it looks like he is. That's when he takes it
into his head to pick out some girl and settle down and have a home and
chuldern of his own. THEN, I guess, he'll go out after the money! You'll
see. I've known dozens o' cases, and so've you--moony, no-'count young
men, all notions and talk, goin' to be ministers, maybe or something;
and there's just this one thing takes it out of 'em and brings 'em right
down to business. Well, I never could make out just what it is
Bibbs wants to be, really; doesn't seem he wants to be a minister
exactly--he's so far-away you can't tell, and he never SAYS--but I know
this is goin' to get him right down to common sense. Now, I don't say
that Bibbs has got the idea in his head yet--'r else he wouldn't be
talkin' that fool-talk about nine dollars a week bein' good enough for
him to live on. But it's COMIN', papa, and he'll JUMP for whatever you
want to hand him out. He will! And I can tell you this much, too: he'll
want all the salary and stock he can get hold of, and he'll hustle to
keep gettin' more. That girl's the kind that a young husband just goes
crazy to give things to! She's pretty and fine-lookin', and things look
nice on her, and I guess she'd like to have 'em about as well as the
next. And I guess she isn't gettin' many these days, either, and she'll
be pretty ready for the change. I saw her with her sleeves rolled up at
the kitchen window the other day, and Jackson told me yesterday their
cook left two weeks ago, and they haven't tried to hire another one. He
says her and her mother been doin' the housework a good while, and now
they're doin' the cookin,' too. 'Course Bibbs wouldn't know that
unless she's told him, and I reckon she wouldn't; she's kind o'
stiffish-lookin', and Bibbs is too up in the clouds to notice anything
like that for himself. They've never asked him to a meal in the house,
but he wouldn't notice that, either--he's kind of innocent. Now I was
thinkin'--you know, I don't suppose we've hardly mentioned the girl's
name at table since Jim went, but it seems to me maybe if--"

Sheridan flung out his arms, uttering a sound half-groan, half-yawn.
"You're barkin' up the wrong tree! Go on back to bed, mamma!"

"Why am I?" she demanded, crossly. "Why am I barkin' up the wrong tree?"

"Because you are. There's nothin' in it."

"I'll bet you," she said, rising--"I'll bet you he goes to church with
her this morning. What you want to bet?"

"Go back to bed," he commanded. "I KNOW what I'm talkin' about; there's
nothin' in it, I tell you."

She shook her head perplexedly. "You think because--because Jim was
runnin' so much with her it wouldn't look right?"

"No. Nothin' to do with it."

"Then--do you know something about it that you ain't told me?"

"Yes, I do," he grunted. "Now go on. Maybe I can get a little sleep. I
ain't had any yet!"

"Well--" She went to the door, her expression downcast. "I thought
maybe--but--" She coughed prefatorily. "Oh, papa, something else I
wanted to tell you. I was talkin' to Roscoe over the 'phone last night
when the telegram came, so I forgot to tell you, but--well, Sibyl wants
to come over this afternoon. Roscoe says she has something she wants to
say to us. It'll be the first time she's been out since she was able to
sit up--and I reckon she wants to tell us she's sorry for what happened.
They expect to get off by the end o' the week, and I reckon she wants to
feel she's done what she could to kind o' make up. Anyway, that's
what he said. I 'phoned him again about Edith, and he said it wouldn't
disturb Sibyl, because she'd been expectin' it; she was sure all
along it was goin' to happen; and, besides, I guess she's got all that
foolishness pretty much out of her, bein' so sick. But what I thought
was, no use bein' rough with her, papa--I expect she's suffered a
good deal--and I don't think we'd ought to be, on Roscoe's account.
You'll--you'll be kind o' polite to her, won't you, papa?"

He mumbled something which was smothered under the coverlet he had
pulled over his head.

"What?" she said, timidly. "I was just sayin' I hoped you'd treat Sibyl
all right when she comes, this afternoon. You will, won't you, papa?"

He threw the coverlet off furiously. "I presume so!" he roared.

She departed guiltily.

But if he had accepted her proffered wager that Bibbs would go to
church with Mary Vertrees that morning, Mrs. Sheridan would have lost.
Nevertheless, Bibbs and Mary did certainly set out from Mr. Vertrees's
house with the purpose of going to church. That was their intention, and
they had no other. They meant to go to church.

But it happened that they were attentively preoccupied in a conversation
as they came to the church; and though Mary was looking to the right and
Bibbs was looking to the left, Bibbs's leftward glance converged with
Mary's rightward glance, and neither was looking far beyond the other
at this time. It also happened that, though they were a little jostled
among groups of people in the vicinity of the church, they passed this
somewhat prominent edifice without being aware of their proximity to it,
and they had gone an incredible number of blocks beyond it before
they discovered their error. However, feeling that they might be
embarrassingly late if they returned, they decided that a walk would
make them as good. It was a windless winter morning, with an inch of
crisp snow over the ground. So they walked, and for the most part they
were silent, but on their way home, after they had turned back at noon,
they began to be talkative again.

"Mary," said Bibbs, after a time, "am I a sleep-walker?"

She laughed a little, then looked grave. "Does your father say you are?"

"Yes--when he's in a mood to flatter me. Other times, other names. He
has quite a list."

"You mustn't mind," she said, gently. "He's been getting some pretty
severe shocks. What you've told me makes me pretty sorry for him, Bibbs.
I've always been sure he's very big."

"Yes. Big and--blind. He's like a Hercules without eyes and without any
consciousness except that of his strength and of his purpose to grow
stronger. Stronger for what? For nothing."

"Are you sure, Bibbs? It CAN'T be for nothing; it must be stronger for
something, even though he doesn't know what it is. Perhaps what he and
his kind are struggling for is something so great they COULDN'T see
it--so great none of us could see it."

"No, he's just like some blind, unconscious thing heaving underground--"

"Till he breaks through and leaps out into the daylight," she finished
for him, cheerily.

"Into the smoke," said Bibbs. "Look at the powder of coal-dust already
dirtying the decent snow, even though it's Sunday. That's from the
little pigs; the big ones aren't so bad, on Sunday! There's a fleck of
soot on your cheek. Some pig sent it out into the air; he might as well
have thrown it on you. It would have been braver, for then he'd have
taken his chance of my whipping him for it if I could."

"IS there soot on my cheek, Bibbs, or were you only saying so
rhetorically? IS there?"

"Is there? There ARE soot on your cheeks, Mary--a fleck on each. One
landed since I mentioned the first."

She halted immediately, giving him her handkerchief, and he succeeded in
transferring most of the black from her face to the cambric. They were
entirely matter-of-course about it.

An elderly couple, it chanced, had been walking behind Bibbs and Mary
for the last block or so, and passed ahead during the removal of the
soot. "There!" said the elderly wife. "You're always wrong when
you begin guessing about strangers. Those two young people aren't
honeymooners at all--they've been married for years. A blind man could
see that."


"I wish I did know who threw that soot on you," said Bibbs, looking up
at the neighboring chimneys, as they went on. "They arrest children for
throwing snowballs at the street-cars, but--"

"But they don't arrest the street-cars for shaking all the pictures in
the houses crooked every time they go by. Nor for the uproar they make.
I wonder what's the cost in nerves for the noise of the city each year.
Yes, we pay the price for living in a 'growing town,' whether we have
money to pay or none."

"Who is it gets the pay?" said Bibbs.

"Not I!" she laughed.

"Nobody gets it. There isn't any pay; there's only money. And only some
of the men down-town get much of that. That's what my father wants me to
get."

"Yes," she said, smiling to him, and nodding. "And you don't want it,
and you don't need it."

"But you don't think I'm a sleep-walker, Mary?" He had told her of his
father's new plans for him, though he had not described the vigor and
picturesqueness of their setting forth. "You think I'm right?"

"A thousand times!" she cried. "There aren't so many happy people in
this world, I think--and you say you've found what makes you happy. If
it's a dream--keep it!"

"The thought of going down there--into the money shuffle--I hate it as
I never hated the shop!" he said. "I hate it! And the city itself, the
city that the money shuffle has made--just look at it! Look at it in
winter. The snow's tried hard to make the ugliness bearable, but the
ugliness is winning; it's making the snow hideous; the snow's getting
dirty on top, and it's foul underneath with the dirt and disease of the
unclean street. And the dirt and the ugliness and the rush and the noise
aren't the worst of it; it's what the dirt and ugliness and rush and
noise MEAN--that's the worst! The outward things are insufferable, but
they're only the expression of a spirit--a blind embryo of a spirit, not
yet a soul--oh, just greed! And this 'go ahead' nonsense! Oughtn't it
all to be a fellowship? I shouldn't want to get ahead if I could--I'd
want to help the other fellow to keep up with me."

"I read something the other day and remembered it for you," said Mary.
"It was something Burne-Jones said of a picture he was going to paint:
'In the first picture I shall make a man walking in the street of
a great city, full of all kinds of happy life: children, and lovers
walking, and ladies leaning from the windows all down great lengths of
a street leading to the city walls; and there the gates are wide open,
letting in a space of green field and cornfield in harvest; and all
round his head a great rain of swirling autumn leaves blowing from a
little walled graveyard."

"And if I painted," Bibbs returned, "I'd paint a lady walking in the
street of a great city, full of all kinds of uproarious and futile
life--children being taught only how to make money, and lovers hurrying
to get richer, and ladies who'd given up trying to wash their windows
clean, and the gates of the city wide open, letting in slums and
slaughter-houses and freight-yards, and all round this lady's head a
great rain of swirling soot--" He paused, adding, thoughtfully: "And yet
I believe I'm glad that soot got on your cheek. It was just as if I were
your brother--the way you gave me your handkerchief to rub it off for
you. Still, Edith never--"

"Didn't she?" said Mary, as he paused again.

"No. And I--" He contented himself with shaking his head instead of
offering more definite information. Then he realized that they were
passing the New House, and he sighed profoundly. "Mary, our walk's
almost over."

She looked as blank. "So it is, Bibbs."

They said no more until they came to her gate. As they drifted slowly
to a stop, the door of Roscoe's house opened, and Roscoe came out with
Sibyl, who was startlingly pale. She seemed little enfeebled by her
illness, however, walking rather quickly at her husband's side and not
taking his arm. The two crossed the street without appearing to see Mary
and her companion, and entering the New House, were lost to sight. Mary
gazed after them gravely, but Bibbs, looking at Mary, did not see them.

"Mary," he said, "you seem very serious. Is anything bothering you?"

"No, Bibbs." And she gave him a bright, quick look that made him
instantly unreasonably happy.

"I know you want to go in--" he began.

"No. I don't want to."

"I mustn't keep you standing here, and I mustn't go in with you--but--I
just wanted to say--I've seemed very stupid to myself this morning,
grumbling about soot and all that--while all the time I--Mary, I think
it's been the very happiest of all the hours you've given me. I do.
And--I don't know just why--but it's seemed to me that it was one I'd
always remember. And you," he added, falteringly, "you look so--so
beautiful to-day!"

"It must have been the soot on my cheek, Bibbs."

"Mary, will you tell me something?" he asked.

"I think I will."

"It's something I've had a lot of theories about, but none of them
ever just fits. You used to wear furs in the fall, but now it's so much
colder, you don't--you never wear them at all any more. Why don't you?"

Her eyes fell for a moment, and she grew red. Then she looked up gaily.
"Bibbs, if I tell you the answer will you promise not to ask any more
questions?"

"Yes. Why did you stop wearing them?"

"Because I found I'd be warmer without them!" She caught his hand
quickly in her own for an instant, laughed into his eyes, and ran into
the house.



CHAPTER XXVIII

It is the consoling attribute of unused books that their decorative
warmth will so often make even a ready-made library the actual
"living-room" of a family to whom the shelved volumes are indeed sealed.
Thus it was with Sheridan, who read nothing except newspapers,
business letters, and figures; who looked upon books as he looked upon
bric-a-brac or crocheting--when he was at home, and not abed or eating,
he was in the library.

He stood in the many-colored light of the stained-glass window at the
far end of the long room, when Roscoe and his wife came in, and he
exhaled a solemnity. His deference to the Sabbath was manifest,
as always, in the length of his coat and the closeness of his
Saturday-night shave; and his expression, to match this religious pomp,
was more than Sabbatical, but the most dismaying of his demonstrations
was his keeping his hand in his sling.

Sibyl advanced to the middle of the room and halted there, not looking
at him, but down at her muff, in which, it could be seen, her hands were
nervously moving. Roscoe went to a chair in another part of the room.
There was a deadly silence.

But Sibyl found a shaky voice, after an interval of gulping, though she
was unable to lift her eyes, and the darkling lids continued to veil
them. She spoke hurriedly, like an ungifted child reciting something
committed to memory, but her sincerity was none the less evident for
that.

"Father Sheridan, you and mother Sheridan have always been so kind to
me, and I would hate to have you think I don't appreciate it, from the
way I acted. I've come to tell you I am sorry for the way I did that
night, and to say I know as well as anybody the way I behaved, and it
will never happen again, because it's been a pretty hard lesson;
and when we come back, some day, I hope you'll see that you've got a
daughter-in-law you never need to be ashamed of again. I want to ask
you to excuse me for the way I did, and I can say I haven't any feelings
toward Edith now, but only wish her happiness and good in her new life.
I thank you for all your kindness to me, and I know I made a poor return
for it, but if you can overlook the way I behaved I know I would feel a
good deal happier--and I know Roscoe would, too. I wish to promise not
to be as foolish in the future, and the same error would never occur
again to make us all so unhappy, if you can be charitable enough to
excuse it this time."

He looked steadily at her without replying, and she stood before him,
never lifting her eyes; motionless, save where the moving fur proved the
agitation of her hands within the muff.

"All right," he said at last.

She looked up then with vast relief, though there was a revelation of
heavy tears when the eyelids lifted.

"Thank you," she said. "There's something else--about something
different--I want to say to you, but I want mother Sheridan to hear it,
too."

"She's up-stairs in her room," said Sheridan. "Roscoe--"

Sibyl interrupted. She had just seen Bibbs pass through the hall and
begin to ascend the stairs; and in a flash she instinctively perceived
the chance for precisely the effect she wanted.

"No, let me go," she said. "I want to speak to her a minute first,
anyway."

And she went away quickly, gaining the top of the stairs in time to see
Bibbs enter his room and close the door. Sibyl knew that Bibbs, in his
room, had overheard her quarrel with Edith in the hall outside; for
bitter Edith, thinking the more to shame her, had subsequently informed
her of the circumstance. Sibyl had just remembered this, and with
the recollection there had flashed the thought--out of her own
experience--that people are often much more deeply impressed by words
they overhear than by words directly addressed to them. Sibyl
intended to make it impossible for Bibbs not to overhear. She did not
hesitate--her heart was hot with the old sore, and she believed wholly
in the justice of her cause and in the truth of what she was going to
say. Fate was virtuous at times; it had delivered into her hands the
girl who had affronted her.

Mrs. Sheridan was in her own room. The approach of Sibyl and Roscoe had
driven her from the library, for she had miscalculated her husband's
mood, and she felt that if he used his injured hand as a mark of
emphasis again, in her presence, she would (as she thought of it) "have
a fit right there." She heard Sibyl's step, and pretended to be putting
a touch to her hair before a mirror.

"I was just coming down," she said, as the door opened.

"Yes, he wants you to," said Sibyl. "It's all right, mother Sheridan.
He's forgiven me."

Mrs. Sheridan sniffed instantly; tears appeared. She kissed her
daughter-in-law's cheek; then, in silence, regarded the mirror afresh,
wiped her eyes, and applied powder.

"And I hope Edith will be happy," Sibyl added, inciting more
applications of Mrs. Sheridan's handkerchief and powder.

"Yes, yes," murmured the good woman. "We mustn't make the worst of
things."

"Well, there was something else I had to say, and he wants you to hear
it, too," said Sibyl. "We better go down, mother Sheridan."

She led the way, Mrs. Sheridan following obediently, but when they came
to a spot close by Bibbs's door, Sibyl stopped. "I want to tell you
about it first," she said, abruptly. "It isn't a secret, of course, in
any way; it's something the whole family has to know, and the sooner the
whole family knows it the better. It's something it wouldn't be RIGHT
for us ALL not to understand, and of course father Sheridan most of all.
But I want to just kind of go over it first with you; it'll kind of help
me to see I got it all straight. I haven't got any reason for saying it
except the good of the family, and it's nothing to me, one way or the
other, of course, except for that. I oughtn't to've behaved the way I
did that night, and it seems to me if there's anything I can do to help
the family, I ought to, because it would help show I felt the right way.
Well, what I want to do is to tell this so's to keep the family from
being made a fool of. I don't want to see the family just made use of
and twisted around her finger by somebody that's got no more heart than
so much ice, and just as sure to bring troubles in the long run as--as
Edith's mistake is. Well, then, this is the way it is. I'll just tell
you how it looks to me and see if it don't strike you the same way."

Within the room, Bibbs, much annoyed, tapped his ear with his pencil. He
wished they wouldn't stand talking near his door when he was trying to
write. He had just taken from his trunk the manuscript of a poem begun
the preceding Sunday afternoon, and he had some ideas he wanted to
fix upon paper before they maliciously seized the first opportunity
to vanish, for they were but gossamer. Bibbs was pleased with the
beginnings of his poem, and if he could carry it through he meant to
dare greatly with it--he would venture it upon an editor. For he had
his plan of life now: his day would be of manual labor and thinking--he
could think of his friend and he could think in cadences for poems, to
the crashing of the strong machine--and if his father turned him out of
home and out of the Works, he would work elsewhere and live elsewhere.
His father had the right, and it mattered very little to Bibbs--he faced
the prospect of a working-man's lodging-house without trepidation. He
could find a washstand to write upon, he thought; and every evening when
he left Mary he would write a little; and he would write on holidays and
on Sundays--on Sundays in the afternoon. In a lodging-house, at least
he wouldn't be interrupted by his sister-in-law's choosing the immediate
vicinity of his door for conversations evidently important to herself,
but merely disturbing to him. He frowned plaintively, wishing he could
think of some polite way of asking her to go away. But, as she went on,
he started violently, dropping manuscript and pencil upon the floor.

"I don't know whether you heard it, mother Sheridan," she said, "but
this old Vertrees house, next door, had been sold on foreclosure, and
all THEY got out of it was an agreement that let's 'em live there a
little longer. Roscoe told me, and he says he heard Mr. Vertrees has
been up and down the streets more'n two years, tryin' to get a job he
could call a 'position,' and couldn't land it. You heard anything about
it, mother Sheridan?"

"Well, I DID know they been doin' their own house-work a good while
back," said Mrs. Sheridan. "And now they're doin' the cookin', too."

Sibyl sent forth a little titter with a sharp edge. "I hope they find
something to cook! She sold her piano mighty quick after Jim died!"

Bibbs jumped up. He was trembling from head to foot and he was dizzy--of
all the real things he could never have dreamed in his dream the last
would have been what he heard now. He felt that something incredible was
happening, and that he was powerless to stop it. It seemed to him that
heavy blows were falling on his head and upon Mary's; it seemed to
him that he and Mary were being struck and beaten physically--and that
something hideous impended. He wanted to shout to Sibyl to be silent,
but he could not; he could only stand, swallowing and trembling.

"What I think the whole family ought to understand is just this," said
Sibyl, sharply. "Those people were so hard up that this Miss Vertrees
started after Bibbs before they knew whether he was INSANE or not!
They'd got a notion he might be, from his being in a sanitarium, and
Mrs. Vertrees ASKED me if he was insane, the very first day Bibbs took
the daughter out auto-riding!" She paused a moment, looking at Mrs.
Sheridan, but listening intently. There was no sound from within the
room.

"No!" exclaimed Mrs. Sheridan.

"It's the truth," Sibyl declared, loudly. "Oh, of course we were all
crazy about that girl at first. We were pretty green when we moved up
here, and we thought she'd get us IN--but it didn't take ME long to read
her! Her family were down and out when it came to money--and they had to
go after it, one way or another, SOMEHOW! So she started for Roscoe; but
she found out pretty quick he was married, and she turned right around
to Jim--and she landed him! There's no doubt about it, she had Jim, and
if he'd lived you'd had another daughter-in-law before this, as sure as
I stand here telling you the God's truth about it! Well--when Jim was
left in the cemetery she was waiting out there to drive home with Bibbs!
Jim wasn't COLD--and she didn't know whether Bibbs was insane or not,
but he was the only one of the rich Sheridan boys left. She had to get
him."

The texture of what was the truth made an even fabric with what was not,
in Sibyl's mind; she believed every word that she uttered, and she spoke
with the rapidity and vehemence of fierce conviction.

"What I feel about it is," she said, "it oughtn't to be allowed to go
on. It's too mean! I like poor Bibbs, and I don't want to see him made
such a fool of, and I don't want to see the family made such a fool of!
I like poor Bibbs, but if he'd only stop to think a minute himself he'd
have to realize he isn't the kind of man ANY girl would be apt to fall
in love with. He's better-looking lately, maybe, but you know how he
WAS--just kind of a long white rag in good clothes. And girls like
men with some GO to 'em--SOME sort of dashingness, anyhow! Nobody ever
looked at poor Bibbs before, and neither'd she--no, SIR! not till she'd
tried both Roscoe and Jim first! It was only when her and her family got
desperate that she--"

Bibbs--whiter than when he came from the sanitarium--opened the door.
He stepped across its threshold and stook looking at her. Both women
screamed.

"Oh, good heavens!" cried Sibyl. "Were you in THERE? Oh, I wouldn't--"
She seized Mrs. Sheridan's arm, pulling her toward the stairway. "Come
on, mother Sheridan!" she urged, and as the befuddled and confused lady
obeyed, Sibyl left a trail of noisy exclamations: "Good gracious! Oh,
I wouldn't--too bad! I didn't DREAM he was there! I wouldn't hurt his
feelings! Not for the world! Of course he had to know SOME time! But,
good heavens--"

She heard his door close as she and Mrs. Sheridan reached the top of
the stairs, and she glanced over her shoulder quickly, but Bibbs was not
following; he had gone back into his room.

"He--he looked--oh, terrible bad!" stammered Mrs. Sheridan. "I--I
wish--"

"Still, it's a good deal better he knows about it," said Sibyl. "I
shouldn't wonder it might turn out the very best thing could happened.
Come on!"

And completing their descent to the library, the two made their
appearance to Roscoe and his father. Sibyl at once gave a full and
truthful account of what had taken place, repeating her own remarks,
and omitting only the fact that it was through her design that Bibbs had
overheard them.

"But as I told mother Sheridan," she said, in conclusion, "it might turn
out for the very best that he did hear--just that way. Don't you think
so, father Sheridan?"

He merely grunted in reply, and sat rubbing the thick hair on the top
of his head with his left hand and looking at the fire. He had given no
sign of being impressed in any manner by her exposure of Mary Vertrees's
character; but his impassivity did not dismay Sibyl--it was Bibbs whom
she desired to impress, and she was content in that matter.

"I'm sure it was all for the best," she said. "It's over now, and
he knows what she is. In one way I think it was lucky, because, just
hearing a thing that way, a person can tell it's SO--and he knows I
haven't got any ax to grind except his own good and the good of the
family."

Mrs. Sheridan went nervously to the door and stood there, looking toward
the stairway. "I wish--I wish I knew what he was doin'," she said. "He
did look terrible bad. It was like something had been done to him
that was--I don't know what. I never saw anybody look like he did.
He looked--so queer. It was like you'd--" She called down the hall,
"George!"

"Yes'm?"

"Were you up in Mr. Bibbs's room just now?"

"Yes'm. He ring bell; tole me make him fiah in his grate. I done buil'
him nice fiah. I reckon he ain' feelin' so well. Yes'm." He departed.

"What do you expect he wants a fire for?" she asked, turning toward her
husband. "The house is warm as can be, I do wish I--"

"Oh, quit frettin'!" said Sheridan.

"Well, I--I kind o' wish you hadn't said anything, Sibyl. I know you
meant it for the best and all, but I don't believe it would been so much
harm if--"

"Mother Sheridan, you don't mean you WANT that kind of a girl in the
family? Why, she--"

"I don't know, I don't know," the troubled woman quavered. "If he liked
her it seems kind of a pity to spoil it. He's so queer, and he hasn't
ever taken much enjoyment. And besides, I believe the way it was, there
was more chance of him bein' willin' to do what papa wants him to. If
she wants to marry him--"

Sheridan interrupted her with a hooting laugh. "She don't!" he said.
"You're barkin' up the wrong tree, Sibyl. She ain't that kind of a
girl."

"But, father Sheridan, didn't she--"

He cut her short. "That's enough. You may mean all right, but you guess
wrong. So do you, mamma."

Sibyl cried out, "Oh! But just LOOK how she ran after Jim--"

"She did not," he said, curtly. "She wouldn't take Jim. She turned him
down cold."

"But that's impossi--"

"It's not. I KNOW she did."

Sibyl looked flatly incredulous.

"And YOU needn't worry," he said, turning to his wife. "This won't have
any effect on your idea, because there wasn't any sense to it, anyhow.
D'you think she'd be very likely to take Bibbs--after she wouldn't take
JIM? She's a good-hearted girl, and she lets Bibbs come to see her,
but if she'd ever given him one sign of encouragement the way you women
think, he wouldn't of acted the stubborn fool he has--he'd 'a' been at
me long ago, beggin' me for some kind of a job he could support a wife
on. There's nothin' in it--and I've got the same old fight with him on
my hands I've had all his life--and the Lord knows what he won't do
to balk me! What's happened now'll probably only make him twice as
stubborn, but--"

"SH!" Mrs. Sheridan, still in the doorway, lifted her hand. "That's his
step--he's comin' down-stairs." She shrank away from the door as if
she feared to have Bibbs see her. "I--I wonder--" she said, almost in a
whisper--"I wonder what he's goin'--to do."

Her timorousness had its effect upon the others. Sheridan rose,
frowning, but remained standing beside his chair; and Roscoe moved
toward Sibyl, who stared uneasily at the open doorway. They listened as
the slow steps descended the stairs and came toward the library.

Bibbs stopped upon the threshold, and with sick and haggard eyes looked
slowly from one to the other until at last his gaze rested upon his
father. Then he came and stood before him.

"I'm sorry you've had so much trouble with me," he said, gently. "You
won't, any more. I'll take the job you offered me."

Sheridan did not speak--he stared, astounded and incredulous; and Bibbs
had left the room before any of its occupants uttered a sound, though he
went as slowly as he came. Mrs. Sheridan was the first to move. She went
nervously back to the doorway, and then out into the hall. Bibbs had
gone from the house.

Bibbs's mother had a feeling about him then that she had never known
before; it was indefinite and vague, but very poignant--something in her
mourned for him uncomprehendingly. She felt that an awful thing had been
done to him, though she did not know what it was. She went up to his
room.

The fire George had built for him was almost smothered under thick,
charred ashes of paper. The lid of his trunk stood open, and the
large upper tray, which she remembered to have seen full of papers and
note-books, was empty. And somehow she understood that Bibbs had given
up the mysterious vocation he had hoped to follow--and that he had
given it up for ever. She thought it was the wisest thing he could have
done--and yet, for an unknown reason, she sat upon the bed and wept a
little before she went down-stairs.

So Sheridan had his way with Bibbs, all through.



CHAPTER XXIX

As Bibbs came out of the New House, a Sunday trio was in course of
passage upon the sidewalk: an ample young woman, placid of face;
a black-clad, thin young man, whose expression was one of habitual
anxiety, habitual wariness and habitual eagerness. He propelled a
perambulator containing the third--and all three were newly cleaned,
Sundayfied, and made fit to dine with the wife's relatives.

"How'd you like for me to be THAT young fella, mamma?" the husband
whispered. "He's one of the sons, and there ain't but two left now."

The wife stared curiously at Bibbs. "Well, I don't know," she returned.
"He looks to me like he had his own troubles."

"I expect he has, like anybody else," said the young husband, "but I
guess we could stand a good deal if we had his money."

"Well, maybe, if you keep on the way you been, baby'll be as well fixed
as the Sheridans. You can't tell." She glanced back at Bibbs, who had
turned north. "He walks kind of slow and stooped over, like."

"So much money in his pockets it makes him sag, I guess," said the young
husband, with bitter admiration.

Mary, happening to glance from a window, saw Bibbs coming, and she
started, clasping her hands together in a sudden alarm. She met him at
the door.

"Bibbs!" she cried. "What is the matter? I saw something was terribly
wrong when I--You look--" She paused, and he came in, not lifting his
eyes to hers. Always when he crossed that threshold he had come with
his head up and his wistful gaze seeking hers. "Ah, poor boy!" she said,
with a gesture of understanding and pity. "I know what it is!"

He followed her into the room where they always sat, and sank into a
chair.

"You needn't tell me," she said. "They've made you give up. Your
father's won--you're going to do what he wants. You've given up."

Still without looking at her, he inclined his head in affirmation.

She gave a little cry of compassion, and came and sat near him. "Bibbs,"
she said. "I can be glad of one thing, though it's selfish. I can be
glad you came straight to me. It's more to me than even if you'd come
because you were happy." She did not speak again for a little while;
then she said: "Bibbs--dear--could you tell me about it? Do you want
to?"

Still he did not look up, but in a voice, shaken and husky he asked her
a question so grotesque that at first she thought she had misunderstood
his words.

"Mary," he said, "could you marry me?"

"What did you say, Bibbs?" she asked, quietly.

His tone and attitude did not change. "Will you marry me?"

Both of her hands leaped to her cheeks--she grew red and then white.
She rose slowly and moved backward from him, staring at him, at first
incredulously, then with an intense perplexity more and more luminous
in her wide eyes; it was like a spoken question. The room filled with
strangeness in the long silence--the two were so strange to each other.
At last she said:

"What made you say that?"

He did not answer.

"Bibbs, look at me!" Her voice was loud and clear. "What made you say
that? Look at me!"

He could not look at her, and he could not speak.

"What was it that made you?" she said. "I want you to tell me."

She went closer to him, her eyes ever brighter and wider with that
intensity of wonder. "You've given up--to your father," she said,
slowly, "and then you came to ask me--" She broke off. "Bibbs, do you
want me to marry you?"

"Yes," he said, just audibly.

"No!" she cried. "You do not. Then what made you ask me? What is it
that's happened?"

"Nothing."

"Wait," she said. "Let me think. It's something that happened since our
walk this morning--yes, since you left me at noon. Something happened
that--" She stopped abruptly, with a tremulous murmur of amazement and
dawning comprehension. She remembered that Sibyl had gone to the New
House.

Bibbs swallowed painfully and contrived to say, "I do--I do want you
to--marry me, if--if--you could."

She looked at him, and slowly shook her head. "Bibbs, do you--" Her
voice was as unsteady as his--little more than a whisper. "Do you think
I'm--in love with you?"

"No," he said.

Somewhere in the still air of the room there was a whispered word; it
did not seem to come from Mary's parted lips, but he was aware of it.
"Why?"

"I've had nothing but dreams," Bibbs said, desolately, "but they weren't
like that. Sibyl said no girl could care about me." He smiled faintly,
though still he did not look at Mary. "And when I first came home Edith
told me Sibyl was so anxious to marry that she'd have married ME. She
meant it to express Sibyl's extremity, you see. But I hardly needed
either of them to tell me. I hadn't thought of myself as--well, not as
particularly captivating!"

Oddly enough, Mary's pallor changed to an angry flush. "Those two!" she
exclaimed, sharply; and then, with thoroughgoing contempt: "Lamhorn!
That's like them!" She turned away, went to the bare little black
mantel, and stood leaning upon it. Presently she asked: "WHEN did Mrs.
Roscoe Sheridan say that 'no girl' could care about you?"

"To-day."

Mary drew a deep breath. "I think I'm beginning to understand--a
little." She bit her lip; there was anger in good truth in her eyes and
in her voice. "Answer me once more," she said. "Bibbs, do you know now
why I stopped wearing my furs?"

"Yes."

"I thought so! Your sister-in-law told you, didn't she?"

"I--I heard her say--"

"I think I know what happened, now." Mary's breath came fast and her
voice shook, but she spoke rapidly. "You 'heard her say' more than that.
You 'heard her say' that we were bitterly poor, and on that account I
tried first to marry your brother--and then--" But now she faltered, and
it was only after a convulsive effort that she was able to go on. "And
then--that I tried to marry--you! You 'heard her say' that--and you
believe that I don't care for you and that 'no girl' could care for
you--but you think I am in such an 'extremity,' as Sibyl was--that you--
And so, not wanting me, and believing that I could not want you--except
for my 'extremity'--you took your father's offer and then came to ask
me--to marry you! What had I shown you of myself that could make you--"

Suddenly she sank down, kneeling, with her face buried in her arms upon
the lap of a chair, tears overwhelming her.

"Mary, Mary!" he cried, helplessly. "Oh NO--you--you don't understand."

"I do, though!" she sobbed. "I do!"

He came and stood beside her. "You kill me!" he said. "I can't make it
plain. From the first of your loveliness to me, I was all self. It was
always you that gave and I that took. I was the dependent--I did nothing
but lean on you. We always talked of me, not of you. It was all about my
idiotic distresses and troubles. I thought of you as a kind of wonderful
being that had no mortal or human suffering except by sympathy. You
seemed to lean down--out of a rosy cloud--to be kind to me. I never
dreamed I could do anything for YOU! I never dreamed you could need
anything to be done for you by anybody. And to-day I heard that--that
you--"

"You heard that I needed to marry--some one--anybody--with money," she
sobbed. "And you thought we were so--so desperate--you believed that I
had--"

"No!" he said, quickly. "I didn't believe you'd done one kind thing
for me--for that. No, no, no! I knew you'd NEVER thought of me except
generously--to give. I said I couldn't make it plain!" he cried,
despairingly.

"Wait!" She lifted her head and extended her hands to him unconsciously,
like a child. "Help me up, Bibbs." Then, when she was once more upon her
feet, she wiped her eyes and smiled upon him ruefully and faintly, but
reassuringly, as if to tell him, in that way, that she knew he had
not meant to hurt her. And that smile of hers, so lamentable, but so
faithfully friendly, misted his own eyes, for his shamefacedness lowered
them no more.

"Let me tell you what you want to tell me," she said. "You can't,
because you can't put it into words--they are too humiliating for me
and you're too gentle to say them. Tell me, though, isn't it true? You
didn't believe that I'd tried to make you fall in love with me--"

"Never! Never for an instant!"

"You didn't believe I'd tried to make you want to marry me--"

"No, no, no!"

"I believe it, Bibbs. You thought that I was fond of you; you knew I
cared for you--but you didn't think I might be--in love with you.
But you thought that I might marry you without being in love with you
because you did believe I had tried to marry your brother, and--"

"Mary, I only knew--for the first time--that you--that you were--"

"Were desperately poor," she said. "You can't even say that! Bibbs, it
was true: I did try to make Jim want to marry me. I did!" And she sank
down into the chair, weeping bitterly again. Bibbs was agonized.

"Mary," he groaned, "I didn't know you COULD cry!"

"Listen," she said. "Listen till I get through--I want you to
understand. We were poor, and we weren't fitted to be. We never had
been, and we didn't know what to do. We'd been almost rich; there was
plenty, but my father wanted to take advantage of the growth of the
town; he wanted to be richer, but instead--well, just about the time
your father finished building next door we found we hadn't anything.
People say that, sometimes, meaning that they haven't anything in
comparison with other people of their own kind, but we really hadn't
anything--we hadn't anything at all, Bibbs! And we couldn't DO anything.
You might wonder why I didn't 'try to be a stenographer'--and I wonder
myself why, when a family loses its money, people always say the
daughters 'ought to go and be stenographers.' It's curious!--as if a
wave of the hand made you into a stenographer. No, I'd been raised to be
either married comfortably or a well-to-do old maid, if I chose not
to marry. The poverty came on slowly, Bibbs, but at last it was all
there--and I didn't know how to be a stenographer. I didn't know how
to be anything except a well-to-do old maid or somebody's wife--and
I couldn't be a well-to-do old maid. Then, Bibbs, I did what I'd been
raised to know how to do. I went out to be fascinating and be married. I
did it openly, at least, and with a kind of decent honesty. I told your
brother I had meant to fascinate him and that I was not in love with
him, but I let him think that perhaps I meant to marry him. I think I
did mean to marry him. I had never cared for anybody, and I thought
it might be there really WASN'T anything more than a kind of excited
fondness. I can't be sure, but I think that though I did mean to
marry him I never should have done it, because that sort of a marriage
is--it's sacrilege--something would have stopped me. Something did stop
me; it was your sister-in-law, Sibyl. She meant no harm--but she was
horrible, and she put what I was doing into such horrible words--and
they were the truth--oh! I SAW myself! She was proposing a miserable
compact with me--and I couldn't breathe the air of the same room with
her, though I'd so cheapened myself she had a right to assume that I
WOULD. But I couldn't! I left her, and I wrote to your brother--just a
quick scrawl. I told him just what I'd done; I asked his pardon, and I
said I would not marry him. I posted the letter, but he never got it.
That was the afternoon he was killed. That's all, Bibbs. Now you know
what I did--and you know--ME!" She pressed her clenched hands tightly
against her eyes, leaning far forward, her head bowed before him.

Bibbs had forgotten himself long ago; his heart broke for her. "Couldn't
you--Isn't there--Won't you--" he stammered. "Mary, I'm going with
father. Isn't there some way you could use the money without--without--"

She gave a choked little laugh.

"You gave me something to live for," he said. "You kept me alive, I
think--and I've hurt you like this!"

"Not you--oh no!"

"You could forgive me, Mary?"

"Oh, a thousand times!" Her right hand went out in a faltering gesture,
and just touched his own for an instant. "But there's nothing to
forgive."

"And you can't--you can't--"

"Can't what, Bibbs?"

"You couldn't--"

"Marry you?" she said for him.

"Yes."

"No, no, no!" She sprang up, facing him, and, without knowing what she
did, she set her hands upon his breast, pushing him back from her a
little. "I can't, I can't! Don't you SEE?"

"Mary--"

"No, no! And you must go now, Bibbs; I can't bear any more--please--"

"MARY--"

"Never, never, never!" she cried, in a passion of tears. "You mustn't
come any more. I can't see you, dear! Never, never, never!"

Somehow, in helpless, stumbling obedience to her beseeching gesture, he
got himself to the door and out of the house.



CHAPTER XXX

Sibyl and Roscoe were upon the point of leaving when Bibbs returned to
the New House. He went straight to Sibyl and spoke to her quietly, but
so that the others might hear.

"When you said that if I'd stop to think, I'd realize that no one would
be apt to care enough about me to marry me, you were right," he said. "I
thought perhaps you weren't, and so I asked Miss Vertrees to marry me.
It proved what you said of me, and disproved what you said of her. She
refused."

And, having thus spoken, he quitted the room as straightforwardly as he
had entered it.

"He's SO queer!" Mrs. Sheridan gasped. "Who on earth would thought of
his doin' THAT?"

"I told you," said her husband, grimly.

"You didn't tell us he'd go over there and--"

"I told you she wouldn't have him. I told you she wouldn't have JIM,
didn't I?"

Sibyl was altogether taken aback. "Do you supose it's true? Do you
suppose she WOULDN'T?"

"He didn't look exactly like a young man that had just got things fixed
up fine with his girl," said Sheridan. "Not to me, he didn't!"

"But why would--"

"I told you," he interrupted, angrily, "she ain't that kind of a girl!
If you got to have proof, well, I'll tell you and get it over with,
though I'd pretty near just as soon not have to talk a whole lot about
my dead boy's private affairs. She wrote to Jim she couldn't take him,
and it was a good, straight letter, too. It came to Jim's office; he
never saw it. She wrote it the afternoon he was hurt."

"I remember I saw her put a letter in the mail-box that afternoon," said
Roscoe. "Don't you remember, Sibyl? I told you about it--I was waiting
for you while you were in there so long talking to her mother. It was
just before we saw that something was wrong over here, and Edith came
and called me."

Sibyl shook her head, but she remembered. And she was not cast down,
for, although some remnants of perplexity were left in her eyes, they
were dimmed by an increasing glow of triumph; and she departed--after
some further fragmentary discourse--visibly elated. After all, the
guilty had not been exalted; and she perceived vaguely, but none the
less surely, that her injury had been copiously avenged. She bestowed a
contented glance upon the old house with the cupola, as she and Roscoe
crossed the street.

When they had gone, Mrs. Sheridan indulged in reverie, but after a while
she said, uneasily, "Papa, you think it would be any use to tell Bibbs
about that letter?"

"I don't know," he answered, walking moodily to the window. "I been
thinkin' about it." He came to a decision. "I reckon I will." And he
went up to Bibbs's room.

"Well, you goin' back on what you said?" he inquired, brusquely, as he
opened the door. "You goin' to take it back and lay down on me again?"

"No," said Bibbs.

"Well, perhaps I didn't have any call to accuse you of that. I don't
know as you ever did go back on anything you said, exactly, though the
Lord knows you've laid down on me enough. You certainly have!" Sheridan
was baffled. This was not what he wished to say, but his words were
unmanageable; he found himself unable to control them, and his querulous
abuse went on in spite of him. "I can't say I expect much of you--not
from the way you always been, up to now--unless you turn over a new
leaf, and I don't see any encouragement to think you're goin' to do
THAT! If you go down there and show a spark o' real GIT-up, I reckon the
whole office'll fall in a faint. But if you're ever goin' to show any,
you better begin right at the beginning and begin to show it to-morrow."

"Yes--I'll try."

"You better, if it's in you!" Sheridan was sheerly nonplussed. He had
always been able to say whatever he wished to say, but his tongue seemed
bewitched. He had come to tell Bibbs about Mary's letter, and to his own
angry astonishment he found it impossible to do anything except to scold
like a drudge-driver. "You better come down there with your mind made
up to hustle harder than the hardest workin'-man that's under you,
or you'll not get on very good with me, I tell you! The way to get
ahead--and you better set it down in your books--the way to get ahead is
to do ten times the work of the hardest worker that works FOR you. But
you don't know what work is, yet. All you've ever done was just stand
around and feed a machine a child could handle, and then come home
and take a bath and go callin'. I tell you you're up against a mighty
different proposition now, and if you're worth your salt--and you never
showed any signs of it yet--not any signs that stuck out enough to bang
somebody on the head and make 'em sit up and take notice--well, I want
to say, right here and now--and you better listen, because I want to say
just what I DO say. I say--"

He meandered to a full stop. His mouth hung open, and his mind was a
hopeless blank.

Bibbs looked up patiently--an old, old look. "Yes, father; I'm
listening."

"That's all," said Sheridan, frowning heavily. "That's all I came to
say, and you better see't you remember it!"

He shook his head warningly, and went out, closing the door behind him
with a crash. However, no sound of footsteps indicated his departure.
He stopped just outside the door, and stood there a minute or more.
Then abruptly he turned the knob and exhibited to his son a forehead
liberally covered with perspiration.

"Look here," he said, crossly. "That girl over yonder wrote Jim a
letter--"

"I know," said Bibbs. "She told me."

"Well, I thought you needn't feel so much upset about it--" The door
closed on his voice as he withdrew, but the conclusion of the sentence
was nevertheless audible--"if you knew she wouldn't have Jim, either."

And he stamped his way down-stairs to tell his wife to quit her frettin'
and not bother him with any more fool's errands. She was about to
inquire what Bibbs "said," but after a second thought she decided not
to speak at all. She merely murmured a wordless assent, and verbal
communication was given over between them for the rest of that
afternoon.

Bibbs and his father were gone when Mrs. Sheridan woke, the next
morning, and she had a dreary day. She missed Edith woefully, and she
worried about what might be taking place in the Sheridan Building. She
felt that everything depended on how Bibbs "took hold," and upon her
husband's return in the evening she seized upon the first opportunity
to ask him how things had gone. He was non-committal. What could anybody
tell by the first day? He'd seen plenty go at things well enough right
at the start and then blow up. Pretty near anybody could show up fair
the first day or so. There was a big job ahead. This material, such as
it was--Bibbs, in fact--had to be broken in to handling the work Roscoe
had done; and then, at least as an overseer, he must take Jim's position
in the Realty Company as well. He told her to ask him again in a month.

But during the course of dinner she gathered from some disjointed
remarks of his that he and Bibbs had lunched together at the small
restaurant where it had been Sheridan's custom to lunch with Jim, and
she took this to be an encouraging sign. Bibbs went to his room as soon
as they left the table, and her husband was not communicative after
reading his paper.

She became an anxious spectator of Bibbs's progress as a man of
business, although it was a progress she could glimpse but dimly and
only in the evening, through his remarks and his father's at dinner.
Usually Bibbs was silent, except when directly addressed, but on the
first evening of the third week of his new career he offered an opinion
which had apparently been the subject of previous argument.

"I'd like you to understand just what I meant about those storage-rooms,
father," he said, as Jackson placed his coffee before him. "Abercrombie
agreed with me, but you wouldn't listen to him."

"You can talk, if you want to, and I'll listen," Sheridan returned, "but
you can't show me that Jim ever took up with a bad thing. The roof
fell because it hadn't had time to settle and on account of weather
conditions. I want that building put just the way Jim planned it."

"You can't have it," said Bibbs. "You can't, because Jim planned for the
building to stand up, and it won't do it. The other one--the one that
didn't fall--is so shot with cracks we haven't dared use it for storage.
It won't stand weight. There's only one thing to do: get both buildings
down as quickly as we can, and build over. Brick's the best and cheapest
in the long run for that type."

Sheridan looked sarcastic. "Fine! What we goin' to do for storage-rooms
while we're waitin' for those few bricks to be laid?"

"Rent," Bibbs returned, promptly. "We'll lose money if we don't rent,
anyhow--they were waiting so long for you to give the warehouse matter
your attention after the roof fell. You don't know what an amount of
stuff they've got piled up on us over there. We'd have to rent until
we could patch up those process perils--and the Krivitch Manufacturing
Company's plant is empty, right across the street. I took an option on
it for us this morning."

Sheridan's expression was queer. "Look here!" he said, sharply. "Did you
go and do that without consulting me?"

"It didn't cost anything," said Bibbs. "It's only until to-morrow
afternoon at two o'clock. I undertook to convince you before then."

"Oh, you did?" Sheridan's tone was sardonic. "Well, just suppose you
couldn't convince me."

"I can, though--and I intend to," said Bibbs, quietly. "I don't think
you understand the condition of those buildings you want patched up."

"Now, see here," said Sheridan, with slow emphasis; "suppose I had my
mind set about this. JIM thought they'd stand, and suppose it was--well,
kind of a matter of sentiment with me to prove he was right."

Bibbs looked at him compassionately. "I'm sorry if you have a sentiment
about it, father," he said. "But whether you have or not can't make a
difference. You'll get other people hurt if you trust that process, and
that won't do. And if you want a monument to Jim, at least you want
one that will stand. Besides, I don't think you can reasonably defend
sentiment in this particular kind of affair."

"Oh, you don't?"

"No, but I'm sorry you didn't tell me you felt it."

Sheridan was puzzled by his son's tone. "Why are you 'sorry'?" he asked,
curiously.

"Because I had the building inspector up there, this noon," said Bibbs,
"and I had him condemn both those buildings."

"What?"

"He'd been afraid to do it before, until he heard from us--afraid you'd
see he lost his job. But he can't un-condemn them--they've got to come
down now."

Sheridan gave him a long and piercing stare from beneath lowered brows.
Finally he said, "How long did they give you on that option to convince
me?"

"Until two o'clock to-morrow afternoon."

"All right," said Sheridan, not relaxing. "I'm convinced."

Bibbs jumped up. "I thought you would be. I'll telephone the Krivitch
agent. He gave me the option until to-morrow, but I told him I'd settle
it this evening."

Sheridan gazed after him as he left the room, and then, though his
expression did not alter in the slightest, a sound came from him that
startled his wife. It had been a long time since she had heard anything
resembling a chuckle from him, and this sound--although it was grim and
dry--bore that resemblance.

She brightened eagerly. "Looks like he was startin' right well don't it,
papa?"

"Startin'? Lord! He got me on the hip! Why, HE knew what I
wanted--that's why he had the inspector up there, so't he'd have me beat
before we even started to talk about it. And did you hear him? 'Can't
reasonably defend SENTIMENT!' And the way he says 'Us': 'Took an option
for Us'! 'Stuff piled up on Us'!"

There was always an alloy for Mrs. Sheridan. "I don't just like the way
he looks, though, papa."

"Oh, there's got to be something! Only one chick left at home, so you
start to frettin' about IT!"

"No. He's changed. There's kind of a settish look to his face, and--"

"I guess that's the common sense comin' out on him, then," said
Sheridan. "You'll see symptoms like that in a good many business men, I
expect."

"Well, and he don't have as good color as he was gettin' before. And
he'd begun to fill out some, but--"

Sheridan gave forth another dry chuckle, and, going round the table to
her, patted her upon the shoulder with his left hand, his right being
still heavily bandaged, though he no longer wore a sling. "That's the
way it is with you, mamma--got to take your frettin' out one way if you
don't another!"

"No. He don't look well. It ain't exactly the way he looked when he
begun to get sick that time, but he kind o' seems to be losin', some
way."

"Yes, he may 'a' lost something," said Sheridan. "I expect he's lost a
whole lot o' foolishness besides his God-forsaken notions about writin'
poetry and--"

"No," his wife persisted. "I mean he looks right peakid. And yesterday,
when he was settin' with us, he kept lookin' out the window. He wasn't
readin'."

"Well, why shouldn't he look out the window?"

"He was lookin' over there. He never read a word all afternoon, I don't
believe."

"Look, here!" said Sheridan. "Bibbs might 'a' kept goin' on over there
the rest of his life, moonin' on and on, but what he heard Sibyl say did
one big thing, anyway. It woke him up out of his trance. Well, he had
to go and bust clean out with a bang; and that stopped his goin' over
there, and it stopped his poetry, but I reckon he's begun to get pretty
fair pay for what he lost. I guess a good many young men have had to get
over worries like his; they got to lose SOMETHING if they're goin'
to keep ahead o' the procession nowadays--and it kind o' looks to me,
mamma, like Bibbs might keep quite a considerable long way ahead. Why, a
year from now I'll bet you he won't know there ever WAS such a thing as
poetry! And ain't he funny? He wanted to stick to the shop so's he could
'think'! What he meant was, think about something useless. Well, I guess
he's keepin' his mind pretty occupied the other way these days. Yes,
sir, it took a pretty fair-sized shock to get him out of his trance, but
it certainly did the business." He patted his wife's shoulder again, and
then, without any prefatory symptoms, broke into a boisterous laugh.

"Honest, mamma, he works like a gorilla!"



CHAPTER XXI

And so Bibbs sat in the porch of the temple with the money-changers. But
no one came to scourge him forth, for this was the temple of Bigness,
and the changing of money was holy worship and true religion. The
priests wore that "settish" look Bibbs's mother had seen beginning
to develop about his mouth and eyes--a wary look which she could not
define, but it comes with service at the temple; and it was the more
marked upon Bibbs for his sharp awakening to the necessities of that
service.

He did as little "useless" thinking as possible, giving himself no time
for it. He worked continuously, keeping his thoughts still on his work
when he came home at night; and he talked of nothing whatever except his
work. But he did not sing at it. He was often in the streets, and people
were not allowed to sing in the streets. They might make any manner of
hideous uproar--they could shake buildings; they could out-thunder the
thunder, deafen the deaf, and kill the sick with noise; or they
could walk the streets or drive through them bawling, squawking, or
screeching, as they chose, if the noise was traceably connected with
business; though street musicians were not tolerated, being considered
a nuisance and an interference. A man or woman who went singing for
pleasure through the streets--like a crazy Neopolitan--would have been
stopped, and belike locked up; for Freedom does not mean that a citizen
is allowed to do every outrageous thing that comes into his head. The
streets were dangerous enough, in all conscience, without any singing!
and the Motor Federation issued public warnings declaring that the
pedestrian's life was in his own hands, and giving directions how to
proceed with the least peril. However, Bibbs Sheridan had no desire to
sing in the streets, or anywhere. He had gone to his work with an energy
that, for the start, at least, was bitter, and there was no song left in
him.

He began to know his active fellow-citizens. Here and there among
them he found a leisurely, kind soul, a relic of the old period
of neighborliness, "pioneer stock," usually; and there were
men--particularly among the merchants and manufacturers--"so honest they
leaned backward"; reputations sometimes attested by stories of heroic
sacrifices to honor; nor were there lacking some instances of generosity
even nobler. Here and there, too, were book-men, in their little
leisure; and, among the Germans, music-men. And these, with the others,
worshiped Bigness and the growth, each man serving for his own sake and
for what he could get out of it, but all united in their faith in the
beneficence and glory of their god.

To almost all alike that service stood as the most important thing in
life, except on occasion of some such vital, brief interregnum as the
dangerous illness of a wife or child. In the way of "relaxation" some of
the servers took golf; some took fishing; some took "shows"--a mixture
of infantile and negroid humor, stockings, and tin music; some took
an occasional debauch; some took trips; some took cards; and some took
nothing. The high priests were vigilant to watch that no "relaxation"
should affect the service. When a man attended to anything outside his
business, eyes were upon him; his credit was in danger--that is, his
life was in danger. And the old priests were as ardent as the young
ones; the million was as eager to be bigger as the thousand; seventy was
as busy as seventeen. They strove mightily against one another, and
the old priests were the most wary, the most plausible, and the most
dangerous. Bibbs learned he must walk charily among these--he must wear
a thousand eyes and beware of spiders indeed!

And outside the temple itself were the pretenders, the swarming thieves
and sharpers and fleecers, the sly rascals and the open rascals; but
these were feeble folk, not dangerous once he knew them, and he had
a good guide to point them out to him. They were useful sometimes,
he learned, and many of them served as go-betweens in matters where
business must touch politics. He learned also how breweries and
"traction" companies and banks and other institutions fought one another
for the political control of the city. The newspapers, he discovered,
had lost their ancient political influence, especially with the knowing,
who looked upon them with a skeptical humor, believing the journals
either to be retained partisans, like lawyers, or else striving to
forward the personal ambitions of their owners. The control of the city
lay not with them, but was usually obtained by giving the hordes of
negroes gin-money, and by other largesses. The revenues of the people
were then distributed as fairly as possible among a great number of men
who had assisted the winning side. Names and titles of offices went with
many of the prizes, and most of these title-holders were expected to
present a busy appearance at times; and, indeed, some among them did
work honestly and faithfully.

Bibbs had been very ignorant. All these simple things, so well known
and customary, astonished him at first, and once--in a brief moment
of forgetting that he was done with writing--he thought that if he had
known them and written of them, how like a satire the plainest relation
of them must have seemed! Strangest of all to him was the vehement and
sincere patriotism. On every side he heard it--it was a permeation; the
newest school-child caught it, though just from Hungary and learning to
stammer a few words of the local language. Everywhere the people shouted
of the power, the size, the riches, and the growth of their city. Not
only that, they said that the people of their city were the greatest,
the "finest," the strongest, the Biggest people on earth. They cited no
authorities, and felt the need of none, being themselves the people thus
celebrated. And if the thing was questioned, or if it was hinted that
there might be one small virtue in which they were not perfect and
supreme, they wasted no time examining themselves to see if what the
critic said was true, but fell upon him and hooted him and cursed him,
for they were sensitive. So Bibbs, learning their ways and walking with
them, harkened to the voice of the people and served Bigness with them.
For the voice of the people is the voice of their god.


Sheridan had made the room next to his own into an office for Bibbs,
and the door between the two rooms usually stood open--the father had
established that intimacy. One morning in February, when Bibbs was
alone, Sheridan came in, some sheets of typewritten memoranda in his
hand.

"Bibbs," he said, "I don't like to butt in very often this way, and when
I do I usually wish I hadn't--but for Heaven's sake what have you been
buying that ole busted inter-traction stock for?"

Bibbs leaned back from his desk. "For eleven hundred and fifty-five
dollars. That's all it cost."

"Well, it ain't worth eleven hundred and fifty-five cents. You ought to
know that. I don't get your idea. That stuff's deader'n Adam's cat!"

"It might be worth something--some day."

"How?"

"It mightn't be so dead--not if we went into it," said Bibbs, coolly.

"Oh!" Sheridan considered this musingly; then he said, "Who'd you buy it
from?"

"A broker--Fansmith."

"Well, he must 'a' got it from one o' the crowd o' poor ninnies that was
soaked with it. Don't you know who owned it?"

"Yes, I do."

"Ain't sayin', though? That it? What's the matter?"

"It belonged to Mr. Vertrees," said Bibbs, shortly, applying himself to
his desk.

"So!" Sheridan gazed down at his son's thin face. "Excuse me," he said.
"Your business." And he went back to his own room. But presently he
looked in again.

"I reckon you won't mind lunchin' alone to-day"--he was shuffling
himself into his overcoat--"because I just thought I'd go up to the
house and get THIS over with mamma." He glanced apologetically toward
his right hand as it emerged from the sleeve of the overcoat. The
bandages had been removed, finally, that morning, revealing but three
fingers--the forefinger and the finger next to it had been amputated.
"She's bound to make an awful fuss, and better to spoil her lunch than
her dinner. I'll be back about two."

But he calculated the time of his arrival at the New House so accurately
that Mrs. Sheridan's lunch was not disturbed, and she was rising from
the lonely table when he came into the dining-room. He had left his
overcoat in the hall, but he kept his hands in his trousers pockets.

"What's the matter, papa?" she asked, quickly. "Has anything gone wrong?
You ain't sick?"

"Me!" He laughed loudly. "Me SICK?"

"You had lunch?"

"Didn't want any to-day. You can give me a cup o' coffee, though."

She rang, and told George to have coffee made, and when he had withdrawn
she said querulously, "I just know there's something wrong."

"Nothin' in the world," he responded, heartily, taking a seat at the
head of the table. "I thought I'd talk over a notion o' mine with you,
that's all. It's more women-folks' business than what it is man's,
anyhow."

"What about?"

"Why, ole Doc Gurney was up at the office this morning awhile--"

"To look at your hand? How's he say it's doin'?"

"Fine! Well, he went in and sat around with Bibbs awhile--"

Mrs. Sheridan nodded pessimistically. "I guess it's time you had him,
too. I KNEW Bibbs--"

"Now, mamma, hold your horses! I wanted him to look Bibbs over BEFORE
anything's the matter. You don't suppose I'm goin' to take any chances
with BIBBS, do you? Well, afterwards, I shut the door, and I an' ole
Gurney had a talk. He's a mighty disagreeable man; he rubbed it in on
me what he said about Bibbs havin' brains if he ever woke up. Then
I thought he must want to get something out o' me, he got so
flattering--for a minute! 'Bibbs couldn't help havin' business brains,'
he says, 'bein' YOUR son. Don't be surprised,' he says--'don't be
surprised at his makin' a success,' he says. 'He couldn't get over his
heredity; he couldn't HELP bein' a business success--once you got him
into it. It's in his blood. Yes, sir' he says, 'it doesn't need MUCH
brains,' he says, 'an only third-rate brains, at that,' he says, 'but
it does need a special KIND o' brains,' he says, 'to be a millionaire.
I mean,' he says, 'when a man's given a start. If nobody gives him a
start, why, course he's got to have luck AND the right kind o' brains.
The only miracle about Bibbs,' he says, 'is where he got the OTHER kind
o' brains--the brains you made him quit usin' and throw away.'"

"But what'd he say about his health?" Mrs. Sheridan demanded,
impatiently, as George placed a cup of coffee before her husband.
Sheridan helped himself to cream and sugar, and began to sip the coffee.

"I'm comin' to that," he returned, placidly. "See how easy I manage this
cup with my left hand, mamma?"

"You been doin' that all winter. What did--"

"It's wonderful," he interrupted, admiringly, "what a fellow can do with
his left hand. I can sign my name with mine now, well's I ever could
with my right. It came a little hard at first, but now, honest, I
believe I RATHER sign with my left. That's all I ever have to write,
anyway--just the signature. Rest's all dictatin'." He blew across the
top of the cup unctuously. "Good coffee, mamma! Well, about Bibbs. Ole
Gurney says he believes if Bibbs could somehow get back to the state o'
mind he was in about the machine-shop--that is, if he could some way get
to feelin' about business the way he felt about the shop--not the poetry
and writin' part, but--" He paused, supplementing his remarks with a
motion of his head toward the old house next door. "He says Bibbs
is older and harder'n what he was when he broke down that time, and
besides, he ain't the kind o' dreamy way he was then--and I should
say he AIN'T! I'd like 'em to show ME anybody his age that's any wider
awake! But he says Bibbs's health never need bother us again if--"

Mrs. Sheridan shook her head. "I don't see any help THAT way. You know
yourself she wouldn't have Jim."

"Who's talkin' about her havin' anybody? But, my Lord! she might let him
LOOK at her! She needn't 'a' got so mad, just because he asked her, that
she won't let him come in the house any more. He's a mighty funny boy,
and some ways I reckon he's pretty near as hard to understand as the
Bible, but Gurney kind o' got me in the way o' thinkin' that if
she'd let him come back and set around with her an evening or two
sometimes--not reg'lar, I don't mean--why--Well, I just thought I'd see
what YOU'D think of it. There ain't any way to talk about it to Bibbs
himself--I don't suppose he'd let you, anyhow--but I thought maybe you
could kind o' slip over there some day, and sort o' fix up to have a
little talk with her, and kind o' hint around till you see how the land
lays, and ask her--"

"ME!" Mrs. Sheridan looked both helpless and frightened. "No." She shook
her head decidedly. "It wouldn't do any good."

"You won't try it?"

"I won't risk her turnin' me out o' the house. Some way, that's what I
believe she did to Sibyl, from what Roscoe said once. No, I CAN'T--and,
what's more, it'd only make things worse. If people find out you're
runnin' after 'em they think you're cheap, and then they won't do as
much for you as if you let 'em alone. I don't believe it's any use, and
I couldn't do it if it was."

He sighed with resignation. "All right, mamma. That's all." Then, in a
livelier tone, he said: "Ole Gurney took the bandages off my hand this
morning. All healed up. Says I don't need 'em any more."

"Why, that's splendid, papa!" she cried, beaming. "I was afraid--Let's
see."

She came toward him, but he rose, still keeping his hand in his pocket.
"Wait a minute," he said, smiling. "Now it may give you just a teeny bit
of a shock, but the fact is--well, you remember that Sunday when Sibyl
came over here and made all that fuss about nothin'--it was the day
after I got tired o' that statue when Edith's telegram came--"

"Let me see your hand!" she cried.

"Now wait!" he said, laughing and pushing her away with his left hand.
"The truth is, mamma, that I kind o' slipped out on you that morning,
when you wasn't lookin', and went down to ole Gurney's office--he'd told
me to, you see--and, well, it doesn't AMOUNT to anything." And he held
out, for her inspection, the mutilated hand. "You see, these days when
it's all dictatin', anyhow, nobody'd mind just a couple o'--"

He had to jump for her--she went over backward. For the second time in
her life Mrs. Sheridan fainted.



CHAPTER XXXII

It was a full hour later when he left her lying upon a couch in her own
room, still lamenting intermittently, though he assured her with heat
that the "fuss" she was making irked him far more than his physical
loss. He permitted her to think that he meant to return directly to his
office, but when he came out to the open air he told the chauffeur in
attendance to await him in front of Mr. Vertrees's house, whither he
himself proceeded on foot.

Mr. Vertrees had taken the sale of half of his worthless stock as
manna in the wilderness; it came from heaven--by what agency he did
not particularly question. The broker informed him that "parties were
interested in getting hold of the stock," and that later there might
be a possible increase in the value of the large amount retained by his
client. It might go "quite a ways up" within a year or so, he said, and
he advised "sitting tight" with it. Mr. Vertrees went home and prayed.

He rose from his knees feeling that he was surely coming into his own
again. It was more than a mere gasp of temporary relief with him, and
his wife shared his optimism; but Mary would not let him buy back her
piano, and as for furs--spring was on the way, she said. But they paid
the butcher, the baker, and the candlestick-maker, and hired a cook
once more. It was this servitress who opened the door for Sheridan and
presently assured him that Miss Vertrees would "be down."

He was not the man to conceal admiration when he felt it, and he flushed
and beamed as Mary made her appearance, almost upon the heels of the
cook. She had a look of apprehension for the first fraction of a second,
but it vanished at the sight of him, and its place was taken in her eyes
by a soft brilliance, while color rushed in her cheeks.

"Don't be surprised," he said. "Truth is, in a way it's sort of on
business I looked in here. It'll only take a minute, I expect."

"I'm sorry," said Mary. "I hoped you'd come because we're neighbors."

He chuckled. "Neighbors! Sometimes people don't see so much o' their
neighbors as they used to. That is, I hear so--lately."

"You'll stay long enough to sit down, won't you?"

"I guess I could manage that much." And they sat down, facing each other
and not far apart.

"Of course, it couldn't be called business, exactly," he said, more
gravely. "Not at all, I expect. But there's something o' yours it seemed
to me I ought to give you, and I just thought it was better to bring it
myself and explain how I happened to have it. It's this--this letter you
wrote my boy." He extended the letter to her solemnly, in his left hand,
and she took it gently from him. "It was in his mail, after he was hurt.
You knew he never got it, I expect."

"Yes," she said, in a low voice.

He sighed. "I'm glad he didn't. Not," he added, quickly--"not but what
you did just right to send it. You did. You couldn't acted any other way
when it came right down TO it. There ain't any blame comin' to you--you
were above-board all through."

Mary said, "Thank you," almost in a whisper, and with her head bowed
low.

"You'll have to excuse me for readin' it. I had to take charge of all
his mail and everything; I didn't know the handwritin', and I read it
all--once I got started."

"I'm glad you did."

"Well"--he leaned forward as if to rise--"I guess that's about all. I
just thought you ought to have it."

"Thank you for bringing it."

He looked at her hopefully, as if he thought and wished that she might
have something more to say. But she seemed not to be aware of this
glance, and sat with her eyes fixed sorrowfully upon the floor.

"Well, I expect I better be gettin' back to the office," he said, rising
desperately. "I told--I told my partner I'd be back at two o'clock,
and I guess he'll think I'm a poor business man if he catches me behind
time. I got to walk the chalk a mighty straight line these days--with
THAT fellow keepin' tabs on me!"

Mary rose with him. "I've always heard YOU were the hard driver."

He guffawed derisively. "Me? I'm nothin' to that partner o' mine. You
couldn't guess to save your life how he keeps after me to hold up my end
o' the job. I shouldn't be surprised he'd give me the grand bounce some
day, and run the whole circus by himself. You know how he is--once he
goes AT a thing!"

"No," she smiled. "I didn't know you had a partner. I'd always heard--"

He laughed, looking away from her. "It's just my way o' speakin' o' that
boy o' mine, Bibbs."

He stood then, expectant, staring out into the hall with an air of
careless geniality. He felt that she certainly must at least say, "How
IS Bibbs?" but she said nothing at all, though he waited until the
silence became embarrassing.

"Well, I guess I better be gettin' down there," he said, at last. "He
might worry."

"Good-by--and thank you," said Mary.

"For what?"

"For the letter."

"Oh," he said, blankly. "You're welcome. Good-by."

Mary put out her hand. "Good-by."

"You'll have to excuse my left hand," he said. "I had a little accident
to the other one."

She gave a pitying cry as she saw. "Oh, poor Mr. Sheridan!"

"Nothin' at all! Dictate everything nowadays, anyhow." He laughed
jovially. "Did anybody tell you how it happened?"

"I heard you hurt your hand, but no--not just how."

"It was this way," he began, and both, as if unconsciously, sat down
again. "You may not know it, but I used to worry a good deal about the
youngest o' my boys--the one that used to come to see you sometimes,
after Jim--that is, I mean Bibbs. He's the one I spoke of as my partner;
and the truth is that's what it's just about goin' to amount to, one o'
these days--if his health holds out. Well, you remember, I expect, I
had him on a machine over at a plant o' mine; and sometimes I'd kind o'
sneak in there and see how he was gettin' along. Take a doctor with me
sometimes, because Bibbs never WAS so robust, you might say. Ole Doc
Gurney--I guess maybe you know him? Tall, thin man; acts sleepy--"

"Yes."

"Well, one day I an' ole Doc Gurney, we were in there, and I undertook
to show Bibbs how to run his machine. He told me to look out, but I
wouldn't listen, and I didn't look out--and that's how I got my hand
hurt, tryin' to show Bibbs how to do something he knew how to do and
I didn't. Made me so mad I just wouldn't even admit to myself it WAS
hurt--and so, by and by, ole Doc Gurney had to take kind o' radical
measures with me. He's a right good doctor, too. Don't you think so,
Miss Vertrees?"

"Yes."

"Yes, he is so!" Sheridan now had the air of a rambling talker and
gossip with all day on his hands. "Take him on Bibbs's case. I was
talkin' about Bibbs's case with him this morning. Well, you'd laugh to
hear the way ole Gurney talks about THAT! 'Course he IS just as much a
friend as he is doctor--and he takes as much interest in Bibbs as if
he was in the family. He says Bibbs isn't anyways bad off YET; and
he thinks he could stand the pace and get fat on it if--well, this is
what'd made YOU laugh if you'd been there, Miss Vertrees--honest it
would!" He paused to chuckle, and stole a glance at her. She was gazing
straight before her at the wall; her lips were parted, and--visibly--she
was breathing heavily and quickly. He feared that she was growing
furiously angry; but he had led to what he wanted to say, and he went
on, determined now to say it all. He leaned forward and altered his
voice to one of confidential friendliness, though in it he still
maintained a tone which indicated that ole Doc Gurney's opinion was only
a joke he shared with her. "Yes, sir, you certainly would 'a' laughed!
Why, that ole man thinks YOU got something to do with it. You'll have to
blame it on him, young lady, if it makes you feel like startin' out
to whip somebody! He's actually got THIS theory: he says Bibbs got to
gettin' better while he worked over there at the shop because you kept
him cheered up and feelin' good. And he says if you could manage to
just stand him hangin' around a little--maybe not much, but just
SOMEtimes--again, he believed it'd do Bibbs a mighty lot o' good.
'Course, that's only what the doctor said. Me, I don't know anything
about that; but I can say this much--I never saw any such a MENTAL
improvement in anybody in my life as I have lately in Bibbs. I expect
you'd find him a good deal more entertaining than what he used to
be--and I know it's a kind of embarrassing thing to suggest after the
way he piled in over here that day to ask you to stand up before the
preacher with him, but accordin' to ole Doc GURNEY, he's got you on his
brain so bad--"

Mary jumped. "Mr. Sheridan!" she exclaimed.

He sighed profoundly. "There! I noticed you were gettin' mad. I
didn't--"

"No, no, no!" she cried. "But I don't understand--and I think you don't.
What is it you want me to do?"

He sighed again, but this time with relief. "Well, well!" he said.
"You're right. It'll be easier to talk plain. I ought to known I could
with you, all the time. I just hoped you'd let that boy come and see you
sometimes, once more. Could you?"

"You don't understand." She clasped her hands together in a sorrowful
gesture. "Yes, we must talk plain. Bibbs heard that I'd tried to make
your oldest son care for me because I was poor, and so Bibbs came and
asked me to marry him--because he was sorry for me. And I CAN'T see him
any more," she cried in distress. "I CAN'T!"

Sheridan cleared his throat uncomfortably. "You mean because he thought
that about you?"

"No, no! What he thought was TRUE!"

"Well--you mean he was so much in--you mean he thought so much of you--"
The words were inconceivably awkward upon Sheridan's tongue; he seemed
to be in doubt even about pronouncing them, but after a ghastly pause he
bravely repeated them. "You mean he thought so much of you that you just
couldn't stand him around?"

"NO! He was sorry for me. He cared for me; he was fond of me; and he'd
respected me--too much! In the finest way he loved me, if you like, and
he'd have done anything on earth for me, as I would for him, and as he
knew I would. It was beautiful, Mr. Sheridan," she said. "But the cheap,
bad things one has done seem always to come back--they wait, and pull
you down when you're happiest. Bibbs found me out, you see; and he
wasn't 'in love' with me at all."

"He wasn't? Well, it seems to me he gave up everything he wanted to
do--it was fool stuff, but he certainly wanted it mighty bad--he just
threw it away and walked right up and took the job he swore he never
would--just for you. And it looks to me as if a man that'd do that
must think quite a heap o' the girl he does it for! You say it was only
because he was sorry, but let me tell you there's only ONE girl he could
feel THAT sorry for! Yes, sir!"

"No, no," she said. "Bibbs isn't like other men--he would do anything
for anybody."

Sheridan grinned. "Perhaps not so much as you think, nowadays," he
said. "For instance, I got kind of a suspicion he doesn't believe in
'sentiment in business.' But that's neither here nor there. What he
wanted was, just plain and simple, for you to marry him. Well, I was
afraid his thinkin' so much OF you had kind o' sickened you of him--the
way it does sometimes. But from the way you talk, I understand that
ain't the trouble." He coughed, and his voice trembled a little. "Now
here, Miss Vertrees, I don't have to tell you--because you see things
easy--I know I got no business comin' to you like this, but I had to
make Bibbs go my way instead of his own--I had to do it for the sake o'
my business and on his own account, too--and I expect you got some idea
how it hurt him to give up. Well, he's made good. He didn't come in
half-hearted or mean; he came in--all the way! But there isn't anything
in it to him; you can see he's just shut his teeth on it and goin' ahead
with dust in his mouth. You see, one way of lookin' at it, he's
got nothin' to work FOR. And it seems to me like it cost him your
friendship, and I believe--honest--that's what hurt him the worst. Now
you said we'd talk plain. Why can't you let him come back?"

She covered her face desperately with her hands. "I can't!"

He rose, defeated, and looking it.

"Well, I mustn't press you," he said, gently.

At that she cried out, and dropped her hands and let him see her face.
"Ah! He was only sorry for me!"

He gazed at her intently. Mary was proud, but she had a fatal honesty,
and it confessed the truth of her now; she was helpless. It was so clear
that even Sheridan, marveling and amazed, was able to see it. Then a
change came over him; gloom fell from him, and he grew radiant.

"Don't! Don't" she cried. "You mustn't--"

"I won't tell him," said Sheridan, from the doorway. "I won't tell
anybody anything!"



CHAPTER XXXIII

There was a heavy town-fog that afternoon, a smoke-mist, densest in the
sanctuary of the temple. The people went about in it, busy and dirty,
thickening their outside and inside linings of coal-tar, asphalt,
sulphurous acid, oil of vitriol, and the other familiar things the men
liked to breathe and to have upon their skins and garments and upon
their wives and babies and sweethearts. The growth of the city was
visible in the smoke and the noise and the rush. There was more smoke
than there had been this day of February a year earlier; there was more
noise; and the crowds were thicker--yet quicker in spite of that. The
traffic policeman had a hard time, for the people were independent--they
retained some habits of the old market-town period, and would cross
the street anywhere and anyhow, which not only got them killed more
frequently than if they clung to the legal crossings, but kept the
motormen, the chauffeurs, and the truck-drivers in a stew of profane
nervousness. So the traffic policemen led harried lives; they themselves
were killed, of course, with a certain periodicity, but their main
trouble was that they could not make the citizens realize that it was
actually and mortally perilous to go about their city. It was strange,
for there were probably no citizens of any length of residence who had
not personally known either some one who had been killed or injured in
an accident, or some one who had accidentally killed or injured others.
And yet, perhaps it was not strange, seeing the sharp preoccupation of
the faces--the people had something on their minds; they could not stop
to bother about dirt and danger.

Mary Vertrees was not often down-town; she had never seen an accident
until this afternoon. She had come upon errands for her mother connected
with a timorous refurbishment; and as she did these, in and out of the
department stores, she had an insistent consciousness of the Sheridan
Building. From the street, anywhere, it was almost always in sight, like
some monstrous geometrical shadow, murk-colored and rising limitlessly
into the swimming heights of the smoke-mist. It was gaunt and grimy
and repellent; it had nothing but strength and size--but in that
consciousness of Mary's the great structure may have partaken of beauty.
Sheridan had made some of the things he said emphatic enough to remain
with her. She went over and over them--and they began to seem true:
"Only ONE girl he could feel THAT sorry for!" "Gurney says he's got you
on his brain so bad--" The man's clumsy talk began to sing in her heart.
The song was begun there when she saw the accident.

She was directly opposite the Sheridan Building then, waiting for the
traffic to thin before she crossed, though other people were risking the
passage, darting and halting and dodging parlously. Two men came from
the crowd behind her, talking earnestly, and started across. Both wore
black; one was tall and broad and thick, and the other was taller, but
noticeably slender. And Mary caught her breath, for they were Bibbs and
his father. They did not see her, and she caught a phrase in Bibbs's
mellow voice, which had taken a crisper ring: "Sixty-eight thousand
dollars? Not sixty-eight thousand buttons!" It startled her queerly,
and as there was a glimpse of his profile she saw for the first time a
resemblance to his father.

She watched them. In the middle of the street Bibbs had to step ahead
of his father, and the two were separated. But the reckless passing of
a truck, beyond the second line of rails, frightened a group of country
women who were in course of passage; they were just in front of Bibbs,
and shoved backward upon him violently. To extricate himself from them
he stepped back, directly in front of a moving trolley-car--no place for
absent-mindedness, but Bibbs was still absorbed in thoughts concerned
with what he had been saying to his father. There were shrieks and
yells; Bibbs looked the wrong way--and then Mary saw the heavy figure
of Sheridan plunge straight forward in front of the car. With
absolute disregard of his own life, he hurled himself at Bibbs like a
football-player shunting off an opponent, and to Mary it seemed
that they both went down together. But that was all she could
see--automobiles, trucks, and wagons closed in between. She made out
that the trolley-car stopped jerkily, and she saw a policeman breaking
his way through the instantly condensing crowd, while the traffic came
to a standstill, and people stood up in automobiles or climbed upon
the hubs and tires of wheels, not to miss a chance of seeing anything
horrible.

Mary tried to get through; it was impossible. Other policemen came to
help the first, and in a minute or two the traffic was in motion again.
The crowd became pliant, dispersing--there was no figure upon the
ground, and no ambulance came. But one of the policemen was detained by
the clinging and beseeching of a gloved hand.

"What IS the matter, lady?"

"Where are they?" Mary cried.

"Who? Ole man Sheridan? I reckon HE wasn't much hurt!"

"His SON--"

"Was that who the other one was? I seen him knock him--oh, he's not bad
off, I guess, lady. The ole man got him out of the way all right. The
fender shoved the ole man around some, but I reckon he only got shook
up. They both went on in the Sheridan Building without any help. Excuse
me, lady."

Sheridan and Bibbs, in fact, were at that moment in the elevator,
ascending. "Whisk-broom up in the office," Sheridan was saying. "You got
to look out on those corners nowadays, I tell you. I don't know I got
any call to blow, though--because I tried to cross after you did. That's
how I happened to run into you. Well, you want to remember to look out
after this. We were talkin' about Murtrie's askin' sixty-eight thousand
flat for that ninety-nine-year lease. It's his lookout if he'd rather
take it that way, and I don't know but--"

"No," said Bibbs, emphatically, as the elevator stopped; "he won't get
it. Not from us, he won't, and I'll show you why. I can convince you
in five minutes." He followed his father into the office anteroom--and
convinced him. Then, having been diligently brushed by a youth of color,
Bibbs went into his own room and closed the door.

He was more shaken than he had allowed his father to perceive, and his
side was sore where Sheridan had struck him. He desired to be alone; he
wanted to rub himself and, for once, to do some useless thinking again.
He knew that his father had not "happened" to run into him; he knew that
Sheridan had instantly--and instinctively--proved that he held his own
life of no account whatever compared to that of his son and heir. Bibbs
had been unable to speak of that, or to seem to know it; for Sheridan,
just as instinctively, had swept the matter aside--as of no importance,
since all was well--reverting immediately to business.

Bibbs began to think intently of his father. He perceived, as he
had never perceived before, the shadowing of something enormous and
indomitable--and lawless; not to be daunted by the will of nature's
very self; laughing at the lightning and at wounds and mutilation;
conquering, irresistible--and blindly noble. For the first time in his
life Bibbs began to understand the meaning of being truly this man's
son.

He would be the more truly his son henceforth, though, as Sheridan said,
Bibbs had not come down-town with him meanly or half-heartedly. He
had given his word because he had wanted the money, simply, for Mary
Vertrees in her need. And he shivered with horror of himself, thinking
how he had gone to her to offer it, asking her to marry him--with his
head on his breast in shameful fear that she would accept him! He had
not known her; the knowing had lost her to him, and this had been his
real awakening; for he knew now how deep had been that slumber wherein
he dreamily celebrated the superiority of "friendship"! The sleep-walker
had wakened to bitter knowledge of love and life, finding himself a
failure in both. He had made a burnt offering of his dreams, and the
sacrifice had been an unforgivable hurt to Mary. All that was left for
him was the work he had not chosen, but at least he would not fail in
that, though it was indeed no more than "dust in his mouth." If there
had been anything "to work for--"

He went to the window, raised it, and let in the uproar of the streets
below. He looked down at the blurred, hurrying swarms and he looked
across, over the roofs with their panting jets of vapor, into the vast,
foggy heart of the smoke. Dizzy traceries of steel were rising dimly
against it, chattering with steel on steel, and screeching in steam,
while tiny figures of men walked on threads in the dull sky. Buildings
would overtop the Sheridan. Bigness was being served.

But what for? The old question came to Bibbs with a new despair. Here,
where his eyes fell, had once been green fields and running brooks, and
how had the kind earth been despoiled and disfigured! The pioneers had
begun the work, but in their old age their orators had said for them
that they had toiled and risked and sacrificed that their posterity
might live in peace and wisdom, enjoying the fruits of the earth. Well,
their posterity was here--and there was only turmoil. Where was the
promised land? It had been promised by the soldiers of all the wars; it
had been promised to this generation by the pioneers; but here was the
very posterity to whom it had been promised, toiling and risking and
sacrificing in turn--for what?

The harsh roar of the city came in through the open window, continuously
beating upon Bibbs's ear until he began to distinguish a pulsation in
it--a broken and irregular cadence. It seemed to him that it was like
a titanic voice, discordant, hoarse, rustily metallic--the voice of
the god, Bigness. And the voice summoned Bibbs as it summoned all its
servants.

"Come and work!" it seemed to yell. "Come and work for Me, all men! By
your youth and your hope I summon you! By your age and your despair I
summon you to work for Me yet a little, with what strength you have. By
your love of home I summon you! By your love of woman I summon you! By
your hope of children I summon you!

"You shall be blind slaves of Mine, blind to everything but Me, your
Master and Driver! For your reward you shall gaze only upon my ugliness.
You shall give your toil and your lives, you shall go mad for love and
worship of my ugliness! You shall perish still worshipping Me, and your
children shall perish knowing no other god!"

And then, as Bibbs closed the window down tight, he heard his father's
voice booming in the next room; he could not distinguish the words but
the tone was exultant--and there came the THUMP! THUMP! of the maimed
hand. Bibbs guessed that Sheridan was bragging of the city and of
Bigness to some visitor from out-of-town.

And he thought how truly Sheridan was the high priest of Bigness. But
with the old, old thought again, "What for?" Bibbs caught a glimmer of
far, faint light. He saw that Sheridan had all his life struggled
and conquered, and must all his life go on struggling and inevitably
conquering, as part of a vast impulse not his own. Sheridan served
blindly--but was the impulse blind? Bibbs asked himself if it was not
he who had been in the greater hurry, after all. The kiln must be fired
before the vase is glazed, and the Acropolis was not crowned with marble
in a day.

Then the voice came to him again, but there was a strain in it as of
some high music struggling to be born of the turmoil. "Ugly I am," it
seemed to say to him, "but never forget that I AM a god!" And the voice
grew in sonorousness and in dignity. "The highest should serve, but so
long as you worship me for my own sake I will not serve you. It is man
who makes me ugly, by his worship of me. If man would let me serve him,
I should be beautiful!"

Looking once more from the window, Bibbs sculptured for himself--in
the vague contortions of the smoke and fog above the roofs--a gigantic
figure with feet pedestaled upon the great buildings and shoulders
disappearing in the clouds, a colossus of steel and wholly blackened
with soot. But Bibbs carried his fancy further--for there was still a
little poet lingering in the back of his head--and he thought that up
over the clouds, unseen from below, the giant labored with his hands
in the clean sunshine; and Bibbs had a glimpse of what he made
there--perhaps for a fellowship of the children of the children that
were children now--a noble and joyous city, unbelievably white--

It was the telephone that called him from his vision. It rang fiercely.

He lifted the thing from his desk and answered--and as the small voice
inside it spoke he dropped the receiver with a crash. He trembled
violently as he picked it up, but he told himself he was wrong--he had
been mistaken--yet it was a startlingly beautiful voice; startlingly
kind, too, and ineffably like the one he hungered most to hear.

"Who?" he said, his own voice shaking--like his hand.

"Mary."

He responded with two hushed and incredulous words: "IS IT?"

There was a little thrill of pathetic half-laughter in the instrument.
"Bibbs--I wanted to--just to see if you--"

"Yes--Mary?"

"I was looking when you were so nearly run over. I saw it, Bibbs.
They said you hadn't been hurt, they thought, but I wanted to know for
myself."

"No, no, I wasn't hurt at all--Mary. It was father who came nearer it.
He saved me."

"Yes, I saw; but you had fallen. I couldn't get through the crowd until
you had gone. And I wanted to KNOW."

"Mary--would you--have minded?" he said.

There was a long interval before she answered.

"Yes."

"Then why--"

"Yes, Bibbs?"

"I don't know what to say," he cried. "It's so wonderful to hear your
voice again--I'm shaking, Mary--I--I don't know--I don't know anything
except that I AM talking to you! It IS you--Mary?"

"Yes, Bibbs!"

"Mary--I've seen you from my window at home--only five times since
I--since then. You looked--oh, how can I tell you? It was like a man
chained in a cave catching a glimpse of the blue sky, Mary. Mary, won't
you--let me see you again--near? I think I could make you really forgive
me--you'd have to--"

"I DID--then."

"No--not really--or you wouldn't have said you couldn't see me any
more."

"That wasn't the reason." The voice was very low.

"Mary," he said, even more tremulously than before, "I can't--you
COULDN'T mean it was because--you can't mean it was because you--care?"

There was no answer.

"Mary?" he called, huskily. "If you mean THAT--you'd let me see
you--wouldn't you?"

And now the voice was so low he could not be sure it spoke at all, but
if it did, the words were, "Yes, Bibbs--dear."

But the voice was not in the instrument--it was so gentle and so light,
so almost nothing, it seemed to be made of air--and it came from the
air.

Slowly and incredulously he turned--and glory fell upon his shining
eyes. The door of his father's room had opened.

Mary stood upon the threshold.

THE END

========================================
========================================

ALICE ADAMS

By Booth Tarkington



CHAPTER I

The patient, an old-fashioned man, thought the nurse made a mistake in
keeping both of the windows open, and her sprightly disregard of his
protests added something to his hatred of her. Every evening he told her
that anybody with ordinary gumption ought to realize that night air was
bad for the human frame. "The human frame won't stand everything,
Miss Perry," he warned her, resentfully. "Even a child, if it had just
ordinary gumption, ought to know enough not to let the night air blow on
sick people yes, nor well people, either! 'Keep out of the night air, no
matter how well you feel.' That's what my mother used to tell me when I
was a boy. 'Keep out of the night air, Virgil,' she'd say. 'Keep out of
the night air.'"

"I expect probably her mother told her the same thing," the nurse
suggested.

"Of course she did. My grandmother----"

"Oh, I guess your GRANDmother thought so, Mr. Adams! That was when all
this flat central country was swampish and hadn't been drained off yet.
I guess the truth must been the swamp mosquitoes bit people and gave 'em
malaria, especially before they began to put screens in their windows.
Well, we got screens in these windows, and no mosquitoes are goin' to
bite us; so just you be a good boy and rest your mind and go to sleep
like you need to."

"Sleep?" he said. "Likely!"

He thought the night air worst of all in April; he hadn't a doubt it
would kill him, he declared. "It's miraculous what the human frame WILL
survive," he admitted on the last evening of that month. "But you and
the doctor ought to both be taught it won't stand too dang much! You
poison a man and poison and poison him with this April night air----"

"Can't poison you with much more of it," Miss Perry interrupted him,
indulgently. "To-morrow it'll be May night air, and I expect that'll be
a lot better for you, don't you? Now let's just sober down and be a good
boy and get some nice sound sleep."

She gave him his medicine, and, having set the glass upon the center
table, returned to her cot, where, after a still interval, she snored
faintly. Upon this, his expression became that of a man goaded out of
overpowering weariness into irony.

"Sleep? Oh, CERTAINLY, thank you!"

However, he did sleep intermittently, drowsed between times, and even
dreamed; but, forgetting his dreams before he opened his eyes, and
having some part of him all the while aware of his discomfort, he
believed, as usual, that he lay awake the whole night long. He was
conscious of the city as of some single great creature resting fitfully
in the dark outside his windows. It lay all round about, in the damp
cover of its night cloud of smoke, and tried to keep quiet for a few
hours after midnight, but was too powerful a growing thing ever to
lie altogether still. Even while it strove to sleep it muttered with
digestions of the day before, and these already merged with rumblings
of the morrow. "Owl" cars, bringing in last passengers over distant
trolley-lines, now and then howled on a curve; faraway metallic
stirrings could be heard from factories in the sooty suburbs on the
plain outside the city; east, west, and south, switch-engines chugged
and snorted on sidings; and everywhere in the air there seemed to be
a faint, voluminous hum as of innumerable wires trembling overhead to
vibration of machinery underground.

In his youth Adams might have been less resentful of sounds such as
these when they interfered with his night's sleep: even during
an illness he might have taken some pride in them as proof of his
citizenship in a "live town"; but at fifty-five he merely hated them
because they kept him awake. They "pressed on his nerves," as he put it;
and so did almost everything else, for that matter.

He heard the milk-wagon drive into the cross-street beneath his windows
and stop at each house. The milkman carried his jars round to the "back
porch," while the horse moved slowly ahead to the gate of the next
customer and waited there. "He's gone into Pollocks'," Adams thought,
following this progress. "I hope it'll sour on 'em before breakfast.
Delivered the Andersons'. Now he's getting out ours. Listen to the darn
brute! What's HE care who wants to sleep!" His complaint was of the
horse, who casually shifted weight with a clink of steel shoes on the
worn brick pavement of the street, and then heartily shook himself in
his harness, perhaps to dislodge a fly far ahead of its season. Light
had just filmed the windows; and with that the first sparrow woke,
chirped instantly, and roused neighbours in the trees of the small yard,
including a loud-voiced robin. Vociferations began irregularly, but were
soon unanimous.

"Sleep? Dang likely now, ain't it!"

Night sounds were becoming day sounds; the far-away hooting of
freight-engines seemed brisker than an hour ago in the dark. A cheerful
whistler passed the house, even more careless of sleepers than the
milkman's horse had been; then a group of coloured workmen came by, and
although it was impossible to be sure whether they were homeward bound
from night-work or on their way to day-work, at least it was certain
that they were jocose. Loose, aboriginal laughter preceded them afar,
and beat on the air long after they had gone by.

The sick-room night-light, shielded from his eyes by a newspaper propped
against a water-pitcher, still showed a thin glimmering that had grown
offensive to Adams. In his wandering and enfeebled thoughts, which
were much more often imaginings than reasonings, the attempt of the
night-light to resist the dawn reminded him of something unpleasant,
though he could not discover just what the unpleasant thing was. Here
was a puzzle that irritated him the more because he could not solve it,
yet always seemed just on the point of a solution. However, he may have
lost nothing cheerful by remaining in the dark upon the matter; for
if he had been a little sharper in this introspection he might have
concluded that the squalor of the night-light, in its seeming effort
to show against the forerunning of the sun itself, had stimulated some
half-buried perception within him to sketch the painful little synopsis
of an autobiography.

In spite of noises without, he drowsed again, not knowing that he did;
and when he opened his eyes the nurse was just rising from her cot. He
took no pleasure in the sight, it may be said. She exhibited to him a
face mismodelled by sleep, and set like a clay face left on its cheek in
a hot and dry studio. She was still only in part awake, however, and by
the time she had extinguished the night-light and given her patient his
tonic, she had recovered enough plasticity. "Well, isn't that grand!
We've had another good night," she said as she departed to dress in the
bathroom.

"Yes, you had another!" he retorted, though not until after she had
closed the door.

Presently he heard his daughter moving about in her room across the
narrow hall, and so knew that she had risen. He hoped she would come
in to see him soon, for she was the one thing that didn't press on his
nerves, he felt; though the thought of her hurt him, as, indeed, every
thought hurt him. But it was his wife who came first.

She wore a lank cotton wrapper, and a crescent of gray hair escaped to
one temple from beneath the handkerchief she had worn upon her head for
the night and still retained; but she did everything possible to make
her expression cheering.

"Oh, you're better again! I can see that, as soon as I look at you," she
said. "Miss Perry tells me you've had another splendid night."

He made a sound of irony, which seemed to dispose unfavourably of Miss
Perry, and then, in order to be more certainly intelligible, he added,
"She slept well, as usual!"

But his wife's smile persisted. "It's a good sign to be cross; it means
you're practically convalescent right now."

"Oh, I am, am I?"

"No doubt in the world!" she exclaimed. "Why, you're practically a well
man, Virgil--all except getting your strength back, of course, and that
isn't going to take long. You'll be right on your feet in a couple of
weeks from now."

"Oh, I will?"

"Of course you will!" She laughed briskly, and, going to the table in
the center of the room, moved his glass of medicine an inch or two,
turned a book over so that it lay upon its other side, and for a few
moments occupied herself with similar futilities, having taken on the
air of a person who makes things neat, though she produced no such
actual effect upon them. "Of course you will," she repeated, absently.
"You'll be as strong as you ever were; maybe stronger." She paused for a
moment, not looking at him, then added, cheerfully, "So that you can fly
around and find something really good to get into."

Something important between them came near the surface here, for though
she spoke with what seemed but a casual cheerfulness, there was a
little betraying break in her voice, a trembling just perceptible in the
utterance of the final word. And she still kept up the affectation of
being helpfully preoccupied with the table, and did not look at her
husband--perhaps because they had been married so many years that
without looking she knew just what his expression would be, and
preferred to avoid the actual sight of it as long as possible.
Meanwhile, he stared hard at her, his lips beginning to move with little
distortions not lacking in the pathos of a sick man's agitation.

"So that's it," he said. "That's what you're hinting at."

"'Hinting?'" Mrs. Adams looked surprised and indulgent. "Why, I'm not
doing any hinting, Virgil."

"What did you say about my finding 'something good to get into?'" he
asked, sharply. "Don't you call that hinting?"

Mrs. Adams turned toward him now; she came to the bedside and would have
taken his hand, but he quickly moved it away from her.

"You mustn't let yourself get nervous," she said. "But of course when
you get well there's only one thing to do. You mustn't go back to that
old hole again."

"'Old hole?' That's what you call it, is it?" In spite of his weakness,
anger made his voice strident, and upon this stimulation she spoke more
urgently.

"You just mustn't go back to it, Virgil. It's not fair to any of us, and
you know it isn't."

"Don't tell me what I know, please!"

She clasped her hands, suddenly carrying her urgency to plaintive
entreaty. "Virgil, you WON'T go back to that hole?"

"That's a nice word to use to me!" he said. "Call a man's business a
hole!"

"Virgil, if you don't owe it to me to look for something different,
don't you owe it to your children? Don't tell me you won't do what we
all want you to, and what you know in your heart you ought to! And if
you HAVE got into one of your stubborn fits and are bound to go back
there for no other reason except to have your own way, don't tell me so,
for I can't bear it!"

He looked up at her fiercely. "You've got a fine way to cure a sick
man!" he said; but she had concluded her appeal--for that time--and
instead of making any more words in the matter, let him see that there
were tears in her eyes, shook her head, and left the room.

Alone, he lay breathing rapidly, his emaciated chest proving itself
equal to the demands his emotion put upon it. "Fine!" he repeated, with
husky indignation. "Fine way to cure a sick man! Fine!" Then, after a
silence, he gave forth whispering sounds as of laughter, his expression
the while remaining sore and far from humour.

"And give us our daily bread!" he added, meaning that his wife's little
performance was no novelty.



CHAPTER II

In fact, the agitation of Mrs. Adams was genuine, but so well under her
control that its traces vanished during the three short steps she
took to cross the narrow hall between her husband's door and the one
opposite. Her expression was matter-of-course, rather than pathetic, as
she entered the pretty room where her daughter, half dressed, sat before
a dressing-table and played with the reflections of a three-leafed
mirror framed in blue enamel. That is, just before the moment of
her mother's entrance, Alice had been playing with the mirror's
reflections--posturing her arms and her expressions, clasping her hands
behind her neck, and tilting back her head to foreshorten the face in a
tableau conceived to represent sauciness, then one of smiling weariness,
then one of scornful toleration, and all very piquant; but as the door
opened she hurriedly resumed the practical, and occupied her hands in
the arrangement of her plentiful brownish hair.

They were pretty hands, of a shapeliness delicate and fine. "The best
things she's got!" a cold-blooded girl friend said of them, and meant
to include Alice's mind and character in the implied list of possessions
surpassed by the notable hands. However that may have been, the rest
of her was well enough. She was often called "a right pretty
girl"--temperate praise meaning a girl rather pretty than otherwise,
and this she deserved, to say the least. Even in repose she deserved
it, though repose was anything but her habit, being seldom seen upon
her except at home. On exhibition she led a life of gestures, the unkind
said to make her lovely hands more memorable; but all of her usually
accompanied the gestures of the hands, the shoulders ever giving them
their impulses first, and even her feet being called upon, at the same
time, for eloquence.

So much liveliness took proper place as only accessory to that of the
face, where her vivacity reached its climax; and it was unfortunate that
an ungifted young man, new in the town, should have attempted to define
the effect upon him of all this generosity of emphasis. He said that
"the way she used her cute hazel eyes and the wonderful glow of her
facial expression gave her a mighty spiritual quality." His actual
rendition of the word was "spirichul"; but it was not his pronunciation
that embalmed this outburst in the perennial laughter of Alice's girl
friends; they made the misfortune far less his than hers.

Her mother comforted her too heartily, insisting that Alice had "plenty
enough spiritual qualities," certainly more than possessed by the other
girls who flung the phrase at her, wooden things, jealous of everything
they were incapable of themselves; and then Alice, getting more
championship than she sought, grew uneasy lest Mrs. Adams should repeat
such defenses "outside the family"; and Mrs. Adams ended by weeping
because the daughter so distrusted her intelligence. Alice frequently
thought it necessary to instruct her mother.

Her morning greeting was an instruction to-day; or, rather, it was
an admonition in the style of an entreaty, the more petulant as Alice
thought that Mrs. Adams might have had a glimpse of the posturings to
the mirror. This was a needless worry; the mother had caught a thousand
such glimpses, with Alice unaware, and she thought nothing of the one
just flitted.

"For heaven's sake, mama, come clear inside the room and shut the door!
PLEASE don't leave it open for everybody to look at me!"

"There isn't anybody to see you," Mrs. Adams explained, obeying. "Miss
Perry's gone downstairs, and----"

"Mama, I heard you in papa's room," Alice said, not dropping the note of
complaint. "I could hear both of you, and I don't think you ought to get
poor old papa so upset--not in his present condition, anyhow."

Mrs. Adams seated herself on the edge of the bed. "He's better all the
time," she said, not disturbed. "He's almost well. The doctor says so
and Miss Perry says so; and if we don't get him into the right frame
of mind now we never will. The first day he's outdoors he'll go back to
that old hole--you'll see! And if he once does that, he'll settle down
there and it'll be too late and we'll never get him out."

"Well, anyhow, I think you could use a little more tact with him."

"I do try to," the mother sighed. "It never was much use with him. I
don't think you understand him as well as I do, Alice."

"There's one thing I don't understand about either of you," Alice
returned, crisply. "Before people get married they can do anything they
want to with each other. Why can't they do the same thing after they're
married? When you and papa were young people and engaged, he'd have done
anything you wanted him to. That must have been because you knew how to
manage him then. Why can't you go at him the same way now?"

Mrs. Adams sighed again, and laughed a little, making no other response;
but Alice persisted. "Well, WHY can't you? Why can't you ask him to do
things the way you used to ask him when you were just in love with each
other? Why don't you anyhow try it, mama, instead of ding-donging at
him?"

"'Ding-donging at him,' Alice?" Mrs. Adams said, with a pathos somewhat
emphasized. "Is that how my trying to do what I can for you strikes
you?"

"Never mind that; it's nothing to hurt your feelings." Alice disposed of
the pathos briskly. "Why don't you answer my question? What's the matter
with using a little more tact on papa? Why can't you treat him the way
you probably did when you were young people, before you were married? I
never have understood why people can't do that."

"Perhaps you WILL understand some day," her mother said, gently. "Maybe
you will when you've been married twenty-five years."

"You keep evading. Why don't you answer my question right straight out?"

"There are questions you can't answer to young people, Alice."

"You mean because we're too young to understand the answer? I don't see
that at all. At twenty-two a girl's supposed to have some intelligence,
isn't she? And intelligence is the ability to understand, isn't it?
Why do I have to wait till I've lived with a man twenty-five years to
understand why you can't be tactful with papa?"

"You may understand some things before that," Mrs. Adams said,
tremulously. "You may understand how you hurt me sometimes. Youth
can't know everything by being intelligent, and by the time you could
understand the answer you're asking for you'd know it, and wouldn't need
to ask. You don't understand your father, Alice; you don't know what it
takes to change him when he's made up his mind to be stubborn."

Alice rose and began to get herself into a skirt. "Well, I don't think
making scenes ever changes anybody," she grumbled. "I think a little
jolly persuasion goes twice as far, myself."

"'A little jolly persuasion!'" Her mother turned the echo of this phrase
into an ironic lament. "Yes, there was a time when I thought that, too!
It didn't work; that's all."

"Perhaps you left the 'jolly' part of it out, mama."

For the second time that morning--it was now a little after seven
o'clock--tears seemed about to offer their solace to Mrs. Adams. "I
might have expected you to say that, Alice; you never do miss a chance,"
she said, gently. "It seems queer you don't some time miss just ONE
chance!"

But Alice, progressing with her toilet, appeared to be little concerned.
"Oh, well, I think there are better ways of managing a man than just
hammering at him."

Mrs. Adams uttered a little cry of pain. "'Hammering,' Alice?"

"If you'd left it entirely to me," her daughter went on, briskly, "I
believe papa'd already be willing to do anything we want him to."

"That's it; tell me I spoil everything. Well, I won't interfere from now
on, you can be sure of it."

"Please don't talk like that," Alice said, quickly. "I'm old enough to
realize that papa may need pressure of all sorts; I only think it makes
him more obstinate to get him cross. You probably do understand him
better, but that's one thing I've found out and you haven't. There!"
She gave her mother a friendly tap on the shoulder and went to the door.
"I'll hop in and say hello to him now."

As she went, she continued the fastening of her blouse, and appeared in
her father's room with one hand still thus engaged, but she patted his
forehead with the other.

"Poor old papa-daddy!" she said, gaily. "Every time he's better somebody
talks him into getting so mad he has a relapse. It's a shame!"

Her father's eyes, beneath their melancholy brows, looked up at her
wistfully. "I suppose you heard your mother going for me," he said.

"I heard you going for her, too!" Alice laughed. "What was it all
about?"

"Oh, the same danged old story!"

"You mean she wants you to try something new when you get well?" Alice
asked, with cheerful innocence. "So we could all have a lot more money?"

At this his sorrowful forehead was more sorrowful than ever. The deep
horizontal lines moved upward to a pattern of suffering so familiar to
his daughter that it meant nothing to her; but he spoke quietly. "Yes;
so we wouldn't have any money at all, most likely."

"Oh, no!" she laughed, and, finishing with her blouse, patted his cheeks
with both hands. "Just think how many grand openings there must be for
a man that knows as much as you do! I always did believe you could get
rich if you only cared to, papa."

But upon his forehead the painful pattern still deepened. "Don't you
think we've always had enough, the way things are, Alice?"

"Not the way things ARE!" She patted his cheeks again; laughed again.
"It used to be enough, maybe anyway we did skimp along on it--but the
way things are now I expect mama's really pretty practical in her ideas,
though, I think it's a shame for her to bother you about it while you're
so weak. Don't you worry about it, though; just think about other things
till you get strong."

"You know," he said; "you know it isn't exactly the easiest thing in the
world for a man of my age to find these grand openings you speak of. And
when you've passed half-way from fifty to sixty you're apt to see some
risk in giving up what you know how to do and trying something new."

"My, what a frown!" she cried, blithely. "Didn't I tell you to stop
thinking about it till you get ALL well?" She bent over him, giving
him a gay little kiss on the bridge of his nose. "There! I must run to
breakfast. Cheer up now! Au 'voir!" And with her pretty hand she waved
further encouragement from the closing door as she departed.

Lightsomely descending the narrow stairway, she whistled as she went,
her fingers drumming time on the rail; and, still whistling, she came
into the dining-room, where her mother and her brother were already at
the table. The brother, a thin and sallow boy of twenty, greeted her
without much approval as she took her place.

"Nothing seems to trouble you!" he said.

"No; nothing much," she made airy response. "What's troubling yourself,
Walter?"

"Don't let that worry you!" he returned, seeming to consider this to be
repartee of an effective sort; for he furnished a short laugh to go
with it, and turned to his coffee with the manner of one who has
satisfactorily closed an episode.

"Walter always seems to have so many secrets!" Alice said, studying
him shrewdly, but with a friendly enough amusement in her scrutiny.
"Everything he does or says seems to be acted for the benefit of some
mysterious audience inside himself, and he always gets its applause.
Take what he said just now: he seems to think it means something, but
if it does, why, that's just another secret between him and the secret
audience inside of him! We don't really know anything about Walter at
all, do we, mama?"

Walter laughed again, in a manner that sustained her theory well enough;
then after finishing his coffee, he took from his pocket a flattened
packet in glazed blue paper; extracted with stained fingers a bent and
wrinkled little cigarette, lighted it, hitched up his belted trousers
with the air of a person who turns from trifles to things better worth
his attention, and left the room.

Alice laughed as the door closed. "He's ALL secrets," she said. "Don't
you think you really ought to know more about him, mama?"

"I'm sure he's a good boy," Mrs. Adams returned, thoughtfully. "He's
been very brave about not being able to have the advantages that are
enjoyed by the boys he's grown up with. I've never heard a word of
complaint from him."

"About his not being sent to college?" Alice cried. "I should think you
wouldn't! He didn't even have enough ambition to finish high school!"

Mrs. Adams sighed. "It seemed to me Walter lost his ambition when nearly
all the boys he'd grown up with went to Eastern schools to prepare for
college, and we couldn't afford to send him. If only your father would
have listened----"

Alice interrupted: "What nonsense! Walter hated books and studying, and
athletics, too, for that matter. He doesn't care for anything nice that
I ever heard of. What do you suppose he does like, mama? He must like
something or other somewhere, but what do you suppose it is? What does
he do with his time?"

"Why, the poor boy's at Lamb and Company's all day. He doesn't get
through until five in the afternoon; he doesn't HAVE much time."

"Well, we never have dinner until about seven, and he's always late for
dinner, and goes out, heaven knows where, right afterward!" Alice shook
her head. "He used to go with our friends' boys, but I don't think he
does now."

"Why, how could he?" Mrs. Adams protested. "That isn't his fault, poor
child! The boys he knew when he was younger are nearly all away at
college."

"Yes, but he doesn't see anything of 'em when they're here at
holiday-time or vacation. None of 'em come to the house any more."

"I suppose he's made other friends. It's natural for him to want
companions, at his age."

"Yes," Alice said, with disapproving emphasis. "But who are they? I've
got an idea he plays pool at some rough place down-town."

"Oh, no; I'm sure he's a steady boy," Mrs. Adams protested, but her tone
was not that of thoroughgoing conviction, and she added, "Life might
be a very different thing for him if only your father can be brought to
see----"

"Never mind, mama! It isn't me that has to be convinced, you know; and
we can do a lot more with papa if we just let him alone about it for a
day or two. Promise me you won't say any more to him until--well, until
he's able to come downstairs to table. Will you?"

Mrs. Adams bit her lip, which had begun to tremble. "I think you can
trust me to know a FEW things, Alice," she said. "I'm a little older
than you, you know."

"That's a good girl!" Alice jumped up, laughing. "Don't forget it's the
same as a promise, and do just cheer him up a little. I'll say good-bye
to him before I go out."

"Where are you going?"

"Oh, I've got lots to do. I thought I'd run out to Mildred's to see what
she's going to wear to-night, and then I want to go down and buy a
yard of chiffon and some narrow ribbon to make new bows for my
slippers--you'll have to give me some money----"

"If he'll give it to me!" her mother lamented, as they went toward the
front stairs together; but an hour later she came into Alice's room with
a bill in her hand.

"He has some money in his bureau drawer," she said. "He finally told me
where it was."

There were traces of emotion in her voice, and Alice, looking shrewdly
at her, saw moisture in her eyes.

"Mama!" she cried. "You didn't do what you promised me you wouldn't, did
you--NOT before Miss Perry!"

"Miss Perry's getting him some broth," Mrs. Adams returned, calmly.
"Besides, you're mistaken in saying I promised you anything; I said I
thought you could trust me to know what is right."

"So you did bring it up again!" And Alice swung away from her, strode
to her father's door, flung it open, went to him, and put a light hand
soothingly over his unrelaxed forehead.

"Poor old papa!" she said. "It's a shame how everybody wants to trouble
him. He shan't be bothered any more at all! He doesn't need to have
everybody telling him how to get away from that old hole he's worked in
so long and begin to make us all nice and rich. HE knows how!"

Thereupon she kissed him a consoling good-bye, and made another gay
departure, the charming hand again fluttering like a white butterfly in
the shadow of the closing door.



CHAPTER III

Mrs. Adams had remained in Alice's room, but her mood seemed to have
changed, during her daughter's little more than momentary absence.

"What did he SAY?" she asked, quickly, and her tone was hopeful.

"'Say?'" Alice repeated, impatiently. "Why, nothing. I didn't let him.
Really, mama, I think the best thing for you to do would be to just keep
out of his room, because I don't believe you can go in there and not
talk to him about it, and if you do talk we'll never get him to do the
right thing. Never!"

The mother's response was a grieving silence; she turned from her
daughter and walked to the door.

"Now, for goodness' sake!" Alice cried. "Don't go making tragedy out of
my offering you a little practical advice!"

"I'm not," Mrs. Adams gulped, halting. "I'm just--just going to dust the
downstairs, Alice." And with her face still averted, she went out into
the little hallway, closing the door behind her. A moment later she
could be heard descending the stairs, the sound of her footsteps
carrying somehow an effect of resignation.

Alice listened, sighed, and, breathing the words, "Oh, murder!" turned
to cheerier matters. She put on a little apple-green turban with a dim
gold band round it, and then, having shrouded the turban in a white
veil, which she kept pushed up above her forehead, she got herself into
a tan coat of soft cloth fashioned with rakish severity. After that,
having studied herself gravely in a long glass, she took from one of
the drawers of her dressing-table a black leather card-case cornered in
silver filigree, but found it empty.

She opened another drawer wherein were two white pasteboard boxes of
cards, the one set showing simply "Miss Adams," the other engraved in
Gothic characters, "Miss Alys Tuttle Adams." The latter belonged to
Alice's "Alys" period--most girls go through it; and Alice must have
felt that she had graduated, for, after frowning thoughtfully at the
exhibit this morning, she took the box with its contents, and let the
white shower fall from her fingers into the waste-basket beside her
small desk. She replenished the card-case from the "Miss Adams"
box; then, having found a pair of fresh white gloves, she tucked an
ivory-topped Malacca walking-stick under her arm and set forth.

She went down the stairs, buttoning her gloves and still wearing
the frown with which she had put "Alys" finally out of her life. She
descended slowly, and paused on the lowest step, looking about her with
an expression that needed but a slight deepening to betoken bitterness.
Its connection with her dropping "Alys" forever was slight, however.

The small frame house, about fifteen years old, was already inclining
to become a new Colonial relic. The Adamses had built it, moving into it
from the "Queen Anne" house they had rented until they took this step in
fashion. But fifteen years is a long time to stand still in the midland
country, even for a house, and this one was lightly made, though the
Adamses had not realized how flimsily until they had lived in it for
some time. "Solid, compact, and convenient" were the instructions to the
architect, and he had made it compact successfully. Alice, pausing
at the foot of the stairway, was at the same time fairly in the
"living-room," for the only separation between the "living room" and the
hall was a demarcation suggested to willing imaginations by a pair of
wooden columns painted white. These columns, pine under the paint,
were bruised and chipped at the base; one of them showed a crack that
threatened to become a split; the "hard-wood" floor had become uneven;
and in a corner the walls apparently failed of solidity, where the
wall-paper had declined to accompany some staggerings of the plaster
beneath it.

The furniture was in great part an accumulation begun with the wedding
gifts; though some of it was older, two large patent rocking-chairs and
a footstool having belonged to Mrs. Adams's mother in the days of hard
brown plush and veneer. For decoration there were pictures and vases.
Mrs. Adams had always been fond of vases, she said, and every year
her husband's Christmas present to her was a vase of one sort or
another--whatever the clerk showed him, marked at about twelve or
fourteen dollars. The pictures were some of them etchings framed in
gilt: Rheims, Canterbury, schooners grouped against a wharf; and Alice
could remember how, in her childhood, her father sometimes pointed out
the watery reflections in this last as very fine. But it was a long time
since he had shown interest in such things--"or in anything much," as
she thought.

Other pictures were two water-colours in baroque frames; one being the
Amalfi monk on a pergola wall, while the second was a yard-wide display
of iris blossoms, painted by Alice herself at fourteen, as a birthday
gift to her mother. Alice's glance paused upon it now with no great
pride, but showed more approval of an enormous photograph of the
Colosseum. This she thought of as "the only good thing in the room";
it possessed and bestowed distinction, she felt; and she did not regret
having won her struggle to get it hung in its conspicuous place of
honour over the mantelpiece. Formerly that place had been held for
years by a steel-engraving, an accurate representation of the Suspension
Bridge at Niagara Falls. It was almost as large as its successor, the
"Colosseum," and it had been presented to Mr. Adams by colleagues in
his department at Lamb and Company's. Adams had shown some feeling when
Alice began to urge its removal to obscurity in the "upstairs hall"; he
even resisted for several days after she had the "Colosseum" charged
to him, framed in oak, and sent to the house. She cheered him up, of
course, when he gave way; and her heart never misgave her that there
might be a doubt which of the two pictures was the more dismaying.

Over the pictures, the vases, the old brown plush rocking-chairs and
the stool, over the three gilt chairs, over the new chintz-covered easy
chair and the gray velure sofa--over everything everywhere, was the
familiar coating of smoke grime. It had worked into every fibre of
the lace curtains, dingying them to an unpleasant gray; it lay on
the window-sills and it dimmed the glass panes; it covered the walls,
covered the ceiling, and was smeared darker and thicker in all corners.
Yet here was no fault of housewifery; the curse could not be lifted, as
the ingrained smudges permanent on the once white woodwork proved. The
grime was perpetually renewed; scrubbing only ground it in.

This particular ugliness was small part of Alice's discontent, for
though the coating grew a little deeper each year she was used to it.
Moreover, she knew that she was not likely to find anything better in
a thousand miles, so long as she kept to cities, and that none of
her friends, however opulent, had any advantage of her here. Indeed,
throughout all the great soft-coal country, people who consider
themselves comparatively poor may find this consolation: cleanliness has
been added to the virtues and beatitudes that money can not buy.

Alice brightened a little as she went forward to the front door, and
she brightened more when the spring breeze met her there. Then all
depression left her as she walked down the short brick path to the
sidewalk, looked up and down the street, and saw how bravely the maple
shade-trees, in spite of the black powder they breathed, were flinging
out their thousands of young green particles overhead.

She turned north, treading the new little shadows on the pavement
briskly, and, having finished buttoning her gloves, swung down her
Malacca stick from under her arm to let it tap a more leisurely
accompaniment to her quick, short step. She had to step quickly if she
was to get anywhere; for the closeness of her skirt, in spite of its
little length, permitted no natural stride; but she was pleased to be
impeded, these brevities forming part of her show of fashion.

Other pedestrians found them not without charm, though approval may have
been lacking here and there, and at the first crossing Alice suffered
what she might have accounted an actual injury, had she allowed herself
to be so sensitive. An elderly woman in fussy black silk stood there,
waiting for a streetcar; she was all of a globular modelling, with
a face patterned like a frost-bitten peach; and that the approaching
gracefulness was uncongenial she naively made too evident. Her round,
wan eyes seemed roused to bitter life as they rose from the curved high
heels of the buckled slippers to the tight little skirt, and thence with
startled ferocity to the Malacca cane, which plainly appeared to her as
a decoration not more astounding than it was insulting.

Perceiving that the girl was bowing to her, the globular lady hurriedly
made shift to alter her injurious expression. "Good morning, Mrs.
Dowling," Alice said, gravely. Mrs. Dowling returned the salutation with
a smile as convincingly benevolent as the ghastly smile upon a Santa
Claus face; and then, while Alice passed on, exploded toward her a
single compacted breath through tightened lips.

The sound was eloquently audible, though Mrs. Dowling remained unaware
that in this or any manner whatever she had shed a light upon her
thoughts; for it was her lifelong innocent conviction that other people
saw her only as she wished to be seen, and heard from her only what she
intended to be heard. At home it was always her husband who pulled down
the shades of their bedroom window.

Alice looked serious for a few moments after the little encounter, then
found some consolation in the behaviour of a gentleman of forty or
so who was coming toward her. Like Mrs. Dowling, he had begun to show
consciousness of Alice's approach while she was yet afar off; but his
tokens were of a kind pleasanter to her. He was like Mrs. Dowling again,
however, in his conception that Alice would not realize the significance
of what he did. He passed his hand over his neck-scarf to see that it
lay neatly to his collar, smoothed a lapel of his coat, and adjusted
his hat, seeming to be preoccupied the while with problems that kept
his eyes to the pavement; then, as he came within a few feet of her,
he looked up, as in a surprised recognition almost dramatic, smiled
winningly, lifted his hat decisively, and carried it to the full arm's
length.

Alice's response was all he could have asked. The cane in her right
hand stopped short in its swing, while her left hand moved in a pretty
gesture as if an impulse carried it toward the heart; and she smiled,
with her under lip caught suddenly between her teeth. Months ago she had
seen an actress use this smile in a play, and it came perfectly to Alice
now, without conscious direction, it had been so well acquired; but the
pretty hand's little impulse toward the heart was an original bit all
her own, on the spur of the moment.

The gentleman went on, passing from her forward vision as he replaced
his hat. Of himself he was nothing to Alice, except for the gracious
circumstance that he had shown strong consciousness of a pretty girl. He
was middle-aged, substantial, a family man, securely married; and
Alice had with him one of those long acquaintances that never become
emphasized by so much as five minutes of talk; yet for this inconsequent
meeting she had enacted a little part like a fragment in a pantomime of
Spanish wooing.

It was not for him--not even to impress him, except as a messenger.
Alice was herself almost unaware of her thought, which was one of the
running thousands of her thoughts that took no deliberate form in words.
Nevertheless, she had it, and it was the impulse of all her pretty
bits of pantomime when she met other acquaintances who made their
appreciation visible, as this substantial gentleman did. In Alice's
unworded thought, he was to be thus encouraged as in some measure a
champion to speak well of her to the world; but more than this: he was
to tell some magnificent unknown bachelor how wonderful, how mysterious,
she was.

She hastened on gravely, a little stirred reciprocally with the
supposed stirrings in the breast of that shadowy ducal mate, who must be
somewhere "waiting," or perhaps already seeking her; for she more often
thought of herself as "waiting" while he sought her; and sometimes this
view of things became so definite that it shaped into a murmur on her
lips. "Waiting. Just waiting." And she might add, "For him!" Then, being
twenty-two, she was apt to conclude the mystic interview by laughing at
herself, though not without a continued wistfulness.

She came to a group of small coloured children playing waywardly in a
puddle at the mouth of a muddy alley; and at sight of her they gave over
their pastime in order to stare. She smiled brilliantly upon them, but
they were too struck with wonder to comprehend that the manifestation
was friendly; and as Alice picked her way in a little detour to keep
from the mud, she heard one of them say, "Lady got cane! Jeez'!"

She knew that many coloured children use impieties familiarly, and she
was not startled. She was disturbed, however, by an unfavourable hint in
the speaker's tone. He was six, probably, but the sting of a criticism
is not necessarily allayed by knowledge of its ignoble source, and
Alice had already begun to feel a slight uneasiness about her cane. Mrs.
Dowling's stare had been strikingly projected at it; other women more
than merely glanced, their brows and lips contracting impulsively; and
Alice was aware that one or two of them frankly halted as soon as she
had passed.

She had seen in several magazines pictures of ladies with canes, and on
that account she had bought this one, never questioning that fashion is
recognized, even in the provinces, as soon as beheld. On the contrary,
these staring women obviously failed to realize that what they were
being shown was not an eccentric outburst, but the bright harbinger of
an illustrious mode. Alice had applied a bit of artificial pigment to
her lips and cheeks before she set forth this morning; she did not
need it, having a ready colour of her own, which now mounted high with
annoyance.

Then a splendidly shining closed black automobile, with windows of
polished glass, came silently down the street toward her. Within it, as
in a luxurious little apartment, three comely ladies in mourning sat
and gossiped; but when they saw Alice they clutched one another. They
instantly recovered, bowing to her solemnly as they were borne by, yet
were not gone from her sight so swiftly but the edge of her side glance
caught a flash of teeth in mouths suddenly opened, and the dark glisten
of black gloves again clutching to share mirth.

The colour that outdid the rouge on Alice's cheek extended its area and
grew warmer as she realized how all too cordial had been her nod and
smile to these humorous ladies. But in their identity lay a significance
causing her a sharper smart, for they were of the family of that Lamb,
chief of Lamb and Company, who had employed her father since before she
was born.

"And know his salary! They'd be SURE to find out about that!" was her
thought, coupled with another bitter one to the effect that they had
probably made instantaneous financial estimates of what she wore though
certainly her walking-stick had most fed their hilarity.

She tucked it under her arm, not swinging it again; and her breath
became quick and irregular as emotion beset her. She had been enjoying
her walk, but within the space of the few blocks she had gone since she
met the substantial gentleman, she found that more than the walk was
spoiled: suddenly her life seemed to be spoiled, too; though she did not
view the ruin with complaisance. These Lamb women thought her and her
cane ridiculous, did they? she said to herself. That was their parvenu
blood: to think because a girl's father worked for their grandfather
she had no right to be rather striking in style, especially when the
striking WAS her style. Probably all the other girls and women would
agree with them and would laugh at her when they got together, and,
what might be fatal, would try to make all the men think her a silly
pretender. Men were just like sheep, and nothing was easier than for
women to set up as shepherds and pen them in a fold. "To keep out
outsiders," Alice thought. "And make 'em believe I AM an outsider.
What's the use of living?"

All seemed lost when a trim young man appeared, striding out of a
cross-street not far before her, and, turning at the corner, came
toward her. Visibly, he slackened his gait to lengthen the time of his
approach, and, as he was a stranger to her, no motive could be ascribed
to him other than a wish to have a longer time to look at her.

She lifted a pretty hand to a pin at her throat, bit her lip--not with
the smile, but mysteriously--and at the last instant before her shadow
touched the stranger, let her eyes gravely meet his. A moment later,
having arrived before the house which was her destination, she halted
at the entrance to a driveway leading through fine lawns to the
intentionally important mansion. It was a pleasant and impressive
place to be seen entering, but Alice did not enter at once. She paused,
examining a tiny bit of mortar which the masons had forgotten to scrape
from a brick in one of the massive gate-posts. She frowned at this tiny
defacement, and with an air of annoyance scraped it away, using the
ferrule of her cane an act of fastidious proprietorship. If any one had
looked back over his shoulder he would not have doubted that she lived
there.

Alice did not turn to see whether anything of the sort happened or not,
but she may have surmised that it did. At all events, it was with
an invigorated step that she left the gateway behind her and went
cheerfully up the drive to the house of her friend Mildred.



CHAPTER IV

Adams had a restless morning, and toward noon he asked Miss Perry to
call his daughter; he wished to say something to her.

"I thought I heard her leaving the house a couple of hours ago--maybe
longer," the nurse told him. "I'll go see." And she returned from the
brief errand, her impression confirmed by information from Mrs. Adams.
"Yes. She went up to Miss Mildred Palmer's to see what she's going to
wear to-night."

Adams looked at Miss Perry wearily, but remained passive, making no
inquiries; for he was long accustomed to what seemed to him a kind of
jargon among ladies, which became the more incomprehensible when they
tried to explain it. A man's best course, he had found, was just to let
it go as so much sound. His sorrowful eyes followed the nurse as she
went back to her rocking-chair by the window, and her placidity showed
him that there was no mystery for her in the fact that Alice walked
two miles to ask so simple a question when there was a telephone in
the house. Obviously Miss Perry also comprehended why Alice thought it
important to know what Mildred meant to wear. Adams understood why Alice
should be concerned with what she herself wore "to look neat and tidy
and at her best, why, of course she'd want to," he thought--but he
realized that it was forever beyond him to understand why the clothing
of other people had long since become an absorbing part of her life.

Her excursion this morning was no novelty; she was continually going to
see what Mildred meant to wear, or what some other girl meant to wear;
and when Alice came home from wherever other girls or women had been
gathered, she always hurried to her mother with earnest descriptions of
the clothing she had seen. At such times, if Adams was present, he might
recognize "organdie," or "taffeta," or "chiffon," as words defining
certain textiles, but the rest was too technical for him, and he
was like a dismal boy at a sermon, just waiting for it to get itself
finished. Not the least of the mystery was his wife's interest: she was
almost indifferent about her own clothes, and when she consulted Alice
about them spoke hurriedly and with an air of apology; but when Alice
described other people's clothes, Mrs. Adams listened as eagerly as the
daughter talked.

"There they go!" he muttered to-day, a moment after he heard the front
door closing, a sound recognizable throughout most of the thinly built
house. Alice had just returned, and Mrs. Adams called to her from the
upper hallway, not far from Adams's door.

"What did she SAY?"

"She was sort of snippy about it," Alice returned, ascending the stairs.
"She gets that way sometimes, and pretended she hadn't made up her mind,
but I'm pretty sure it'll be the maize Georgette with Malines flounces."

"Didn't you say she wore that at the Pattersons'?" Mrs. Adams inquired,
as Alice arrived at the top of the stairs. "And didn't you tell me she
wore it again at the----"

"Certainly not," Alice interrupted, rather petulantly. "She's never worn
it but once, and of course she wouldn't want to wear anything to-night
that people have seen her in a lot."

Miss Perry opened the door of Adams's room and stepped out. "Your father
wants to know if you'll come and see him a minute, Miss Adams."

"Poor old thing! Of course!" Alice exclaimed, and went quickly into the
room, Miss Perry remaining outside. "What's the matter, papa? Getting
awful sick of lying on his tired old back, I expect."

"I've had kind of a poor morning," Adams said, as she patted his hand
comfortingly. "I been thinking----"

"Didn't I tell you not to?" she cried, gaily. "Of course you'll have
poor times when you go and do just exactly what I say you mustn't. You
stop thinking this very minute!"

He smiled ruefully, closing his eyes; was silent for a moment, then
asked her to sit beside the bed. "I been thinking of something I wanted
to say," he added.

"What like, papa?"

"Well, it's nothing--much," he said, with something deprecatory in his
tone, as if he felt vague impulses toward both humour and apology. "I
just thought maybe I ought to've said more to you some time or other
about--well, about the way things ARE, down at Lamb and Company's, for
instance."

"Now, papa!" She leaned forward in the chair she had taken, and
pretended to slap his hand crossly. "Isn't that exactly what I said you
couldn't think one single think about till you get ALL well?"

"Well----" he said, and went on slowly, not looking at her, but at the
ceiling. "I just thought maybe it wouldn't been any harm if some time or
other I told you something about the way they sort of depend on me down
there."

"Why don't they show it, then?" she asked, quickly. "That's just what
mama and I have been feeling so much; they don't appreciate you."

"Why, yes, they do," he said. "Yes, they do. They began h'isting my
salary the second year I went in there, and they've h'isted it a little
every two years all the time I've worked for 'em. I've been head of the
sundries department for seven years now, and I could hardly have more
authority in that department unless I was a member of the firm itself."

"Well, why don't they make you a member of the firm? That's what they
ought to've done! Yes, and long ago!"

Adams laughed, but sighed with more heartiness than he had laughed.
"They call me their 'oldest stand-by' down there." He laughed again,
apologetically, as if to excuse himself for taking a little pride in
this title. "Yes, sir; they say I'm their 'oldest stand-by'; and I guess
they know they can count on my department's turning in as good a report
as they look for, at the end of every month; but they don't have to take
a man into the firm to get him to do my work, dearie."

"But you said they depended on you, papa."

"So they do; but of course not so's they couldn't get along without me."
He paused, reflecting. "I don't just seem to know how to put it--I
mean how to put what I started out to say. I kind of wanted to tell
you--well, it seems funny to me, these last few years, the way your
mother's taken to feeling about it. I'd like to see a better
established wholesale drug business than Lamb and Company this side the
Alleghanies--I don't say bigger, I say better established--and it's kind
of funny for a man that's been with a business like that as long as
I have to hear it called a 'hole.' It's kind of funny when you think,
yourself, you've done pretty fairly well in a business like that, and
the men at the head of it seem to think so, too, and put your salary
just about as high as anybody could consider customary--well, what I
mean, Alice, it's kind of funny to have your mother think it's mostly
just--mostly just a failure, so to speak."

His voice had become tremulous in spite of him; and this sign of
weakness and emotion had sufficient effect upon Alice. She bent over him
suddenly, with her arm about him and her cheek against his. "Poor papa!"
she murmured. "Poor papa!"

"No, no," he said. "I didn't mean anything to trouble you. I just
thought----" He hesitated. "I just wondered--I thought maybe it wouldn't
be any harm if I said something about how things ARE down there. I
got to thinking maybe you didn't understand it's a pretty good place.
They're fine people to work for; and they've always seemed to think
something of me;--the way they took Walter on, for instance, soon as I
asked 'em, last year. Don't you think that looked a good deal as if they
thought something of me, Alice?"

"Yes, papa," she said, not moving.

"And the work's right pleasant," he went on. "Mighty nice boys in our
department, Alice. Well, they are in all the departments, for that
matter. We have a good deal of fun down there some days."

She lifted her head. "More than you do at home 'some days,' I expect,
papa!" she said.

He protested feebly. "Now, I didn't mean that--I didn't want to trouble
you----"

She looked at him through winking eyelashes. "I'm sorry I called it a
'hole,' papa."

"No, no," he protested, gently. "It was your mother said that."

"No. I did, too."

"Well, if you did, it was only because you'd heard her."

She shook her head, then kissed him. "I'm going to talk to her," she
said, and rose decisively.

But at this, her father's troubled voice became quickly louder: "You
better let her alone. I just wanted to have a little talk with you. I
didn't mean to start any--your mother won't----"

"Now, papa!" Alice spoke cheerfully again, and smiled upon him. "I want
you to quit worrying! Everything's going to be all right and nobody's
going to bother you any more about anything. You'll see!"

She carried her smile out into the hall, but after she had closed the
door her face was all pity; and her mother, waiting for her in the
opposite room, spoke sympathetically.

"What's the matter, Alice? What did he say that's upset you?"

"Wait a minute, mama." Alice found a handkerchief, used it for eyes and
suffused nose, gulped, then suddenly and desolately sat upon the bed.
"Poor, poor, POOR papa!" she whispered.

"Why?" Mrs. Adams inquired, mildly. "What's the matter with him?
Sometimes you act as if he weren't getting well. What's he been talking
about?"

"Mama--well, I think I'm pretty selfish. Oh, I do!"

"Did he say you were?"

"Papa? No, indeed! What I mean is, maybe we're both a little selfish to
try to make him go out and hunt around for something new."

Mrs. Adams looked thoughtful. "Oh, that's what he was up to!"

"Mama, I think we ought to give it up. I didn't dream it had really hurt
him."

"Well, doesn't he hurt us?"

"Never that I know of, mama."

"I don't mean by SAYING things," Mrs. Adams explained, impatiently.
"There are more ways than that of hurting people. When a man sticks to a
salary that doesn't provide for his family, isn't that hurting them?"

"Oh, it 'provides' for us well enough, mama. We have what we need--if I
weren't so extravagant. Oh, _I_ know I am!"

But at this admission her mother cried out sharply. "'Extravagant!'
You haven't one tenth of what the other girls you go with have. And
you CAN'T have what you ought to as long as he doesn't get out of that
horrible place. It provides bare food and shelter for us, but what's
that?"

"I don't think we ought to try any more to change him."

"You don't?" Mrs. Adams came and stood before her. "Listen, Alice: your
father's asleep; that's his trouble, and he's got to be waked up. He
doesn't know that things have changed. When you and Walter were little
children we did have enough--at least it seemed to be about as much
as most of the people we knew. But the town isn't what it was in those
days, and times aren't what they were then, and these fearful PRICES
aren't the old prices. Everything else but your father has changed, and
all the time he's stood still. He doesn't know it; he thinks because
they've given him a hundred dollars more every two years he's quite a
prosperous man! And he thinks that because his children cost him more
than he and I cost our parents he gives them--enough!"

"But Walter----" Alice faltered. "Walter doesn't cost him anything at
all any more." And she concluded, in a stricken voice, "It's all--me!"

"Why shouldn't it be?" her mother cried. "You're young--you're just at
the time when your life should be fullest of good things and happiness.
Yet what do you get?"

Alice's lip quivered; she was not unsusceptible to such an appeal, but
she contrived the semblance of a protest. "I don't have such a bad time
not a good DEAL of the time, anyhow. I've got a good MANY of the things
other girls have----"

"You have?" Mrs. Adams was piteously satirical. "I suppose you've got
a limousine to go to that dance to-night? I suppose you've only got
to call a florist and tell him to send you some orchids? I suppose
you've----"

But Alice interrupted this list. Apparently in a single instant all
emotion left her, and she became businesslike, as one in the midst of
trifles reminded of really serious matters. She got up from the bed
and went to the door of the closet where she kept her dresses. "Oh, see
here," she said, briskly. "I've decided to wear my white organdie if you
could put in a new lining for me. I'm afraid it'll take you nearly all
afternoon."

She brought forth the dress, displayed it upon the bed, and Mrs. Adams
examined it attentively.

"Do you think you could get it done, mama?"

"I don't see why not," Mrs. Adams answered, passing a thoughtful hand
over the fabric. "It oughtn't to take more than four or five hours."

"It's a shame to have you sit at the machine that long," Alice said,
absently, adding, "And I'm sure we ought to let papa alone. Let's just
give it up, mama."

Mrs. Adams continued her thoughtful examination of the dress. "Did you
buy the chiffon and ribbon, Alice?"

"Yes. I'm sure we oughtn't to talk to him about it any more, mama."

"Well, we'll see."

"Let's both agree that we'll NEVER say another single word to him about
it," said Alice. "It'll be a great deal better if we just let him make
up his mind for himself."



CHAPTER V

With this, having more immediately practical questions before them, they
dropped the subject, to bend their entire attention upon the dress; and
when the lunch-gong sounded downstairs Alice was still sketching repairs
and alterations. She continued to sketch them, not heeding the summons.

"I suppose we'd better go down to lunch," Mrs. Adams said, absently.
"She's at the gong again." "In a minute, mama. Now about the
sleeves----" And she went on with her planning. Unfortunately the
gong was inexpressive of the mood of the person who beat upon it. It
consisted of three little metal bowls upon a string; they were unequal
in size, and, upon being tapped with a padded stick, gave forth
vibrations almost musically pleasant. It was Alice who had substituted
this contrivance for the brass "dinner-bell" in use throughout her
childhood; and neither she nor the others of her family realized that
the substitution of sweeter sounds had made the life of that household
more difficult. In spite of dismaying increases in wages, the Adamses
still strove to keep a cook; and, as they were unable to pay the higher
rates demanded by a good one, what they usually had was a whimsical
coloured woman of nomadic impulses. In the hands of such a person the
old-fashioned "dinner-bell" was satisfying; life could instantly be
made intolerable for any one dawdling on his way to a meal; the bell was
capable of every desirable profanity and left nothing bottled up in the
breast of the ringer. But the chamois-covered stick might whack upon
Alice's little Chinese bowls for a considerable length of time and
produce no great effect of urgency upon a hearer, nor any other effect,
except fury in the cook. The ironical impossibility of expressing
indignation otherwise than by sounds of gentle harmony proved
exasperating; the cook was apt to become surcharged, so that explosive
resignations, never rare, were somewhat more frequent after the
introduction of the gong.

Mrs. Adams took this increased frequency to be only another
manifestation of the inexplicable new difficulties that beset all
housekeeping. You paid a cook double what you had paid one a few years
before; and the cook knew half as much of cookery, and had no gratitude.
The more you gave these people, it seemed, the worse they behaved--a
condition not to be remedied by simply giving them less, because you
couldn't even get the worst unless you paid her what she demanded.
Nevertheless, Mrs. Adams remained fitfully an optimist in the matter.
Brought up by her mother to speak of a female cook as "the girl," she
had been instructed by Alice to drop that definition in favour of one
not an improvement in accuracy: "the maid." Almost always, during
the first day or so after every cook came, Mrs. Adams would say, at
intervals, with an air of triumph: "I believe--of course it's a little
soon to be sure--but I do really believe this new maid is the treasure
we've been looking for so long!" Much in the same way that Alice dreamed
of a mysterious perfect mate for whom she "waited," her mother had
a fairy theory that hidden somewhere in the universe there was the
treasure, the perfect "maid," who would come and cook in the Adamses'
kitchen, not four days or four weeks, but forever.

The present incumbent was not she. Alice, profoundly interested herself,
kept her mother likewise so preoccupied with the dress that they were
but vaguely conscious of the gong's soft warnings, though these were
repeated and protracted unusually. Finally the sound of a hearty voice,
independent and enraged, reached the pair. It came from the hall below.

"I says goo'-BYE!" it called. "Da'ss all!"

Then the front door slammed.

"Why, what----" Mrs. Adams began.

They went down hurriedly to find out. Miss Perry informed them.

"I couldn't make her listen to reason," she said. "She rang the gong
four or five times and got to talking to herself; and then she went up
to her room and packed her bag. I told her she had no business to go out
the front door, anyhow."

Mrs. Adams took the news philosophically. "I thought she had something
like that in her eye when I paid her this morning, and I'm not
surprised. Well, we won't let Mr. Adams know anything's the matter till
I get a new one."

They lunched upon what the late incumbent had left chilling on the
table, and then Mrs. Adams prepared to wash the dishes; she would "have
them done in a jiffy," she said, cheerfully. But it was Alice who washed
the dishes.

"I DON'T like to have you do that, Alice," her mother protested,
following her into the kitchen. "It roughens the hands, and when a girl
has hands like yours----"

"I know, mama." Alice looked troubled, but shook her head. "It can't be
helped this time; you'll need every minute to get that dress done."

Mrs. Adams went away lamenting, while Alice, no expert, began to splash
the plates and cups and saucers in the warm water. After a while, as
she worked, her eyes grew dreamy: she was making little gay-coloured
pictures of herself, unfounded prophecies of how she would look and what
would happen to her that evening. She saw herself, charming and demure,
wearing a fluffy idealization of the dress her mother now determinedly
struggled with upstairs; she saw herself framed in a garlanded archway,
the entrance to a ballroom, and saw the people on the shining floor
turning dramatically to look at her; then from all points a rush of
young men shouting for dances with her; and she constructed a superb
stranger, tall, dark, masterfully smiling, who swung her out of the
clamouring group as the music began. She saw herself dancing with him,
saw the half-troubled smile she would give him; and she accurately
smiled that smile as she rinsed the knives and forks.

These hopeful fragments of drama were not to be realized, she knew; but
she played that they were true, and went on creating them. In all of
them she wore or carried flowers--her mother's sorrow for her in this
detail but made it the more important--and she saw herself glamorous
with orchids; discarded these for an armful of long-stemmed, heavy
roses; tossed them away for a great bouquet of white camellias; and
so wandered down a lengthening hothouse gallery of floral beauty, all
costly and beyond her reach except in such a wistful day-dream. And upon
her present whole horizon, though she searched it earnestly, she could
discover no figure of a sender of flowers.

Out of her fancies the desire for flowers to wear that night emerged
definitely and became poignant; she began to feel that it might be
particularly important to have them. "This might be the night!" She was
still at the age to dream that the night of any dance may be the vital
point in destiny. No matter how commonplace or disappointing other
dance nights have been this one may bring the great meeting. The unknown
magnifico may be there.

Alice was almost unaware of her own reveries in which this being
appeared--reveries often so transitory that they developed and passed in
a few seconds. And in some of them the being was not wholly a stranger;
there were moments when he seemed to be composed of recognizable
fragments of young men she knew--a smile she had liked, from one; the
figure of another, the hair of another--and sometimes she thought
he might be concealed, so to say, within the person of an actual
acquaintance, someone she had never suspected of being the right seeker
for her, someone who had never suspected that it was she who "waited"
for him. Anything might reveal them to each other: a look, a turn of the
head, a singular word--perhaps some flowers upon her breast or in her
hand.

She wiped the dishes slowly, concluding the operation by dropping a
saucer upon the floor and dreamily sweeping the fragments under the
stove. She sighed and replaced the broom near a window, letting her
glance wander over the small yard outside. The grass, repulsively
besooted to the colour of coal-smoke all winter, had lately come to life
again and now sparkled with green, in the midst of which a tiny shot of
blue suddenly fixed her absent eyes. They remained upon it for several
moments, becoming less absent.

It was a violet.

Alice ran upstairs, put on her hat, went outdoors and began to search
out the violets. She found twenty-two, a bright omen--since the number
was that of her years--but not enough violets. There were no more; she
had ransacked every foot of the yard.

She looked dubiously at the little bunch in her hand, glanced at
the lawn next door, which offered no favourable prospect; then went
thoughtfully into the house, left her twenty-two violets in a bowl
of water, and came quickly out again, her brow marked with a frown of
decision. She went to a trolley-line and took a car to the outskirts of
the city where a new park had been opened.

Here she resumed her search, but it was not an easily rewarded one,
and for an hour after her arrival she found no violets. She walked
conscientiously over the whole stretch of meadow, her eyes roving
discontentedly; there was never a blue dot in the groomed expanse; but
at last, as she came near the borders of an old grove of trees, left
untouched by the municipal landscapers, the little flowers appeared, and
she began to gather them. She picked them carefully, loosening the earth
round each tiny plant, so as to bring the roots up with it, that it
might live the longer; and she had brought a napkin, which she
drenched at a hydrant, and kept loosely wrapped about the stems of her
collection.

The turf was too damp for her to kneel; she worked patiently, stooping
from the waist; and when she got home in a drizzle of rain at five
o'clock her knees were tremulous with strain, her back ached, and she
was tired all over, but she had three hundred violets. Her mother moaned
when Alice showed them to her, fragrant in a basin of water.

"Oh, you POOR child! To think of your having to work so hard to get
things that other girls only need lift their little fingers for!"

"Never mind," said Alice, huskily. "I've got 'em and I AM going to have
a good time to-night!"

"You've just got to!" Mrs. Adams agreed, intensely sympathetic. "The
Lord knows you deserve to, after picking all these violets, poor thing,
and He wouldn't be mean enough to keep you from it. I may have to get
dinner before I finish the dress, but I can get it done in a few minutes
afterward, and it's going to look right pretty. Don't you worry about
THAT! And with all these lovely violets----"

"I wonder----" Alice began, paused, then went on, fragmentarily: "I
suppose--well, I wonder--do you suppose it would have been better policy
to have told Walter before----"

"No," said her mother. "It would only have given him longer to grumble."

"But he might----"

"Don't worry," Mrs. Adams reassured her. "He'll be a little cross, but
he won't be stubborn; just let me talk to him and don't you say anything
at all, no matter what HE says."

These references to Walter concerned some necessary manoeuvres which
took place at dinner, and were conducted by the mother, Alice having
accepted her advice to sit in silence. Mrs. Adams began by laughing
cheerfully. "I wonder how much longer it took me to cook this dinner
than it does Walter to eat it?" she said. "Don't gobble, child! There's
no hurry."

In contact with his own family Walter was no squanderer of words.

"Is for me," he said. "Got date."

"I know you have, but there's plenty of time."

He smiled in benevolent pity. "YOU know, do you? If you made any
coffee--don't bother if you didn't. Get some down-town." He seemed
about to rise and depart; whereupon Alice, biting her lip, sent a
panic-stricken glance at her mother.

But Mrs. Adams seemed not at all disturbed; and laughed again. "Why,
what nonsense, Walter! I'll bring your coffee in a few minutes, but
we're going to have dessert first."

"What sort?"

"Some lovely peaches."

"Doe' want 'ny canned peaches," said the frank Walter, moving back his
chair. "G'-night."

"Walter! It doesn't begin till about nine o'clock at the earliest."

He paused, mystified. "What doesn't?"

"The dance."

"What dance?"

"Why, Mildred Palmer's dance, of course."

Walter laughed briefly. "What's that to me?"

"Why, you haven't forgotten it's TO-NIGHT, have you?" Mrs. Adams cried.
"What a boy!"

"I told you a week ago I wasn't going to that ole dance," he returned,
frowning. "You heard me."

"Walter!" she exclaimed. "Of COURSE you're going. I got your clothes all
out this afternoon, and brushed them for you. They'll look very nice,
and----"

"They won't look nice on ME," he interrupted. "Got date down-town, I
tell you."

"But of course you'll----"

"See here!" Walter said, decisively. "Don't get any wrong ideas in your
head. I'm just as liable to go up to that ole dance at the Palmers' as I
am to eat a couple of barrels of broken glass."

"But, Walter----"

Walter was beginning to be seriously annoyed. "Don't 'Walter' me! I'm no
s'ciety snake. I wouldn't jazz with that Palmer crowd if they coaxed me
with diamonds."

"Walter----"

"Didn't I tell you it's no use to 'Walter' me?" he demanded.

"My dear child----"

"Oh, Glory!"

At this Mrs. Adams abandoned her air of amusement, looked hurt, and
glanced at the demure Miss Perry across the table. "I'm afraid Miss
Perry won't think you have very good manners, Walter."

"You're right she won't," he agreed, grimly. "Not if I haf to hear any
more about me goin' to----"

But his mother interrupted him with some asperity: "It seems very
strange that you always object to going anywhere among OUR friends,
Walter."

"YOUR friends!" he said, and, rising from his chair, gave utterance to
an ironical laugh strictly monosyllabic. "Your friends!" he repeated,
going to the door. "Oh, yes! Certainly! Good-NIGHT!"

And looking back over his shoulder to offer a final brief view of his
derisive face, he took himself out of the room.

Alice gasped: "Mama----"

"I'll stop him!" her mother responded, sharply; and hurried after the
truant, catching him at the front door with his hat and raincoat on.

"Walter----"

"Told you had a date down-town," he said, gruffly, and would have opened
the door, but she caught his arm and detained him.

"Walter, please come back and finish your dinner. When I take all the
trouble to cook it for you, I think you might at least----"

"Now, now!" he said. "That isn't what you're up to. You don't want to
make me eat; you want to make me listen."

"Well, you MUST listen!" She retained her grasp upon his arm, and
made it tighter. "Walter, please!" she entreated, her voice becoming
tremulous. "PLEASE don't make me so much trouble!"

He drew back from her as far as her hold upon him permitted, and looked
at her sharply. "Look here!" he said. "I get you, all right! What's the
matter of Alice GOIN' to that party by herself?"

"She just CAN'T!"

"Why not?"

"It makes things too MEAN for her, Walter. All the other girls have
somebody to depend on after they get there."

"Well, why doesn't she have somebody?" he asked, testily. "Somebody
besides ME, I mean! Why hasn't somebody asked her to go? She ought to be
THAT popular, anyhow, I sh'd think--she TRIES enough!"

"I don't understand how you can be so hard," his mother wailed, huskily.
"You know why they don't run after her the way they do the other girls
she goes with, Walter. It's because we're poor, and she hasn't got any
background.

"'Background?'" Walter repeated. "'Background?' What kind of talk is
that?"

"You WILL go with her to-night, Walter?" his mother pleaded, not
stopping to enlighten him. "You don't understand how hard things are for
her and how brave she is about them, or you COULDN'T be so selfish! It'd
be more than I can bear to see her disappointed to-night! She went clear
out to Belleview Park this afternoon, Walter, and spent hours and hours
picking violets to wear. You WILL----"

Walter's heart was not iron, and the episode of the violets may have
reached it. "Oh, BLUB!" he said, and flung his soft hat violently at the
wall.

His mother beamed with delight. "THAT'S a good boy, darling! You'll
never be sorry you----"

"Cut it out," he requested. "If I take her, will you pay for a taxi?"

"Oh, Walter!" And again Mrs. Adams showed distress. "Couldn't you?"

"No, I couldn't; I'm not goin' to throw away my good money like that,
and you can't tell what time o' night it'll be before she's willin' to
come home. What's the matter you payin' for one?"

"I haven't any money."

"Well, father----"

She shook her head dolefully. "I got some from him this morning, and
I can't bother him for any more; it upsets him. He's ALWAYS been so
terribly close with money----"

"I guess he couldn't help that," Walter observed. "We're liable to go to
the poorhouse the way it is. Well, what's the matter our walkin' to this
rotten party?"

"In the rain, Walter?"

"Well, it's only a drizzle and we can take a streetcar to within a block
of the house."

Again his mother shook her head. "It wouldn't do."

"Well, darn the luck, all right!" he consented, explosively. "I'll get
her something to ride in. It means seventy-five cents."

"Why, Walter!" Mrs. Adams cried, much pleased. "Do you know how to get a
cab for that little? How splendid!"

"Tain't a cab," Walter informed her crossly. "It's a tin Lizzie, but you
don't haf' to tell her what it is till I get her into it, do you?"

Mrs. Adams agreed that she didn't.



CHAPTER VI

Alice was busy with herself for two hours after dinner; but a little
before nine o'clock she stood in front of her long mirror, completed,
bright-eyed and solemn. Her hair, exquisitely arranged, gave all she
asked of it; what artificialities in colour she had used upon her face
were only bits of emphasis that made her prettiness the more distinct;
and the dress, not rumpled by her mother's careful hours of work, was a
white cloud of loveliness. Finally there were two triumphant bouquets
of violets, each with the stems wrapped in tin-foil shrouded by a bow of
purple chiffon; and one bouquet she wore at her waist and the other she
carried in her hand.

Miss Perry, called in by a rapturous mother for the free treat of a look
at this radiance, insisted that Alice was a vision. "Purely and simply
a vision!" she said, meaning that no other definition whatever would
satisfy her. "I never saw anybody look a vision if she don't look one
to-night," the admiring nurse declared. "Her papa'll think the same I do
about it. You see if he doesn't say she's purely and simply a vision."

Adams did not fulfil the prediction quite literally when Alice paid a
brief visit to his room to "show" him and bid him good-night; but he
chuckled feebly. "Well, well, well!" he said.

"You look mighty fine--MIGHTY fine!" And he waggled a bony finger at her
two bouquets. "Why, Alice, who's your beau?"

"Never you mind!" she laughed, archly brushing his nose with the violets
in her hand. "He treats me pretty well, doesn't he?"

"Must like to throw his money around! These violets smell mighty sweet,
and they ought to, if they're going to a party with YOU. Have a good
time, dearie."

"I mean to!" she cried; and she repeated this gaily, but with an
emphasis expressing sharp determination as she left him. "I MEAN to!"

"What was he talking about?" her mother inquired, smoothing the rather
worn and old evening wrap she had placed on Alice's bed. "What were you
telling him you 'mean to?'"

Alice went back to her triple mirror for the last time, then stood
before the long one. "That I mean to have a good time to-night," she
said; and as she turned from her reflection to the wrap Mrs. Adams held
up for her, "It looks as though I COULD, don't you think so?"

"You'll just be a queen to-night," her mother whispered in fond emotion.
"You mustn't doubt yourself."

"Well, there's one thing," said Alice. "I think I do look nice enough to
get along without having to dance with that Frank Dowling! All I ask is
for it to happen just once; and if he comes near me to-night I'm going
to treat him the way the other girls do. Do you suppose Walter's got the
taxi out in front?"

"He--he's waiting down in the hall," Mrs. Adams answered, nervously; and
she held up another garment to go over the wrap.

Alice frowned at it. "What's that, mama?"

"It's--it's your father's raincoat. I thought you'd put it on over----"

"But I won't need it in a taxicab."

"You will to get in and out, and you needn't take it into the Palmers'.
You can leave it in the--in the--It's drizzling, and you'll need it."

"Oh, well," Alice consented; and a few minutes later, as with Walter's
assistance she climbed into the vehicle he had provided, she better
understood her mother's solicitude.

"What on earth IS this, Walter?" she asked.

"Never mind; it'll keep you dry enough with the top up," he returned,
taking his seat beside her. Then for a time, as they went rather jerkily
up the street, she was silent; but finally she repeated her question:
"What IS it, Walter?"

"What's what?"

"This--this CAR?"

"It's a ottomobile."

"I mean--what kind is it?"

"Haven't you got eyes?"

"It's too dark."

"It's a second-hand tin Lizzie," said Walter. "D'you know what that
means? It means a flivver."

"Yes, Walter."

"Got 'ny 'bjections?"

"Why, no, dear," she said, placatively. "Is it yours, Walter? Have you
bought it?"

"Me?" he laughed. "_I_ couldn't buy a used wheelbarrow. I rent this
sometimes when I'm goin' out among 'em. Costs me seventy-five cents and
the price o' the gas."

"That seems very moderate."

"I guess it is! The feller owes me some money, and this is the only way
I'd ever get it off him."

"Is he a garage-keeper?"

"Not exactly!" Walter uttered husky sounds of amusement. "You'll be just
as happy, I guess, if you don't know who he is," he said.

His tone misgave her; and she said truthfully that she was content not
to know who owned the car. "I joke sometimes about how you keep things
to yourself," she added, "but I really never do pry in your affairs,
Walter."

"Oh, no, you don't!"

"Indeed, I don't."

"Yes, you're mighty nice and cooing when you got me where you want me,"
he jeered. "Well, _I_ just as soon tell you where I get this car."

"I'd just as soon you wouldn't, Walter," she said, hurriedly. "Please
don't."

But Walter meant to tell her. "Why, there's nothin' exactly CRIMINAL
about it," he said. "It belongs to old J. A. Lamb himself. He keeps it
for their coon chauffeur. I rent it from him."

"From Mr. LAMB?"

"No; from the coon chauffeur."

"Walter!" she gasped.

"Sure I do! I can get it any night when the coon isn't goin' to use it
himself. He's drivin' their limousine to-night--that little Henrietta
Lamb's goin' to the party, no matter if her father HAS only been dead
less'n a year!" He paused, then inquired: "Well, how d'you like it?"

She did not speak, and he began to be remorseful for having imparted
so much information, though his way of expressing regret was his own.
"Well, you WILL make the folks make me take you to parties!" he said. "I
got to do it the best way I CAN, don't I?"

Then as she made no response, "Oh, the car's CLEAN enough," he said.
"This coon, he's as particular as any white man; you needn't worry about
that." And as she still said nothing, he added gruffly, "I'd of had a
better car if I could afforded it. You needn't get so upset about it."

"I don't understand--" she said in a low voice--"I don't understand how
you know such people."

"Such people as who?"

"As--coloured chauffeurs."

"Oh, look here, now!" he protested, loudly. "Don't you know this is a
democratic country?"

"Not quite that democratic, is it, Walter?"

"The trouble with you," he retorted, "you don't know there's anybody in
town except just this silk-shirt crowd." He paused, seeming to await
a refutation; but as none came, he expressed himself definitely: "They
make me sick."

They were coming near their destination, and the glow of the big,
brightly lighted house was seen before them in the wet night. Other
cars, not like theirs, were approaching this center of brilliance; long
triangles of light near the ground swept through the fine drizzle; small
red tail-lights gleamed again from the moist pavement of the street;
and, through the myriads of little glistening leaves along the curving
driveway, glimpses were caught of lively colours moving in a white glare
as the limousines released their occupants under the shelter of the
porte-cochere.

Alice clutched Walter's arm in a panic; they were just at the driveway
entrance. "Walter, we mustn't go in there."

"What's the matter?"

"Leave this awful car outside."

"Why, I----"

"Stop!" she insisted, vehemently. "You've got to! Go back!"

"Oh, Glory!"

The little car was between the entrance posts; but Walter backed it out,
avoiding a collision with an impressive machine which swerved away
from them and passed on toward the porte-cochere, showing a man's face
grinning at the window as it went by. "Flivver runabout got the wrong
number!" he said.

"Did he SEE us?" Alice cried.

"Did who see us?"

"Harvey Malone--in that foreign coupe."

"No; he couldn't tell who we were under this top," Walter assured her as
he brought the little car to a standstill beside the curbstone, out in
the street. "What's it matter if he did, the big fish?"

Alice responded with a loud sigh, and sat still.

"Well, want to go on back?" Walter inquired. "You bet I'm willing!"

"No."

"Well, then, what's the matter our drivin' on up to the porte-cochere?
There's room for me to park just the other side of it."

"No, NO!"

"What you expect to do? Sit HERE all night?"

"No, leave the car here."

"_I_ don't care where we leave it," he said. "Sit still till I lock her,
so none o' these millionaires around here'll run off with her." He got
out with a padlock and chain; and, having put these in place, offered
Alice his hand. "Come on, if you're ready."

"Wait," she said, and, divesting herself of the raincoat, handed it to
Walter. "Please leave this with your things in the men's dressing-room,
as if it were an extra one of your own, Walter."

He nodded; she jumped out; and they scurried through the drizzle.

As they reached the porte-cochere she began to laugh airily, and spoke
to the impassive man in livery who stood there. "Joke on us!" she
said, hurrying by him toward the door of the house. "Our car broke down
outside the gate."

The man remained impassive, though he responded with a faint gleam
as Walter, looking back at him, produced for his benefit a cynical
distortion of countenance which offered little confirmation of Alice's
account of things. Then the door was swiftly opened to the brother and
sister; and they came into a marble-floored hall, where a dozen sleeked
young men lounged, smoked cigarettes and fastened their gloves, as they
waited for their ladies. Alice nodded to one or another of these, and
went quickly on, her face uplifted and smiling; but Walter detained her
at the door to which she hastened.

"Listen here," he said. "I suppose you want me to dance the first dance
with you----"

"If you please, Walter," she said, meekly.

"How long you goin' to hang around fixin' up in that dressin'-room?"

"I'll be out before you're ready yourself," she promised him; and kept
her word, she was so eager for her good time to begin. When he came
for her, they went down the hall to a corridor opening upon three great
rooms which had been thrown open together, with the furniture removed
and the broad floors waxed. At one end of the corridor musicians sat in
a green grove, and Walter, with some interest, turned toward these; but
his sister, pressing his arm, impelled him in the opposite direction.

"What's the matter now?" he asked. "That's Jazz Louie and his half-breed
bunch--three white and four mulatto. Let's----?"

"No, no," she whispered. "We must speak to Mildred and Mr. and Mrs.
Palmer."

"'Speak' to 'em? I haven't got a thing to say to THOSE berries!"

"Walter, won't you PLEASE behave?"

He seemed to consent, for the moment, at least, and suffered her to take
him down the corridor toward a floral bower where the hostess stood with
her father and mother. Other couples and groups were moving in the
same direction, carrying with them a hubbub of laughter and fragmentary
chatterings; and Alice, smiling all the time, greeted people on
every side of her eagerly--a little more eagerly than most of them
responded--while Walter nodded in a noncommittal manner to one or two,
said nothing, and yawned audibly, the last resource of a person who
finds himself nervous in a false situation. He repeated his yawn and
was beginning another when a convulsive pressure upon his arm made him
understand that he must abandon this method of reassuring himself. They
were close upon the floral bower.

Mildred was giving her hand to one and another of her guests as rapidly
as she could, passing them on to her father and mother, and at the
same time resisting the efforts of three or four detached bachelors who
besought her to give over her duty in favour of the dance-music just
beginning to blare.

She was a large, fair girl, with a kindness of eye somewhat withheld by
an expression of fastidiousness; at first sight of her it was clear that
she would never in her life do anything "incorrect," or wear anything
"incorrect." But her correctness was of the finer sort, and had no air
of being studied or achieved; conduct would never offer her a problem to
be settled from a book of rules, for the rules were so deep within her
that she was unconscious of them. And behind this perfection there was
an even ampler perfection of what Mrs. Adams called "background." The
big, rich, simple house was part of it, and Mildred's father and mother
were part of it. They stood beside her, large, serene people, murmuring
graciously and gently inclining their handsome heads as they gave their
hands to the guests; and even the youngest and most ebullient of these
took on a hushed mannerliness with a closer approach to the bower.

When the opportunity came for Alice and Walter to pass within this
precinct, Alice, going first, leaned forward and whispered in Mildred's
ear. "You DIDN'T wear the maize georgette! That's what I thought you
were going to. But you look simply DARLING! And those pearls----"

Others were crowding decorously forward, anxious to be done with
ceremony and get to the dancing; and Mildred did not prolong the
intimacy of Alice's enthusiastic whispering. With a faint accession of
colour and a smile tending somewhat in the direction of rigidity, she
carried Alice's hand immediately onward to Mrs. Palmer's. Alice's own
colour showed a little heightening as she accepted the suggestion thus
implied; nor was that emotional tint in any wise decreased, a moment
later, by an impression that Walter, in concluding the brief exchange
of courtesies between himself and the stately Mr. Palmer, had again
reassured himself with a yawn.

But she did not speak of it to Walter; she preferred not to confirm the
impression and to leave in her mind a possible doubt that he had done
it. He followed her out upon the waxed floor, said resignedly: "Well,
come on," put his arm about her, and they began to dance.

Alice danced gracefully and well, but not so well as Walter. Of all the
steps and runs, of all the whimsical turns and twirlings, of all the
rhythmic swayings and dips commanded that season by such blarings as
were the barbaric product, loud and wild, of the Jazz Louies and their
half-breed bunches, the thin and sallow youth was a master. Upon his
face could be seen contempt of the easy marvels he performed as he
moved in swift precision from one smooth agility to another; and if some
too-dainty or jealous cavalier complained that to be so much a stylist
in dancing was "not quite like a gentleman," at least Walter's style was
what the music called for. No other dancer in the room could be thought
comparable to him. Alice told him so.

"It's wonderful!" she said. "And the mystery is, where you ever learned
to DO it! You never went to dancing-school, but there isn't a man in the
room who can dance half so well. I don't see why, when you dance like
this, you always make such a fuss about coming to parties."

He sounded his brief laugh, a jeering bark out of one side of the mouth,
and swung her miraculously through a closing space between two other
couples. "You know a lot about what goes on, don't you? You prob'ly
think there's no other place to dance in this town except these
frozen-face joints."

"'Frozen face?'" she echoed, laughing. "Why, everybody's having a
splendid time. Look at them."

"Oh, they holler loud enough," he said. "They do it to make each other
think they're havin' a good time. You don't call that Palmer family
frozen-face berries, I s'pose. No?"

"Certainly not. They're just dignified and----"

"Yeuh!" said Walter. "They're dignified, 'specially when you tried to
whisper to Mildred to show how IN with her you were, and she moved you
on that way. SHE'S a hot friend, isn't she!"

"She didn't mean anything by it. She----"

"Ole Palmer's a hearty, slap you-on-the-back ole berry," Walter
interrupted; adding in a casual tone, "All I'd like, I'd like to hit
him."

"Walter! By the way, you mustn't forget to ask Mildred for a dance
before the evening is over."

"Me?" He produced the lop-sided appearance of his laugh, but without
making it vocal. "You watch me do it!"

"She probably won't have one left, but you must ask her, anyway."

"Why must I?"

"Because, in the first place, you're supposed to, and, in the second
place, she's my most intimate friend."

"Yeuh? Is she? I've heard you pull that 'most-intimate-friend' stuff
often enough about her. What's SHE ever do to show she is?"

"Never mind. You really must ask her, Walter. I want you to; and I want
you to ask several other girls afterwhile; I'll tell you who."

"Keep on wanting; it'll do you good."

"Oh, but you really----"

"Listen!" he said. "I'm just as liable to dance with any of these
fairies as I am to buy a bucket o' rusty tacks and eat 'em. Forget it!
Soon as I get rid of you I'm goin' back to that room where I left my hat
and overcoat and smoke myself to death."

"Well," she said, a little ruefully, as the frenzy of Jazz Louie and his
half-breeds was suddenly abated to silence, "you mustn't--you mustn't
get rid of me TOO soon, Walter."

They stood near one of the wide doorways, remaining where they had
stopped. Other couples, everywhere, joined one another, forming
vivacious clusters, but none of these groups adopted the brother and
sister, nor did any one appear to be hurrying in Alice's direction to
ask her for the next dance. She looked about her, still maintaining that
jubilance of look and manner she felt so necessary--for it is to the
girls who are "having a good time" that partners are attracted--and, in
order to lend greater colour to her impersonation of a lively belle,
she began to chatter loudly, bringing into play an accompaniment of
frolicsome gesture. She brushed Walter's nose saucily with the bunch
of violets in her hand, tapped him on the shoulder, shook her pretty
forefinger in his face, flourished her arms, kept her shoulders moving,
and laughed continuously as she spoke.

"You NAUGHTY old Walter!" she cried. "AREN'T you ashamed to be such a
wonderful dancer and then only dance with your own little sister! You
could dance on the stage if you wanted to. Why, you could made your
FORTUNE that way! Why don't you? Wouldn't it be just lovely to have all
the rows and rows of people clapping their hands and shouting, 'Hurrah!
Hurrah, for Walter Adams! Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!"

He stood looking at her in stolid pity.

"Cut it out," he said. "You better be givin' some of these berries the
eye so they'll ask you to dance."

She was not to be so easily checked, and laughed loudly, flourishing her
violets in his face again. "You WOULD like it; you know you would; you
needn't pretend! Just think! A whole big audience shouting, 'Hurrah!
HURRAH! HUR----'"

"The place'll be pulled if you get any noisier," he interrupted, not
ungently. "Besides, I'm no muley cow."

"A 'COW?'" she laughed. "What on earth----"

"I can't eat dead violets," he explained. "So don't keep tryin' to make
me do it."

This had the effect he desired, and subdued her; she abandoned her
unsisterly coquetries, and looked beamingly about her, but her smile was
more mechanical than it had been at first.

At home she had seemed beautiful; but here, where the other girls
competed, things were not as they had been there, with only her mother
and Miss Perry to give contrast. These crowds of other girls had all
done their best, also, to look beautiful, though not one of them had
worked so hard for such a consummation as Alice had. They did not need
to; they did not need to get their mothers to make old dresses over;
they did not need to hunt violets in the rain.

At home her dress had seemed beautiful; but that was different,
too, where there were dozens of brilliant fabrics, fashioned in new
ways--some of these new ways startling, which only made the wearers
centers of interest and shocked no one. And Alice remembered that she
had heard a girl say, not long before, "Oh, ORGANDIE! Nobody wears
organdie for evening gowns except in midsummer." Alice had thought
little of this; but as she looked about her and saw no organdie except
her own, she found greater difficulty in keeping her smile as arch and
spontaneous as she wished it. In fact, it was beginning to make her face
ache a little.

Mildred came in from the corridor, heavily attended. She carried a great
bouquet of violets laced with lilies of-the-valley; and the violets were
lusty, big purple things, their stems wrapped in cloth of gold, with
silken cords dependent, ending in long tassels. She and her convoy
passed near the two young Adamses; and it appeared that one of the
convoy besought his hostess to permit "cutting in"; they were "doing it
other places" of late, he urged; but he was denied and told to console
himself by holding the bouquet, at intervals, until his third of the
sixteenth dance should come. Alice looked dubiously at her own bouquet.

Suddenly she felt that the violets betrayed her; that any one who looked
at them could see how rustic, how innocent of any florist's craft they
were "I can't eat dead violets," Walter said. The little wild flowers,
dying indeed in the warm air, were drooping in a forlorn mass; and it
seemed to her that whoever noticed them would guess that she had picked
them herself. She decided to get rid of them.

Walter was becoming restive. "Look here!" he said. "Can't you flag one
o' these long-tailed birds to take you on for the next dance? You came
to have a good time; why don't you get busy and have it? I want to get
out and smoke."

"You MUSTN'T leave me, Walter," she whispered, hastily. "Somebody'll
come for me before long, but until they do----"

"Well, couldn't you sit somewhere?"

"No, no! There isn't any one I could sit with."

"Well, why not? Look at those ole dames in the corners. What's the
matter your tyin' up with some o' them for a while?"

"PLEASE, Walter; no!"

In fact, that indomitable smile of hers was the more difficult to
maintain because of these very elders to whom Walter referred. They
were mothers of girls among the dancers, and they were there to fend and
contrive for their offspring; to keep them in countenance through any
trial; to lend them diplomacy in the carrying out of all enterprises;
to be "background" for them; and in these essentially biological
functionings to imitate their own matings and renew the excitement of
their nuptial periods. Older men, husbands of these ladies and fathers
of eligible girls, were also to be seen, most of them with Mr. Palmer
in a billiard-room across the corridor. Mr. and Mrs. Adams had not been
invited. "Of course papa and mama just barely know Mildred Palmer,"
Alice thought, "and most of the other girls' fathers and mothers are old
friends of Mr. and Mrs. Palmer, but I do think she might have ASKED papa
and mama, anyway--she needn't have been afraid just to ask them;
she knew they couldn't come." And her smiling lip twitched a little
threateningly, as she concluded the silent monologue. "I suppose she
thinks I ought to be glad enough she asked Walter!"

Walter was, in fact, rather noticeable. He was not Mildred's only guest
to wear a short coat and to appear without gloves; but he was singular
(at least in his present surroundings) on account of a kind of
coiffuring he favoured, his hair having been shaped after what seemed
a Mongol inspiration. Only upon the top of the head was actual hair
perceived, the rest appearing to be nudity. And even more than by any
difference in mode he was set apart by his look and manner, in which
there seemed to be a brooding, secretive and jeering superiority and
this was most vividly expressed when he felt called upon for his loud,
short, lop-sided laugh. Whenever he uttered it Alice laughed, too, as
loudly as she could, to cover it.

"Well," he said. "How long we goin' to stand here? My feet are sproutin'
roots."

Alice took his arm, and they began to walk aimlessly through the rooms,
though she tried to look as if they had a definite destination, keeping
her eyes eager and her lips parted;--people had called jovially to them
from the distance, she meant to imply, and they were going to join these
merry friends. She was still upon this ghostly errand when a furious
outbreak of drums and saxophones sounded a prelude for the second dance.

Walter danced with her again, but he gave her a warning. "I don't want
to leave you high and dry," he told her, "but I can't stand it. I got to
get somewhere I don't haf' to hurt my eyes with these berries; I'll go
blind if I got to look at any more of 'em. I'm goin' out to smoke as
soon as the music begins the next time, and you better get fixed for
it."

Alice tried to get fixed for it. As they danced she nodded sunnily to
every man whose eye she caught, smiled her smile with the under
lip caught between her teeth; but it was not until the end of the
intermission after the dance that she saw help coming.

Across the room sat the globular lady she had encountered that morning,
and beside the globular lady sat a round-headed, round-bodied girl;
her daughter, at first glance. The family contour was also as evident
a characteristic of the short young man who stood in front of Mrs.
Dowling, engaged with her in a discussion which was not without
evidences of an earnestness almost impassioned. Like Walter, he was
declining to dance a third time with sister; he wished to go elsewhere.

Alice from a sidelong eye watched the controversy: she saw the globular
young man glance toward her, over his shoulder; whereupon Mrs. Dowling,
following this glance, gave Alice a look of open fury, became much more
vehement in the argument, and even struck her knee with a round, fat
fist for emphasis.

"I'm on my way," said Walter. "There's the music startin' up again, and
I told you----"

She nodded gratefully. "It's all right--but come back before long,
Walter."

The globular young man, red with annoyance, had torn himself from
his family and was hastening across the room to her. "C'n I have this
dance?"

"Why, you nice Frank Dowling!" Alice cried. "How lovely!"



CHAPTER VII

They danced. Mr. Dowling should have found other forms of exercise and
pastime.

Nature has not designed everyone for dancing, though sometimes those
she has denied are the last to discover her niggardliness. But the round
young man was at least vigorous enough--too much so, when his knees
collided with Alice's--and he was too sturdy to be thrown off his feet,
himself, or to allow his partner to fall when he tripped her. He held
her up valiantly, and continued to beat a path through the crowd of
other dancers by main force.

He paid no attention to anything suggested by the efforts of the
musicians, and appeared to be unaware that there should have been some
connection between what they were doing and what he was doing; but he
may have listened to other music of his own, for his expression was of
high content; he seemed to feel no doubt whatever that he was dancing.
Alice kept as far away from him as under the circumstances she could;
and when they stopped she glanced down, and found the execution of
unseen manoeuvres, within the protection of her skirt, helpful to one of
her insteps and to the toes of both of her slippers.

Her cheery partner was paddling his rosy brows with a fine handkerchief.
"That was great!" he said. "Let's go out and sit in the corridor;
they've got some comfortable chairs out there."

"Well--let's not," she returned. "I believe I'd rather stay in here and
look at the crowd."

"No; that isn't it," he said, chiding her with a waggish forefinger.
"You think if you go out there you'll miss a chance of someone else
asking you for the next dance, and so you'll have to give it to me."

"How absurd!" Then, after a look about her that revealed nothing
encouraging, she added graciously, "You can have the next if you want
it."

"Great!" he exclaimed, mechanically. "Now let's get out of here--out of
THIS room, anyhow."

"Why? What's the matter with----"

"My mother," Mr. Dowling explained. "But don't look at her. She keeps
motioning me to come and see after Ella, and I'm simply NOT going to do
it, you see!"

Alice laughed. "I don't believe it's so much that," she said, and
consented to walk with him to a point in the next room from which Mrs.
Dowling's continuous signalling could not be seen. "Your mother hates
me."

"Oh, no; I wouldn't say that. No, she don't," he protested, innocently.
"She don't know you more than just to speak to, you see. So how could
she?"

"Well, she does. I can tell."

A frown appeared upon his rounded brow. "No; I'll tell you the way she
feels. It's like this: Ella isn't TOO popular, you know--it's hard to
see why, because she's a right nice girl, in her way--and mother thinks
I ought to look after her, you see. She thinks I ought to dance a whole
lot with her myself, and stir up other fellows to dance with her--it's
simply impossible to make mother understand you CAN'T do that, you see.
And then about me, you see, if she had her way I wouldn't get to dance
with anybody at all except girls like Mildred Palmer and Henrietta Lamb.
Mother wants to run my whole programme for me, you understand, but the
trouble of it is--about girls like that, you see well, I couldn't do
what she wants, even if I wanted to myself, because you take those
girls, and by the time I get Ella off my hands for a minute, why, their
dances are always every last one taken, and where do I come in?"

Alice nodded, her amiability undamaged. "I see. So that's why you dance
with me."

"No, I like to," he protested. "I rather dance with you than I do with
those girls." And he added with a retrospective determination which
showed that he had been through quite an experience with Mrs. Dowling in
this matter. "I TOLD mother I would, too!"

"Did it take all your courage, Frank?"

He looked at her shrewdly. "Now you're trying to tease me," he said. "I
don't care; I WOULD rather dance with you! In the first place, you're
a perfectly beautiful dancer, you see, and in the second, a man feels a
lot more comfortable with you than he does with them. Of course I know
almost all the other fellows get along with those girls all right; but
I don't waste any time on 'em I don't have to. _I_ like people that are
always cordial to everybody, you see--the way you are."

"Thank you," she said, thoughtfully.

"Oh, I MEAN it," he insisted. "There goes the band again. Shall we?"

"Suppose we sit it out?" she suggested. "I believe I'd like to go out in
the corridor, after all--it's pretty warm in here."

Assenting cheerfully, Dowling conducted her to a pair of easy-chairs
within a secluding grove of box-trees, and when they came to this
retreat they found Mildred Palmer just departing, under escort of a
well-favoured gentleman about thirty. As these two walked slowly away,
in the direction of the dancing-floor, they left it not to be doubted
that they were on excellent terms with each other; Mildred was evidently
willing to make their progress even slower, for she halted momentarily,
once or twice; and her upward glances to her tall companion's face were
of a gentle, almost blushing deference. Never before had Alice seen
anything like this in her friend's manner.

"How queer!" she murmured.

"What's queer?" Dowling inquired as they sat down.

"Who was that man?"

"Haven't you met him?"

"I never saw him before. Who is he?"

"Why, it's this Arthur Russell."

"What Arthur Russell? I never heard of him." Mr. Dowling was puzzled.
"Why, THAT'S funny! Only the last time I saw you, you were telling me
how awfully well you knew Mildred Palmer."

"Why, certainly I do," Alice informed him. "She's my most intimate
friend."

"That's what makes it seem so funny you haven't heard anything about
this Russell, because everybody says even if she isn't engaged to him
right now, she most likely will be before very long. I must say it looks
a good deal that way to me, myself."

"What nonsense!" Alice exclaimed. "She's never even mentioned him to
me."

The young man glanced at her dubiously and passed a finger over the tiny
prong that dashingly composed the whole substance of his moustache.

"Well, you see, Mildred IS pretty reserved," he remarked. "This Russell
is some kind of cousin of the Palmer family, I understand."

"He is?"

"Yes--second or third or something, the girls say. You see, my sister
Ella hasn't got much to do at home, and don't read anything, or sew, or
play solitaire, you see; and she hears about pretty much everything that
goes on, you see. Well, Ella says a lot of the girls have been talking
about Mildred and this Arthur Russell for quite a while back, you see.
They were all wondering what he was going to look like, you see; because
he only got here yesterday; and that proves she must have been talking
to some of 'em, or else how----"

Alice laughed airily, but the pretty sound ended abruptly with an
audible intake of breath. "Of course, while Mildred IS my most intimate
friend," she said, "I don't mean she tells me everything--and naturally
she has other friends besides. What else did your sister say she told
them about this Mr. Russell?"

"Well, it seems he's VERY well off; at least Henrietta Lamb told Ella he
was. Ella says----"

Alice interrupted again, with an increased irritability. "Oh, never
mind what Ella says! Let's find something better to talk about than Mr.
Russell!"

"Well, I'M willing," Mr. Dowling assented, ruefully. "What you want to
talk about?"

But this liberal offer found her unresponsive; she sat leaning back,
silent, her arms along the arms of her chair, and her eyes, moist and
bright, fixed upon a wide doorway where the dancers fluctuated. She was
disquieted by more than Mildred's reserve, though reserve so marked had
certainly the significance of a warning that Alice's definition, "my
most intimate friend," lacked sanction. Indirect notice to this effect
could not well have been more emphatic, but the sting of it was left
for a later moment. Something else preoccupied Alice: she had just
been surprised by an odd experience. At first sight of this Mr. Arthur
Russell, she had said to herself instantly, in words as definite as if
she spoke them aloud, though they seemed more like words spoken to her
by some unknown person within her: "There! That's exactly the kind of
looking man I'd like to marry!"

In the eyes of the restless and the longing, Providence often appears to
be worse than inscrutable: an unreliable Omnipotence given to haphazard
whimsies in dealing with its own creatures, choosing at random some
among them to be rent with tragic deprivations and others to be petted
with blessing upon blessing.

In Alice's eyes, Mildred had been blessed enough; something ought to
be left over, by this time, for another girl. The final touch to the
heaping perfection of Christmas-in-everything for Mildred was that this
Mr. Arthur Russell, good-looking, kind-looking, graceful, the perfect
fiance, should be also "VERY well off." Of course! These rich always
married one another. And while the Mildreds danced with their Arthur
Russells the best an outsider could do for herself was to sit with Frank
Dowling--the one last course left her that was better than dancing with
him.

"Well, what DO you want to talk about?" he inquired.

"Nothing," she said. "Suppose we just sit, Frank." But a moment later
she remembered something, and, with a sudden animation, began to
prattle. She pointed to the musicians down the corridor. "Oh, look at
them! Look at the leader! Aren't they FUNNY? Someone told me they're
called 'Jazz Louie and his half-breed bunch.' Isn't that just crazy?
Don't you love it? Do watch them, Frank."

She continued to chatter, and, while thus keeping his glance away from
herself, she detached the forlorn bouquet of dead violets from her dress
and laid it gently beside the one she had carried.

The latter already reposed in the obscurity selected for it at the base
of one of the box-trees.

Then she was abruptly silent.

"You certainly are a funny girl," Dowling remarked. "You say you don't
want to talk about anything at all, and all of a sudden you break
out and talk a blue streak; and just about the time I begin to get
interested in what you're saying you shut off! What's the matter with
girls, anyhow, when they do things like that?"

"I don't know; we're just queer, I guess."

"I say so! Well, what'll we do NOW? Talk, or just sit?"

"Suppose we just sit some more."

"Anything to oblige," he assented. "I'm willing to sit as long as you
like."

But even as he made his amiability clear in this matter, the peace was
threatened--his mother came down the corridor like a rolling, ominous
cloud. She was looking about her on all sides, in a fidget of annoyance,
searching for him, and to his dismay she saw him. She immediately made a
horrible face at his companion, beckoned to him imperiously with a dumpy
arm, and shook her head reprovingly. The unfortunate young man tried to
repulse her with an icy stare, but this effort having obtained little to
encourage his feeble hope of driving her away, he shifted his chair
so that his back was toward her discomfiting pantomime. He should
have known better, the instant result was Mrs. Dowling in motion at an
impetuous waddle.

She entered the box-tree seclusion with the lower rotundities of her
face hastily modelled into the resemblance of an over-benevolent smile
a contortion which neglected to spread its intended geniality upward to
the exasperated eyes and anxious forehead.

"I think your mother wants to speak to you, Frank," Alice said, upon
this advent.

Mrs. Dowling nodded to her. "Good evening, Miss Adams," she said. "I
just thought as you and Frank weren't dancing you wouldn't mind my
disturbing you----"

"Not at all," Alice murmured.

Mr. Dowling seemed of a different mind. "Well, what DO you want?" he
inquired, whereupon his mother struck him roguishly with her fan.

"Bad fellow!" She turned to Alice. "I'm sure you won't mind excusing him
to let him do something for his old mother, Miss Adams."

"What DO you want?" the son repeated.

"Two very nice things," Mrs. Dowling informed him. "Everybody is so
anxious for Henrietta Lamb to have a pleasant evening, because it's the
very first time she's been anywhere since her father's death, and of
course her dear grandfather's an old friend of ours, and----"

"Well, well!" her son interrupted. "Miss Adams isn't interested in all
this, mother."

"But Henrietta came to speak to Ella and me, and I told her you were so
anxious to dance with her----"

"Here!" he cried. "Look here! I'd rather do my own----"

"Yes; that's just it," Mrs. Dowling explained. "I just thought it was
such a good opportunity; and Henrietta said she had most of her dances
taken, but she'd give you one if you asked her before they were all
gone. So I thought you'd better see her as soon as possible."

Dowling's face had become rosy. "I refuse to do anything of the kind."

"Bad fellow!" said his mother, gaily. "I thought this would be the best
time for you to see Henrietta, because it won't be long till all her
dances are gone, and you've promised on your WORD to dance the next with
Ella, and you mightn't have a chance to do it then. I'm sure Miss Adams
won't mind if you----"

"Not at all," Alice said.

"Well, _I_ mind!" he said. "I wish you COULD understand that when I
want to dance with any girl I don't need my mother to ask her for me. I
really AM more than six years old!"

He spoke with too much vehemence, and Mrs. Dowling at once saw how
to have her way. As with husbands and wives, so with many fathers and
daughters, and so with some sons and mothers: the man will himself be
cross in public and think nothing of it, nor will he greatly mind a
little crossness on the part of the woman; but let her show agitation
before any spectator, he is instantly reduced to a coward's slavery.
Women understand that ancient weakness, of course; for it is one of
their most important means of defense, but can be used ignobly.

Mrs. Dowling permitted a tremulousness to become audible in her voice.
"It isn't very--very pleasant--to be talked to like that by your own
son--before strangers!"

"Oh, my! Look here!" the stricken Dowling protested. "_I_ didn't
say anything, mother. I was just joking about how you never get over
thinking I'm a little boy. I only----"

Mrs. Dowling continued: "I just thought I was doing you a little favour.
I didn't think it would make you so angry."

"Mother, for goodness' sake! Miss Adams'll think----"

"I suppose," Mrs. Dowling interrupted, piteously, "I suppose it doesn't
matter what _I_ think!"

"Oh, gracious!"

Alice interfered; she perceived that the ruthless Mrs. Dowling meant to
have her way. "I think you'd better go, Frank. Really."

"There!" his mother cried. "Miss Adams says so, herself! What more do
you want?"

"Oh, gracious!" he lamented again, and, with a sick look over his
shoulder at Alice, permitted his mother to take his arm and propel him
away. Mrs. Dowling's spirits had strikingly recovered even before the
pair passed from the corridor: she moved almost bouncingly beside her
embittered son, and her eyes and all the convolutions of her abundant
face were blithe.

Alice went in search of Walter, but without much hope of finding him.
What he did with himself at frozen-face dances was one of his most
successful mysteries, and her present excursion gave her no clue leading
to its solution. When the musicians again lowered their instruments
for an interval she had returned, alone, to her former seat within the
partial shelter of the box-trees.

She had now to practice an art that affords but a limited variety of
methods, even to the expert: the art of seeming to have an escort or
partner when there is none. The practitioner must imply, merely by
expression and attitude, that the supposed companion has left her for
only a few moments, that she herself has sent him upon an errand; and,
if possible, the minds of observers must be directed toward a conclusion
that this errand of her devising is an amusing one; at all events, she
is alone temporarily and of choice, not deserted. She awaits a devoted
man who may return at any instant.

Other people desired to sit in Alice's nook, but discovered her in
occupancy. She had moved the vacant chair closer to her own, and she
sat with her arm extended so that her hand, holding her lace kerchief,
rested upon the back of this second chair, claiming it. Such
a preemption, like that of a traveller's bag in the rack, was
unquestionable; and, for additional evidence, sitting with her knees
crossed, she kept one foot continuously moving a little, in cadence with
the other, which tapped the floor. Moreover, she added a fine detail:
her half-smile, with the under lip caught, seemed to struggle against
repression, as if she found the service engaging her absent companion
even more amusing than she would let him see when he returned: there was
jovial intrigue of some sort afoot, evidently. Her eyes, beaming with
secret fun, were averted from intruders, but sometimes, when couples
approached, seeking possession of the nook, her thoughts about the
absentee appeared to threaten her with outright laughter; and though
one or two girls looked at her skeptically, as they turned away, their
escorts felt no such doubts, and merely wondered what importantly funny
affair Alice Adams was engaged in. She had learned to do it perfectly.

She had learned it during the last two years; she was twenty when for
the first time she had the shock of finding herself without an applicant
for one of her dances. When she was sixteen "all the nice boys in town,"
as her mother said, crowded the Adamses' small veranda and steps, or sat
near by, cross-legged on the lawn, on summer evenings; and at eighteen
she had replaced the boys with "the older men." By this time most of
"the other girls," her contemporaries, were away at school or college,
and when they came home to stay, they "came out"--that feeble revival
of an ancient custom offering the maiden to the ceremonial inspection of
the tribe. Alice neither went away nor "came out," and, in contrast with
those who did, she may have seemed to lack freshness of lustre--jewels
are richest when revealed all new in a white velvet box. And Alice may
have been too eager to secure new retainers, too kind in her efforts to
keep the old ones. She had been a belle too soon.



CHAPTER VIII

The device of the absentee partner has the defect that it cannot be
employed for longer than ten or fifteen minutes at a time, and it may
not be repeated more than twice in one evening: a single repetition,
indeed, is weak, and may prove a betrayal. Alice knew that her present
performance could be effective during only this interval between
dances; and though her eyes were guarded, she anxiously counted over the
partnerless young men who lounged together in the doorways within her
view. Every one of them ought to have asked her for dances, she thought,
and although she might have been put to it to give a reason why any of
them "ought," her heart was hot with resentment against them.

For a girl who has been a belle, it is harder to live through these bad
times than it is for one who has never known anything better. Like a
figure of painted and brightly varnished wood, Ella Dowling sat against
the wall through dance after dance with glassy imperturbability; it was
easier to be wooden, Alice thought, if you had your mother with you, as
Ella had. You were left with at least the shred of a pretense that you
came to sit with your mother as a spectator, and not to offer yourself
to be danced with by men who looked you over and rejected you--not for
the first time. "Not for the first time": there lay a sting! Why had you
thought this time might be different from the other times? Why had you
broken your back picking those hundreds of violets?

Hating the fatuous young men in the doorways more bitterly for every
instant that she had to maintain her tableau, the smiling Alice knew
fierce impulses to spring to her feet and shout at them, "You IDIOTS!"
Hands in pockets, they lounged against the pilasters, or faced one
another, laughing vaguely, each one of them seeming to Alice no more
than so much mean beef in clothes. She wanted to tell them they were no
better than that; and it seemed a cruel thing of heaven to let them go
on believing themselves young lords. They were doing nothing, killing
time. Wasn't she at her lowest value at least a means of killing time?
Evidently the mean beeves thought not. And when one of them finally
lounged across the corridor and spoke to her, he was the very one to
whom she preferred her loneliness.

"Waiting for somebody, Lady Alicia?" he asked, negligently; and his easy
burlesque of her name was like the familiarity of the rest of him. He
was one of those full-bodied, grossly handsome men who are powerful and
active, but never submit themselves to the rigour of becoming athletes,
though they shoot and fish from expensive camps. Gloss is the most
shining outward mark of the type. Nowadays these men no longer use
brilliantine on their moustaches, but they have gloss bought from
manicure-girls, from masseurs, and from automobile-makers; and their
eyes, usually large, are glossy. None of this is allowed to interfere
with business; these are "good business men," and often make large
fortunes. They are men of imagination about two things--women and money,
and, combining their imaginings about both, usually make a wise first
marriage. Later, however, they are apt to imagine too much about some
little woman without whom life seems duller than need be. They run away,
leaving the first wife well enough dowered. They are never intentionally
unkind to women, and in the end they usually make the mistake of
thinking they have had their money's worth of life. Here was Mr. Harvey
Malone, a young specimen in an earlier stage of development, trying to
marry Henrietta Lamb, and now sauntering over to speak to Alice, as a
time-killer before his next dance with Henrietta.

Alice made no response to his question, and he dropped lazily into the
vacant chair, from which she sharply withdrew her hand. "I might as well
use his chair till he comes, don't you think? You don't MIND, do you,
old girl?"

"Oh, no," Alice said. "It doesn't matter one way or the other. Please
don't call me that."

"So that's how you feel?" Mr. Malone laughed indulgently, without much
interest. "I've been meaning to come to see you for a long time honestly
I have--because I wanted to have a good talk with you about old times. I
know you think it was funny, after the way I used to come to your house
two or three times a week, and sometimes oftener--well, I don't blame
you for being hurt, the way I stopped without explaining or anything.
The truth is there wasn't any reason: I just happened to have a lot of
important things to do and couldn't find the time. But I AM going to
call on you some evening--honestly I am. I don't wonder you think----"

"You're mistaken," Alice said. "I've never thought anything about it at
all."

"Well, well!" he said, and looked at her languidly. "What's the use of
being cross with this old man? He always means well." And, extending his
arm, he would have given her a friendly pat upon the shoulder but she
evaded it. "Well, well!" he said. "Seems to me you're getting awful
tetchy! Don't you like your old friends any more?"

"Not all of them."

"Who's the new one?" he asked, teasingly. "Come on and tell us, Alice.
Who is it you were holding this chair for?"

"Never mind."

"Well, all I've got to do is to sit here till he comes back; then I'll
see who it is."

"He may not come back before you have to go."

"Guess you got me THAT time," Malone admitted, laughing as he rose.
"They're tuning up, and I've got this dance. I AM coming around to
see you some evening." He moved away, calling back over his shoulder,
"Honestly, I am!"

Alice did not look at him.

She had held her tableau as long as she could; it was time for her to
abandon the box-trees; and she stepped forth frowning, as if a little
annoyed with the absentee for being such a time upon her errand;
whereupon the two chairs were instantly seized by a coquetting pair
who intended to "sit out" the dance. She walked quickly down the broad
corridor, turned into the broader hall, and hurriedly entered the
dressing-room where she had left her wraps.

She stayed here as long as she could, pretending to arrange her hair
at a mirror, then fidgeting with one of her slipper-buckles; but the
intelligent elderly woman in charge of the room made an indefinite
sojourn impracticable. "Perhaps I could help you with that buckle,
Miss," she suggested, approaching. "Has it come loose?" Alice wrenched
desperately; then it was loose. The competent woman, producing needle
and thread, deftly made the buckle fast; and there was nothing for Alice
to do but to express her gratitude and go.

She went to the door of the cloak-room opposite, where a coloured man
stood watchfully in the doorway. "I wonder if you know which of the
gentlemen is my brother, Mr. Walter Adams," she said.

"Yes'm; I know him."

"Could you tell me where he is?"

"No'm; I couldn't say."

"Well, if you see him, would you please tell him that his sister, Miss
Adams, is looking for him and very anxious to speak to him?"

"Yes'm. Sho'ly, sho'ly!"

As she went away he stared after her and seemed to swell with some
bursting emotion. In fact, it was too much for him, and he suddenly
retired within the room, releasing strangulated laughter.

Walter remonstrated. Behind an excellent screen of coats and hats, in a
remote part of the room, he was kneeling on the floor, engaged in a game
of chance with a second coloured attendant; and the laughter became
so vehement that it not only interfered with the pastime in hand, but
threatened to attract frozen-face attention.

"I cain' he'p it, man," the laughter explained. "I cain' he'p it! You
sut'n'y the beatin'es' white boy 'n 'is city!"

The dancers were swinging into an "encore" as Alice halted for an
irresolute moment in a doorway. Across the room, a cluster of matrons
sat chatting absently, their eyes on their dancing daughters; and Alice,
finding a refugee's courage, dodged through the scurrying couples,
seated herself in a chair on the outskirts of this colony of elders,
and began to talk eagerly to the matron nearest her. The matron seemed
unaccustomed to so much vivacity, and responded but dryly, whereupon
Alice was more vivacious than ever; for she meant now to present the
picture of a jolly girl too much interested in these wise older women to
bother about every foolish young man who asked her for a dance.

Her matron was constrained to go so far as to supply a tolerant nod, now
and then, in complement to the girl's animation, and Alice was grateful
for the nods. In this fashion she supplemented the exhausted resources
of the dressing-room and the box-tree nook; and lived through two more
dances, when again Mr. Frank Dowling presented himself as a partner.

She needed no pretense to seek the dressing-room for repairs after that
number; this time they were necessary and genuine. Dowling waited for
her, and when she came out he explained for the fourth or fifth time how
the accident had happened. "It was entirely those other people's fault,"
he said. "They got me in a kind of a corner, because neither of those
fellows knows the least thing about guiding; they just jam ahead and
expect everybody to get out of their way. It was Charlotte Thom's
diamond crescent pin that got caught on your dress in the back and made
such a----"

"Never mind," Alice said in a tired voice. "The maid fixed it so that
she says it isn't very noticeable."

"Well, it isn't," he returned. "You could hardly tell there'd been
anything the matter. Where do you want to go? Mother's been interfering
in my affairs some more and I've got the next taken."

"I was sitting with Mrs. George Dresser. You might take me back there."

He left her with the matron, and Alice returned to her picture-making,
so that once more, while two numbers passed, whoever cared to look was
offered the sketch of a jolly, clever girl preoccupied with her elders.
Then she found her friend Mildred standing before her, presenting Mr.
Arthur Russell, who asked her to dance with him.

Alice looked uncertain, as though not sure what her engagements were;
but her perplexity cleared; she nodded, and swung rhythmically away with
the tall applicant. She was not grateful to her hostess for this alms.
What a young hostess does with a fiance, Alice thought, is to make him
dance with the unpopular girls. She supposed that Mr. Arthur Russell had
already danced with Ella Dowling.

The loan of a lover, under these circumstances, may be painful to the
lessee, and Alice, smiling never more brightly, found nothing to say to
Mr. Russell, though she thought he might have found something to say to
her. "I wonder what Mildred told him," she thought. "Probably she said,
'Dearest, there's one more girl you've got to help me out with. You
wouldn't like her much, but she dances well enough and she's having a
rotten time. Nobody ever goes near her any more.'"

When the music stopped, Russell added his applause to the hand-clapping
that encouraged the uproarious instruments to continue, and as they
renewed the tumult, he said heartily, "That's splendid!"

Alice gave him a glance, necessarily at short range, and found his eyes
kindly and pleased. Here was a friendly soul, it appeared, who probably
"liked everybody." No doubt he had applauded for an "encore" when he
danced with Ella Dowling, gave Ella the same genial look, and said,
"That's splendid!"

When the "encore" was over, Alice spoke to him for the first time.

"Mildred will be looking for you," she said. "I think you'd better take
me back to where you found me."

He looked surprised. "Oh, if you----"

"I'm sure Mildred will be needing you," Alice said, and as she took his
arm and they walked toward Mrs. Dresser, she thought it might be just
possible to make a further use of the loan. "Oh, I wonder if you----"
she began.

"Yes?" he said, quickly.

"You don't know my brother, Walter Adams," she said. "But he's somewhere
I think possibly he's in a smoking-room or some place where girls aren't
expected, and if you wouldn't think it too much trouble to inquire----"

"I'll find him," Russell said, promptly. "Thank you so much for that
dance. I'll bring your brother in a moment."

It was to be a long moment, Alice decided, presently. Mrs. Dresser had
grown restive; and her nods and vague responses to her young dependent's
gaieties were as meager as they could well be. Evidently the matron had
no intention of appearing to her world in the light of a chaperone for
Alice Adams; and she finally made this clear. With a word or two of
excuse, breaking into something Alice was saying, she rose and went to
sit next to Mildred's mother, who had become the nucleus of the cluster.
So Alice was left very much against the wall, with short stretches
of vacant chairs on each side of her. She had come to the end of her
picture-making, and could only pretend that there was something amusing
the matter with the arm of her chair.

She supposed that Mildred's Mr. Russell had forgotten Walter by this
time. "I'm not even an intimate enough friend of Mildred's for him to
have thought he ought to bother to tell me he couldn't find him," she
thought. And then she saw Russell coming across the room toward her,
with Walter beside him. She jumped up gaily.

"Oh, thank you!" she cried. "I know this naughty boy must have been
terribly hard to find. Mildred'll NEVER forgive me! I've put you to so
much----"

"Not at all," he said, amiably, and went away, leaving the brother and
sister together.

"Walter, let's dance just once more," Alice said, touching his arm
placatively. "I thought--well, perhaps we might go home then."

But Walter's expression was that of a person upon whom an outrage has
just been perpetrated. "No," he said. "We've stayed THIS long, I'm goin'
to wait and see what they got to eat. And you look here!" He turned upon
her angrily. "Don't you ever do that again!"

"Do what?"

"Send somebody after me that pokes his nose into every corner of the
house till he finds me! 'Are you Mr. Walter Adams?' he says. I guess he
must asked everybody in the place if they were Mr. Walter Adams! Well,
I'll bet a few iron men you wouldn't send anybody to hunt for me again
if you knew where he found me!"

"Where was it?"

Walter decided that her fit punishment was to know. "I was shootin' dice
with those coons in the cloak-room."

"And he saw you?"

"Unless he was blind!" said Walter. "Come on, I'll dance this one more
dance with you. Supper comes after that, and THEN we'll go home."


Mrs. Adams heard Alice's key turning in the front door and hurried down
the stairs to meet her.

"Did you get wet coming in, darling?" she asked. "Did you have a good
time?"

"Just lovely!" Alice said, cheerily, and after she had arranged the
latch for Walter, who had gone to return the little car, she followed
her mother upstairs and hummed a dance-tune on the way.

"Oh, I'm so glad you had a nice time," Mrs. Adams said, as they reached
the door of her daughter's room together. "You DESERVED to, and it's
lovely to think----"

But at this, without warning, Alice threw herself into her mother's
arms, sobbing so loudly that in his room, close by, her father, half
drowsing through the night, started to full wakefulness.



CHAPTER IX

On a morning, a week after this collapse of festal hopes, Mrs. Adams
and her daughter were concluding a three-days' disturbance, the "Spring
house-cleaning"--postponed until now by Adams's long illness--and Alice,
on her knees before a chest of drawers, in her mother's room, paused
thoughtfully after dusting a packet of letters wrapped in worn muslin.
She called to her mother, who was scrubbing the floor of the hallway
just beyond the open door,

"These old letters you had in the bottom drawer, weren't they some papa
wrote you before you were married?"

Mrs. Adams laughed and said, "Yes. Just put 'em back where they were--or
else up in the attic--anywhere you want to."

"Do you mind if I read one, mama?"

Mrs. Adams laughed again. "Oh, I guess you can if you want to. I expect
they're pretty funny!"

Alice laughed in response, and chose the topmost letter of the packet.
"My dear, beautiful girl," it began; and she stared at these singular
words. They gave her a shock like that caused by overhearing some
bewildering impropriety; and, having read them over to herself several
times, she went on to experience other shocks.


MY DEAR, BEAUTIFUL GIRL:


This time yesterday I had a mighty bad case of blues because I had not
had a word from you in two whole long days and when I do not hear from
you every day things look mighty down in the mouth to me. Now it is all
so different because your letter has arrived and besides I have got a
piece of news I believe you will think as fine as I do. Darling, you
will be surprised, so get ready to hear about a big effect on our
future. It is this way. I had sort of a suspicion the head of the firm
kind of took a fancy to me from the first when I went in there, and
liked the way I attended to my work and so when he took me on this
business trip with him I felt pretty sure of it and now it turns out
I was about right. In return I guess I have got about the best boss in
this world and I believe you will think so too. Yes, sweetheart, after
the talk I have just had with him if J. A. Lamb asked me to cut my hand
off for him I guess I would come pretty near doing it because what he
says means the end of our waiting to be together. From New Years on he
is going to put me in entire charge of the sundries dept. and what do
you think is going to be my salary? Eleven hundred cool dollars a year
($1,100.00). That's all! Just only a cool eleven hundred per annum!
Well, I guess that will show your mother whether I can take care of you
or not. And oh how I would like to see your dear, beautiful, loving face
when you get this news.

I would like to go out on the public streets and just dance and shout
and it is all I can do to help doing it, especially when I know we will
be talking it all over together this time next week, and oh my darling,
now that your folks have no excuse for putting it off any longer we
might be in our own little home before Xmas.

Would you be glad?

Well, darling, this settles everything and makes our future just about
as smooth for us as anybody could ask. I can hardly realize after all
this waiting life's troubles are over for you and me and we have nothing
to do but to enjoy the happiness granted us by this wonderful, beautiful
thing we call life. I know I am not any poet and the one I tried to
write about you the day of the picnic was fearful but the way I THINK
about you is a poem.

Write me what you think of the news. I know but write me anyhow.

I'll get it before we start home and I can be reading it over all the
time on the tram.


Your always loving

VIRGIL.



The sound of her mother's diligent scrubbing in the hall came back
slowly to Alice's hearing, as she restored the letter to the packet,
wrapped the packet in its muslin covering, and returned it to the
drawer. She had remained upon her knees while she read the letter; now
she sank backward, sitting upon the floor with her hands behind her, an
unconscious relaxing for better ease to think. Upon her face there had
fallen a look of wonder.

For the first time she was vaguely perceiving that life is everlasting
movement. Youth really believes what is running water to be a permanent
crystallization and sees time fixed to a point: some people have dark
hair, some people have blond hair, some people have gray hair. Until
this moment, Alice had no conviction that there was a universe before
she came into it. She had always thought of it as the background of
herself: the moon was something to make her prettier on a summer night.

But this old letter, through which she saw still flickering an ancient
starlight of young love, astounded her. Faintly before her it revealed
the whole lives of her father and mother, who had been young, after
all--they REALLY had--and their youth was now so utterly passed from
them that the picture of it, in the letter, was like a burlesque of
them. And so she, herself, must pass to such changes, too, and all that
now seemed vital to her would be nothing.

When her work was finished, that afternoon, she went into her father's
room. His recovery had progressed well enough to permit the departure
of Miss Perry; and Adams, wearing one of Mrs. Adams's wrappers over his
night-gown, sat in a high-backed chair by a closed window. The weather
was warm, but the closed window and the flannel wrapper had not sufficed
him: round his shoulders he had an old crocheted scarf of Alice's; his
legs were wrapped in a heavy comfort; and, with these swathings about
him, and his eyes closed, his thin and grizzled head making but a slight
indentation in the pillow supporting it, he looked old and little and
queer.

Alice would have gone out softly, but without opening his eyes, he spoke
to her: "Don't go, dearie. Come sit with the old man a little while."

She brought a chair near his. "I thought you were napping."

"No. I don't hardly ever do that. I just drift a little sometimes."

"How do you mean you drift, papa?"

He looked at her vaguely. "Oh, I don't know. Kind of pictures. They get
a little mixed up--old times with times still ahead, like planning what
to do, you know. That's as near a nap as I get--when the pictures mix up
some. I suppose it's sort of drowsing."

She took one of his hands and stroked it. "What do you mean when you say
you have pictures like 'planning what to do'?" she asked.

"I mean planning what to do when I get out and able to go to work
again."

"But that doesn't need any planning," Alice said, quickly. "You're going
back to your old place at Lamb's, of course."

Adams closed his eyes again, sighing heavily, but made no other
response.

"Why, of COURSE you are!" she cried. "What are you talking about?"

His head turned slowly toward her, revealing the eyes, open in a haggard
stare. "I heard you the other night when you came from the party," he
said. "I know what was the matter."

"Indeed, you don't," she assured him. "You don't know anything about it,
because there wasn't anything the matter at all."

"Don't you suppose I heard you crying? What'd you cry for if there
wasn't anything the matter?"

"Just nerves, papa. It wasn't anything else in the world."

"Never mind," he said. "Your mother told me."

"She promised me not to!"

At that Adams laughed mournfully. "It wouldn't be very likely I'd hear
you so upset and not ask about it, even if she didn't come and tell me
on her own hook. You needn't try to fool me; I tell you I know what was
the matter."

"The only matter was I had a silly fit," Alice protested. "It did me
good, too."

"How's that?"

"Because I've decided to do something about it, papa."

"That isn't the way your mother looks at it," Adams said, ruefully. "She
thinks it's our place to do something about it. Well, I don't know--I
don't know; everything seems so changed these days. You've always been
a good daughter, Alice, and you ought to have as much as any of these
girls you go with; she's convinced me she's right about THAT. The
trouble is----" He faltered, apologetically, then went on, "I mean the
question is--how to get it for you."

"No!" she cried. "I had no business to make such a fuss just because a
lot of idiots didn't break their necks to get dances with me and because
I got mortified about Walter--Walter WAS pretty terrible----"

"Oh, me, my!" Adams lamented. "I guess that's something we just have
to leave work out itself. What you going to do with a boy nineteen or
twenty years old that makes his own living? Can't whip him. Can't keep
him locked up in the house. Just got to hope he'll learn better, I
suppose."

"Of course he didn't want to go to the Palmers'," Alice explained,
tolerantly--"and as mama and I made him take me, and he thought that was
pretty selfish in me, why, he felt he had a right to amuse himself any
way he could. Of course it was awful that this--that this Mr. Russell
should----" In spite of her, the recollection choked her.

"Yes, it was awful," Adams agreed. "Just awful. Oh, me, my!"

But Alice recovered herself at once, and showed him a cheerful face.
"Well, just a few years from now I probably won't even remember it! I
believe hardly anything amounts to as much as we think it does at the
time."

"Well--sometimes it don't."

"What I've been thinking, papa: it seems to me I ought to DO something."

"What like?"

She looked dreamy, but was obviously serious as she told him: "Well,
I mean I ought to be something besides just a kind of nobody. I ought
to----" She paused.

"What, dearie?"

"Well--there's one thing I'd like to do. I'm sure I COULD do it, too."

"What?"

"I want to go on the stage: I know I could act." At this, her father
abruptly gave utterance to a feeble cackling of laughter; and when
Alice, surprised and a little offended, pressed him for his reason, he
tried to evade, saying, "Nothing, dearie. I just thought of something."
But she persisted until he had to explain.

"It made me think of your mother's sister, your Aunt Flora, that died
when you were little," he said. "She was always telling how she was
going on the stage, and talking about how she was certain she'd make a
great actress, and all so on; and one day your mother broke out and said
she ought 'a' gone on the stage, herself, because she always knew she
had the talent for it--and, well, they got into kind of a spat about
which one'd make the best actress. I had to go out in the hall to
laugh!"

"Maybe you were wrong," Alice said, gravely. "If they both felt it, why
wouldn't that look as if there was talent in the family? I've ALWAYS
thought----"

"No, dearie," he said, with a final chuckle. "Your mother and Flora
weren't different from a good many others. I expect ninety per cent. of
all the women I ever knew were just sure they'd be mighty fine actresses
if they ever got the chance. Well, I guess it's a good thing; they enjoy
thinking about it and it don't do anybody any harm."

Alice was piqued. For several days she had thought almost continuously
of a career to be won by her own genius. Not that she planned details,
or concerned herself with first steps; her picturings overleaped all
that. Principally, she saw her name great on all the bill-boards of that
unkind city, and herself, unchanged in age but glamorous with fame and
Paris clothes, returning in a private car. No doubt the pleasantest
development of her vision was a dialogue with Mildred; and this became
so real that, as she projected it, Alice assumed the proper expressions
for both parties to it, formed words with her lips, and even spoke some
of them aloud. "No, I haven't forgotten you, Mrs. Russell. I remember
you quite pleasantly, in fact. You were a Miss Palmer, I recall, in
those funny old days. Very kind of you, I'm shaw. I appreciate your
eagerness to do something for me in your own little home. As you say, a
reception WOULD renew my acquaintanceship with many old friends--but I'm
shaw you won't mind my mentioning that I don't find much inspiration in
these provincials. I really must ask you not to press me. An artist's
time is not her own, though of course I could hardly expect you to
understand----"

Thus Alice illuminated the dull time; but she retired from the interview
with her father still manfully displaying an outward cheerfulness, while
depression grew heavier within, as if she had eaten soggy cake. Her
father knew nothing whatever of the stage, and she was aware of his
ignorance, yet for some reason his innocently skeptical amusement
reduced her bright project almost to nothing. Something like this always
happened, it seemed; she was continually making these illuminations, all
gay with gildings and colourings; and then as soon as anybody else so
much as glanced at them--even her father, who loved her--the pretty
designs were stricken with a desolating pallor. "Is this LIFE?" Alice
wondered, not doubting that the question was original and all her own.
"Is it life to spend your time imagining things that aren't so, and
never will be? Beautiful things happen to other people; why should I be
the only one they never CAN happen to?"

The mood lasted overnight; and was still upon her the next afternoon
when an errand for her father took her down-town. Adams had decided
to begin smoking again, and Alice felt rather degraded, as well as
embarrassed, when she went into the large shop her father had named, and
asked for the cheap tobacco he used in his pipe. She fell back upon an
air of amused indulgence, hoping thus to suggest that her purchase
was made for some faithful old retainer, now infirm; and although the
calmness of the clerk who served her called for no such elaboration of
her sketch, she ornamented it with a little laugh and with the remark,
as she dropped the package into her coat-pocket, "I'm sure it'll please
him; they tell me it's the kind he likes."

Still playing Lady Bountiful, smiling to herself in anticipation of the
joy she was bringing to the simple old negro or Irish follower of the
family, she left the shop; but as she came out upon the crowded pavement
her smile vanished quickly.

Next to the door of the tobacco-shop, there was the open entrance to a
stairway, and, above this rather bleak and dark aperture, a sign-board
displayed in begrimed gilt letters the information that Frincke's
Business College occupied the upper floors of the building. Furthermore,
Frincke here publicly offered "personal instruction and training in
practical mathematics, bookkeeping, and all branches of the business
life, including stenography, typewriting, etc."

Alice halted for a moment, frowning at this signboard as though it were
something surprising and distasteful which she had never seen before.
Yet it was conspicuous in a busy quarter; she almost always passed it
when she came down-town, and never without noticing it. Nor was this the
first time she had paused to lift toward it that same glance of vague
misgiving.

The building was not what the changeful city defined as a modern one,
and the dusty wooden stairway, as seen from the pavement, disappeared
upward into a smoky darkness. So would the footsteps of a girl ascending
there lead to a hideous obscurity, Alice thought; an obscurity as dreary
and as permanent as death. And like dry leaves falling about her she saw
her wintry imaginings in the May air: pretty girls turning into
withered creatures as they worked at typing-machines; old maids "taking
dictation" from men with double chins; Alice saw old maids of a dozen
different kinds "taking dictation." Her mind's eye was crowded with
them, as it always was when she passed that stairway entrance; and
though they were all different from one another, all of them looked a
little like herself.

She hated the place, and yet she seldom hurried by it or averted
her eyes. It had an unpleasant fascination for her, and a mysterious
reproach, which she did not seek to fathom. She walked on thoughtfully
to-day; and when, at the next corner, she turned into the street that
led toward home, she was given a surprise. Arthur Russell came rapidly
from behind her, lifting his hat as she saw him.

"Are you walking north, Miss Adams?" he asked. "Do you mind if I walk
with you?"

She was not delighted, but seemed so. "How charming!" she cried, giving
him a little flourish of the shapely hands; and then, because she
wondered if he had seen her coming out of the tobacco-shop, she laughed
and added, "I've just been on the most ridiculous errand!"

"What was that?"

"To order some cigars for my father. He's been quite ill, poor man, and
he's so particular--but what in the world do _I_ know about cigars?"

Russell laughed. "Well, what DO you know about 'em? Did you select by
the price?"

"Mercy, no!" she exclaimed, and added, with an afterthought, "Of course
he wrote down the name of the kind he wanted and I gave it to the
shopman. I could never have pronounced it."



CHAPTER X

In her pocket as she spoke her hand rested upon the little sack of
tobacco, which responded accusingly to the touch of her restless
fingers; and she found time to wonder why she was building up this
fiction for Mr. Arthur Russell. His discovery of Walter's device for
whiling away the dull evening had shamed and distressed her; but she
would have suffered no less if almost any other had been the discoverer.
In this gentleman, after hearing that he was Mildred's Mr. Arthur
Russell, Alice felt not the slightest "personal interest"; and there was
yet to develop in her life such a thing as an interest not personal. At
twenty-two this state of affairs is not unique.

So far as Alice was concerned Russell might have worn a placard,
"Engaged." She looked upon him as diners entering a restaurant look upon
tables marked "Reserved": the glance, slightly discontented, passes on
at once. Or so the eye of a prospector wanders querulously over staked
and established claims on the mountainside, and seeks the virgin land
beyond; unless, indeed, the prospector be dishonest. But Alice was no
claim-jumper--so long as the notice of ownership was plainly posted.

Though she was indifferent now, habit ruled her: and, at the very time
she wondered why she created fictitious cigars for her father, she
was also regretting that she had not boldly carried her Malacca stick
down-town with her. Her vivacity increased automatically.

"Perhaps the clerk thought you wanted the cigars for yourself," Russell
suggested. "He may have taken you for a Spanish countess."

"I'm sure he did!" Alice agreed, gaily; and she hummed a bar or two of
"LaPaloma," snapping her fingers as castanets, and swaying her body a
little, to suggest the accepted stencil of a "Spanish Dancer." "Would
you have taken me for one, Mr. Russell?" she asked, as she concluded the
impersonation.

"I? Why, yes," he said. "I'D take you for anything you wanted me to."

"Why, what a speech!" she cried, and, laughing, gave him a quick glance
in which there glimmered some real surprise. He was looking at
her quizzically, but with the liveliest appreciation. Her surprise
increased; and she was glad that he had joined her.

To be seen walking with such a companion added to her pleasure. She
would have described him as "altogether quite stunning-looking"; and she
liked his tall, dark thinness, his gray clothes, his soft hat, and his
clean brown shoes; she liked his easy swing of the stick he carried.

"Shouldn't I have said it?" he asked. "Would you rather not be taken for
a Spanish countess?"

"That isn't it," she explained. "You said----"

"I said I'd take you for whatever you wanted me to. Isn't that all
right?"

"It would all depend, wouldn't it?"

"Of course it would depend on what you wanted."

"Oh, no!" she laughed. "It might depend on a lot of things."

"Such as?"

"Well----" She hesitated, having the mischievous impulse to say, "Such
as Mildred!" But she decided to omit this reference, and became serious,
remembering Russell's service to her at Mildred's house. "Speaking of
what I want to be taken for," she said;--"I've been wondering ever since
the other night what you did take me for! You must have taken me for the
sister of a professional gambler, I'm afraid!"

Russell's look of kindness was the truth about him, she was to discover;
and he reassured her now by the promptness of his friendly chuckle.
"Then your young brother told you where I found him, did he? I kept my
face straight at the time, but I laughed afterward--to myself. It
struck me as original, to say the least: his amusing himself with those
darkies."

"Walter IS original," Alice said; and, having adopted this new view of
her brother's eccentricities, she impulsively went on to make it more
plausible. "He's a very odd boy, and I was afraid you'd misunderstand.
He tells wonderful 'darky stories,' and he'll do anything to draw
coloured people out and make them talk; and that's what he was doing at
Mildred's when you found him for me--he says he wins their confidence
by playing dice with them. In the family we think he'll probably write
about them some day. He's rather literary."

"Are you?" Russell asked, smiling.

"I? Oh----" She paused, lifting both hands in a charming gesture of
helplessness. "Oh, I'm just--me!"

His glance followed the lightly waved hands with keen approval, then
rose to the lively and colourful face, with its hazel eyes, its small
and pretty nose, and the lip-caught smile which seemed the climax of
her decorative transition. Never had he seen a creature so plastic or so
wistful.

Here was a contrast to his cousin Mildred, who was not wistful, and
controlled any impulses toward plasticity, if she had them. "By George!"
he said. "But you ARE different!"

With that, there leaped in her such an impulse of roguish gallantry
as she could never resist. She turned her head, and, laughing and
bright-eyed, looked him full in the face.

"From whom?" she cried.

"From--everybody!" he said. "Are you a mind-reader?"

"Why?"

"How did you know I was thinking you were different from my cousin,
Mildred Palmer?"

"What makes you think I DID know it?"

"Nonsense!" he said. "You knew what I was thinking and I knew you knew."

"Yes," she said with cool humour. "How intimate that seems to make us
all at once!"

Russell left no doubt that he was delighted with these gaieties of hers.
"By George!" he exclaimed again. "I thought you were this sort of girl
the first moment I saw you!"

"What sort of girl? Didn't Mildred tell you what sort of girl I am when
she asked you to dance with me?"

"She didn't ask me to dance with you--I'd been looking at you. You were
talking to some old ladies, and I asked Mildred who you were."

"Oh, so Mildred DIDN'T----" Alice checked herself. "Who did she tell you
I was?"

"She just said you were a Miss Adams, so I----"

"'A' Miss Adams?" Alice interrupted.

"Yes. Then I said I'd like to meet you."

"I see. You thought you'd save me from the old ladies."

"No. I thought I'd save myself from some of the girls Mildred was
getting me to dance with. There was a Miss Dowling----"

"Poor man!" Alice said, gently, and her impulsive thought was that
Mildred had taken few chances, and that as a matter of self-defense her
carefulness might have been well founded. This Mr. Arthur Russell was a
much more responsive person than one had supposed.

"So, Mr. Russell, you don't know anything about me except what you
thought when you first saw me?"

"Yes, I know I was right when I thought it."

"You haven't told me what you thought."

"I thought you were like what you ARE like."

"Not very definite, is it? I'm afraid you shed more light a minute or
so ago, when you said how different from Mildred you thought I was. That
WAS definite, unfortunately!"

"I didn't say it," Russell explained. "I thought it, and you read my
mind. That's the sort of girl I thought you were--one that could read a
man's mind. Why do you say 'unfortunately' you're not like Mildred?"

Alice's smooth gesture seemed to sketch Mildred. "Because she's
perfect--why, she's PERFECTLY perfect! She never makes a mistake, and
everybody looks up to her--oh, yes, we all fairly adore her! She's like
some big, noble, cold statue--'way above the rest of us--and she hardly
ever does anything mean or treacherous. Of all the girls I know I
believe she's played the fewest really petty tricks. She's----"

Russell interrupted; he looked perplexed. "You say she's perfectly
perfect, but that she does play SOME----"

Alice laughed, as if at his sweet innocence. "Men are so funny!" she
informed him. "Of course girls ALL do mean things sometimes. My own
career's just one long brazen smirch of 'em! What I mean is, Mildred's
perfectly perfect compared to the rest of us."

"I see," he said, and seemed to need a moment or two of thoughtfulness.
Then he inquired, "What sort of treacherous things do YOU do?"

"I? Oh, the very worst kind! Most people bore me particularly the men in
this town--and I show it."

"But I shouldn't call that treacherous, exactly."

"Well, THEY do," Alice laughed. "It's made me a terribly unpopular
character! I do a lot of things they hate. For instance, at a dance I'd
a lot rather find some clever old woman and talk to her than dance with
nine-tenths of these nonentities. I usually do it, too."

"But you danced as if you liked it. You danced better than any other
girl I----"

"This flattery of yours doesn't quite turn my head, Mr. Russell," Alice
interrupted. "Particularly since Mildred only gave you Ella Dowling to
compare with me!"

"Oh, no," he insisted. "There were others--and of course Mildred,
herself."

"Oh, of course, yes. I forgot that. Well----" She paused, then added, "I
certainly OUGHT to dance well."

"Why is it so much a duty?"

"When I think of the dancing-teachers and the expense to papa! All sorts
of fancy instructors--I suppose that's what daughters have fathers for,
though, isn't it? To throw money away on them?"

"You don't----" Russell began, and his look was one of alarm. "You
haven't taken up----"

She understood his apprehension and responded merrily, "Oh, murder, no!
You mean you're afraid I break out sometimes in a piece of cheesecloth
and run around a fountain thirty times, and then, for an encore, show
how much like snakes I can make my arms look."

"I SAID you were a mind-reader!" he exclaimed. "That's exactly what I
was pretending to be afraid you might do."

"'Pretending?' That's nicer of you. No; it's not my mania."

"What is?"

"Oh, nothing in particular that I know of just now. Of course I've had
the usual one: the one that every girl goes through."

"What's that?"

"Good heavens, Mr. Russell, you can't expect me to believe you're really
a man of the world if you don't know that every girl has a time in her
life when she's positive she's divinely talented for the stage! It's the
only universal rule about women that hasn't got an exception. I don't
mean we all want to go on the stage, but we all think we'd be wonderful
if we did. Even Mildred. Oh, she wouldn't confess it to you: you'd have
to know her a great deal better than any man can ever know her to find
out."

"I see," he said. "Girls are always telling us we can't know them. I
wonder if you----"

She took up his thought before he expressed it, and again he was
fascinated by her quickness, which indeed seemed to him almost
telepathic. "Oh, but DON'T we know one another, though!" she cried.

"Such things we have to keep secret--things that go on right before YOUR
eyes!"

"Why don't some of you tell us?" he asked.

"We can't tell you."

"Too much honour?"

"No. Not even too much honour among thieves, Mr. Russell. We don't tell
you about our tricks against one another because we know it wouldn't
make any impression on you. The tricks aren't played against you, and
you have a soft side for cats with lovely manners!"

"What about your tricks against us?"

"Oh, those!" Alice laughed. "We think they're rather cute!"

"Bravo!" he cried, and hammered the ferrule of his stick upon the
pavement.

"What's the applause for?"

"For you. What you said was like running up the black flag to the
masthead."

"Oh, no. It was just a modest little sign in a pretty flower-bed:
'Gentlemen, beware!'"

"I see I must," he said, gallantly.

"Thanks! But I mean, beware of the whole bloomin' garden!" Then, picking
up a thread that had almost disappeared: "You needn't think you'll ever
find out whether I'm right about Mildred's not being an exception by
asking her," she said. "She won't tell you: she's not the sort that ever
makes a confession."

But Russell had not followed her shift to the former topic. "'Mildred's
not being an exception?'" he said, vaguely. "I don't----"

"An exception about thinking she could be a wonderful thing on the stage
if she only cared to. If you asked her I'm pretty sure she'd say, 'What
nonsense!' Mildred's the dearest, finest thing anywhere, but you won't
find out many things about her by asking her."

Russell's expression became more serious, as it did whenever his cousin
was made their topic. "You think not?" he said. "You think she's----"

"No. But it's not because she isn't sincere exactly. It's only because
she has such a lot to live up to. She has to live up to being a girl
on the grand style to herself, I mean, of course." And without pausing
Alice rippled on, "You ought to have seen ME when I had the stage-fever!
I used to play 'Juliet' all alone in my room.' She lifted her arms in
graceful entreaty, pleading musically,

     "O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
     That monthly changes in her circled orb,
     Lest thy love prove----"


She broke off abruptly with a little flourish, snapping thumb and finger
of each outstretched hand, then laughed and said, "Papa used to make
such fun of me! Thank heaven, I was only fifteen; I was all over it by
the next year."

"No wonder you had the fever," Russell observed. "You do it beautifully.
Why didn't you finish the line?"

"Which one? 'Lest thy love prove likewise variable'? Juliet was saying
it to a MAN, you know. She seems to have been ready to worry about his
constancy pretty early in their affair!"

Her companion was again thoughtful. "Yes," he said, seeming to be rather
irksomely impressed with Alice's suggestion. "Yes; it does appear so."

Alice glanced at his serious face, and yielded to an audacious
temptation. "You mustn't take it so hard," she said, flippantly.

"It isn't about you: it's only about Romeo and Juliet."

"See here!" he exclaimed. "You aren't at your mind-reading again, are
you? There are times when it won't do, you know!"

She leaned toward him a little, as if companionably: they were walking
slowly, and this geniality of hers brought her shoulder in light contact
with his for a moment. "Do you dislike my mind-reading?" she asked, and,
across their two just touching shoulders, gave him her sudden look of
smiling wistfulness. "Do you hate it?"

He shook his head. "No, I don't," he said, gravely. "It's quite
pleasant. But I think it says, 'Gentlemen, beware!'"

She instantly moved away from him, with the lawless and frank laugh of
one who is delighted to be caught in a piece of hypocrisy. "How lovely!"
she cried. Then she pointed ahead. "Our walk is nearly over. We're
coming to the foolish little house where I live. It's a queer little
place, but my father's so attached to it the family have about given up
hope of getting him to build a real house farther out. He doesn't mind
our being extravagant about anything else, but he won't let us alter one
single thing about his precious little old house. Well!" She halted, and
gave him her hand. "Adieu!"

"I couldn't," he began; hesitated, then asked: "I couldn't come in with
you for a little while?"

"Not now," she said, quickly. "You can come----" She paused.

"When?"

"Almost any time." She turned and walked slowly up the path, but he
waited. "You can come in the evening if you like," she called back to
him over her shoulder.

"Soon?"

"As soon as you like!" She waved her hand; then ran indoors and watched
him from a window as he went up the street. He walked rapidly, a fine,
easy figure, swinging his stick in a way that suggested exhilaration.
Alice, staring after him through the irregular apertures of a lace
curtain, showed no similar buoyancy. Upon the instant she closed
the door all sparkle left her: she had become at once the simple and
sometimes troubled girl her family knew.

"What is going on out there?" her mother asked, approaching from the
dining-room.

"Oh, nothing," Alice said, indifferently, as she turned away. "That Mr.
Russell met me downtown and walked up with me."

"Mr. Russell? Oh, the one that's engaged to Mildred?"

"Well--I don't know for certain. He didn't seem so much like an engaged
man to me." And she added, in the tone of thoughtful preoccupation:
"Anyhow--not so terribly!"

Then she ran upstairs, gave her father his tobacco, filled his pipe for
him, and petted him as he lighted it.



CHAPTER XI

After that, she went to her room and sat down before her three-leaved
mirror. There was where she nearly always sat when she came into her
room, if she had nothing in mind to do. She went to that chair as
naturally as a dog goes to his corner.

She leaned forward, observing her profile; gravity seemed to be her
mood. But after a long, almost motionless scrutiny, she began to produce
dramatic sketches upon that ever-ready stage, her countenance: she
showed gaiety, satire, doubt, gentleness, appreciation of a companion
and love-in-hiding--all studied in profile first, then repeated for a
"three-quarter view." Subsequently she ran through them, facing herself
in full.

In this manner she outlined a playful scenario for her next interview
with Arthur Russell; but grew solemn again, thinking of the impression
she had already sought to give him. She had no twinges for any
underminings of her "most intimate friend"--in fact, she felt that her
work on a new portrait of Mildred for Mr.

Russell had been honest and accurate. But why had it been her instinct
to show him an Alice Adams who didn't exist?

Almost everything she had said to him was upon spontaneous impulse,
springing to her lips on the instant; yet it all seemed to have been
founded upon a careful design, as if some hidden self kept such designs
in stock and handed them up to her, ready-made, to be used for its own
purpose. What appeared to be the desired result was a false-coloured
image in Russell's mind; but if he liked that image he wouldn't be
liking Alice Adams; nor would anything he thought about the image be a
thought about her.

Nevertheless, she knew she would go on with her false, fancy colourings
of this nothing as soon as she saw him again; she had just been
practicing them. "What's the idea?" she wondered. "What makes me tell
such lies? Why shouldn't I be just myself?" And then she thought, "But
which one is myself?"

Her eyes dwelt on the solemn eyes in the mirror; and her lips,
disquieted by a deepening wonder, parted to whisper:

"Who in the world are you?"

The apparition before her had obeyed her like an alert slave, but now,
as she subsided to a complete stillness, that aspect changed to the
old mockery with which mirrors avenge their wrongs. The nucleus of some
queer thing seemed to gather and shape itself behind the nothingness of
the reflected eyes until it became almost an actual strange presence.
If it could be identified, perhaps the presence was that of the hidden
designer who handed up the false, ready-made pictures, and, for unknown
purposes, made Alice exhibit them; but whatever it was, she suddenly
found it monkey-like and terrifying. In a flutter she jumped up and went
to another part of the room.

A moment or two later she was whistling softly as she hung her light
coat over a wooden triangle in her closet, and her musing now was
quainter than the experience that led to it; for what she thought was
this, "I certainly am a queer girl!" She took a little pride in so much
originality, believing herself probably the only person in the world to
have such thoughts as had been hers since she entered the room, and the
first to be disturbed by a strange presence in the mirror. In fact, the
effect of the tiny episode became apparent in that look of preoccupied
complacency to be seen for a time upon any girl who has found reason to
suspect that she is a being without counterpart.

This slight glow, still faintly radiant, was observed across the
dinner-table by Walter, but he misinterpreted it. "What YOU lookin' so
self-satisfied about?" he inquired, and added in his knowing way, "I saw
you, all right, cutie!"

"Where'd you see me?"

"Down-town."

"This afternoon, you mean, Walter?"

"Yes, 'this afternoon, I mean, Walter,'" he returned, burlesquing
her voice at least happily enough to please himself; for he laughed
applausively. "Oh, you never saw me! I passed you close enough to pull
a tooth, but you were awful busy. I never did see anybody as busy as
you get, Alice, when you're towin' a barge. My, but you keep your hands
goin'! Looked like the air was full of 'em! That's why I'm onto why you
look so tickled this evening; I saw you with that big fish."

Mrs. Adams laughed benevolently; she was not displeased with this
rallying. "Well, what of it, Walter?" she asked. "If you happen to see
your sister on the street when some nice young man is being attentive to
her----"

Walter barked and then cackled. "Whoa, Sal!" he said. "You got the parts
mixed. It's little Alice that was 'being attentive.' I know the big fish
she was attentive to, all right, too."

"Yes," his sister retorted, quietly. "I should think you might have
recognized him, Walter."

Walter looked annoyed. "Still harpin' on THAT!" he complained. "The kind
of women I like, if they get sore they just hit you somewhere on the
face and then they're through. By the way, I heard this Russell was
supposed to be your dear, old, sweet friend Mildred's steady. What you
doin' walkin' as close to him as all that?"

Mrs. Adams addressed her son in gentle reproof, "Why Walter!"

"Oh, never mind, mama," Alice said. "To the horrid all things are
horrid."

"Get out!" Walter protested, carelessly. "I heard all about this Russell
down at the shop. Young Joe Lamb's such a talker I wonder he don't ruin
his grandfather's business; he keeps all us cheap help standin' round
listening to him nine-tenths of our time. Well, Joe told me this
Russell's some kin or other to the Palmer family, and he's got some
little money of his own, and he's puttin' it into ole Palmer's trust
company and Palmer's goin' to make him a vice-president of the company.
Sort of a keep-the-money-in-the-family arrangement, Joe Lamb says."

Mrs. Adams looked thoughtful. "I don't see----" she began.

"Why, this Russell's supposed to be tied up to Mildred," her son
explained. "When ole Palmer dies this Russell will be his son-in-law,
and all he'll haf' to do'll be to barely lift his feet and step into
the ole man's shoes. It's certainly a mighty fat hand-me-out for this
Russell! You better lay off o' there, Alice. Pick somebody that's got
less to lose and you'll make better showing."

Mrs. Adams's air of thoughtfulness had not departed. "But you say this
Mr. Russell is well off on his own account, Walter."

"Oh, Joe Lamb says he's got some little of his own. Didn't know how
much."

"Well, then----"

Walter laughed his laugh. "Cut it out," he bade her. "Alice wouldn't run
in fourth place."

Alice had been looking at him in a detached way, as though estimating
the value of a specimen in a collection not her own. "Yes," she said,
indifferently. "You REALLY are vulgar, Walter."

He had finished his meal; and, rising, he came round the table to her
and patted her good-naturedly on the shoulder. "Good ole Allie!" he
said. "HONEST, you wouldn't run in fourth place. If I was you I'd never
even start in the class. That frozen-face gang will rule you off the
track soon as they see your colours."

"Walter!" his mother said again.

"Well, ain't I her brother?" he returned, seeming to be entirely serious
and direct, for the moment, at least. "_I_ like the ole girl all right.
Fact is, sometimes I'm kind of sorry for her."

"But what's it all ABOUT?" Alice cried. "Simply because you met me
down-town with a man I never saw but once before and just barely know!
Why all this palaver?"

"'Why?'" he repeated, grinning. "Well, I've seen you start before, you
know!" He went to the door, and paused. "I got no date to-night. Take
you to the movies, you care to go."

She declined crisply. "No, thanks!"

"Come on," he said, as pleasantly as he knew how.

"Give me a chance to show you a better time than we had up at that
frozen-face joint. I'll get you some chop suey afterward."

"No, thanks!"

"All right," he responded and waved a flippant adieu. "As the barber
says, 'The better the advice, the worse it's wasted!' Good-night!"

Alice shrugged her shoulders; but a moment or two later, as the jar of
the carelessly slammed front door went through the house, she shook her
head, reconsidering. "Perhaps I ought to have gone with him. It might
have kept him away from whatever dreadful people are his friends--at
least for one night."

"Oh, I'm sure Walter's a GOOD boy," Mrs. Adams said, soothingly; and
this was what she almost always said when either her husband or Alice
expressed such misgivings. "He's odd, and he's picked up right queer
manners; but that's only because we haven't given him advantages like
the other young men. But I'm sure he's a GOOD boy."

She reverted to the subject a little later, while she washed the dishes
and Alice wiped them. "Of course Walter could take his place with the
other nice boys of the town even yet," she said. "I mean, if we could
afford to help him financially. They all belong to the country clubs and
have cars and----"

"Let's don't go into that any more, mama," the daughter begged her.
"What's the use?"

"It COULD be of use," Mrs. Adams insisted. "It could if your father----"

"But papa CAN'T."

"Yes, he can."

"But how can he? He told me a man of his age CAN'T give up a business
he's been in practically all his life, and just go groping about for
something that might never turn up at all. I think he's right about it,
too, of course!"

Mrs. Adams splashed among the plates with a new vigour heightened by an
old bitterness. "Oh, yes," she said. "He talks that way; but he knows
better."

"How could he 'know better,' mama?"

"HE knows how!"

"But what does he know?"

Mrs. Adams tossed her head. "You don't suppose I'm such a fool I'd
be urging him to give up something for nothing, do you, Alice? Do you
suppose I'd want him to just go 'groping around' like he was telling
you? That would be crazy, of course. Little as his work at Lamb's brings
in, I wouldn't be so silly as to ask him to give it up just on a CHANCE
he could find something else. Good gracious, Alice, you must give me
credit for a little intelligence once in a while!"

Alice was puzzled. "But what else could there be except a chance? I
don't see----"

"Well, I do," her mother interrupted, decisively. "That man could make
us all well off right now if he wanted to. We could have been rich long
ago if he'd ever really felt as he ought to about his family."

"What! Why, how could----"

"You know how as well as I do," Mrs. Adams said, crossly. "I guess you
haven't forgotten how he treated me about it the Sunday before he got
sick."

She went on with her work, putting into it a sudden violence inspired by
the recollection; but Alice, enlightened, gave utterance to a laugh
of lugubrious derision. "Oh, the GLUE factory again!" she cried. "How
silly!" And she renewed her laughter.

So often do the great projects of parents appear ignominious to their
children. Mrs. Adams's conception of a glue factory as a fairy godmother
of this family was an absurd old story which Alice had never taken
seriously. She remembered that when she was about fifteen her mother
began now and then to say something to Adams about a "glue factory,"
rather timidly, and as a vague suggestion, but never without irritating
him. Then, for years, the preposterous subject had not been mentioned;
possibly because of some explosion on the part of Adams, when his
daughter had not been present. But during the last year Mrs. Adams had
quietly gone back to these old hints, reviving them at intervals and
also reviving her husband's irritation. Alice's bored impression was
that her mother wanted him to found, or buy, or do something, or
other, about a glue factory; and that he considered the proposal so
impracticable as to be insulting. The parental conversations took place
when neither Alice nor Walter was at hand, but sometimes Alice had come
in upon the conclusion of one, to find her father in a shouting mood,
and shocking the air behind him with profane monosyllables as he
departed. Mrs. Adams would be left quiet and troubled; and when Alice,
sympathizing with the goaded man, inquired of her mother why these
tiresome bickerings had been renewed, she always got the brooding and
cryptic answer, "He COULD do it--if he wanted to." Alice failed to
comprehend the desirability of a glue factory--to her mind a father
engaged in a glue factory lacked impressiveness; had no advantage over
a father employed by Lamb and Company; and she supposed that Adams knew
better than her mother whether such an enterprise would be profitable
or not. Emphatically, he thought it would not, for she had heard him
shouting at the end of one of these painful interviews, "You can keep up
your dang talk till YOU die and _I_ die, but I'll never make one God's
cent that way!"

There had been a culmination. Returning from church on the Sunday
preceding the collapse with which Adams's illness had begun, Alice
found her mother downstairs, weeping and intimidated, while her father's
stamping footsteps were loudly audible as he strode up and down his room
overhead. So were his endless repetitions of invective loudly audible:
"That woman! Oh, that woman; Oh, that danged woman!"

Mrs. Adams admitted to her daughter that it was "the old glue factory"
and that her husband's wildness had frightened her into a "solemn
promise" never to mention the subject again so long as she had breath.
Alice laughed. The "glue factory" idea was not only a bore, but
ridiculous, and her mother's evident seriousness about it one of those
inexplicable vagaries we sometimes discover in the people we know best.
But this Sunday rampage appeared to be the end of it, and when Adams
came down to dinner, an hour later, he was unusually cheerful. Alice
was glad he had gone wild enough to settle the glue factory once and for
all; and she had ceased to think of the episode long before Friday of
that week, when Adams was brought home in the middle of the afternoon by
his old employer, the "great J. A. Lamb," in the latter's car.

During the long illness the "glue factory" was completely forgotten, by
Alice at least; and her laugh was rueful as well as derisive now, in the
kitchen, when she realized that her mother's mind again dwelt upon this
abandoned nuisance. "I thought you'd got over all that nonsense, mama,"
she said.

Mrs. Adams smiled, pathetically. "Of course you think it's nonsense,
dearie. Young people think everything's nonsense that they don't know
anything about."

"Good gracious!" Alice cried. "I should think I used to hear enough
about that horrible old glue factory to know something about it!"

"No," her mother returned patiently. "You've never heard anything about
it at all."

"I haven't?"

"No. Your father and I didn't discuss it before you children. All you
ever heard was when he'd get in such a rage, after we'd been speaking of
it, that he couldn't control himself when you came in. Wasn't _I_ always
quiet? Did _I_ ever go on talking about it?"

"No; perhaps not. But you're talking about it now, mama, after you
promised never to mention it again."

"I promised not to mention it to your father," said Mrs. Adams, gently.
"I haven't mentioned it to him, have I?"

"Ah, but if you mention it to me I'm afraid you WILL mention it to him.
You always do speak of things that you have on your mind, and you
might get papa all stirred up again about--" Alice paused, a light of
divination flickering in her eyes. "Oh!" she cried. "I SEE!"

"What do you see?"

"You HAVE been at him about it!"

"Not one single word!"

"No!" Alice cried. "Not a WORD, but that's what you've meant all along!
You haven't spoken the words to him, but all this urging him to change,
to 'find something better to go into'--it's all been about nothing on
earth but your foolish old glue factory that you know upsets him, and
you gave your solemn word never to speak to him about again! You didn't
say it, but you meant it--and he KNOWS that's what you meant! Oh, mama!"

Mrs. Adams, with her hands still automatically at work in the flooded
dishpan, turned to face her daughter. "Alice," she said, tremulously,
"what do I ask for myself?"

"What?"

"I say, What do I ask for myself? Do you suppose _I_ want anything?
Don't you know I'd be perfectly content on your father's present income
if I were the only person to be considered? What do I care about any
pleasure for myself? I'd be willing never to have a maid again; _I_
don't mind doing the work. If we didn't have any children I'd be glad to
do your father's cooking and the housework and the washing and ironing,
too, for the rest of my life. I wouldn't care. I'm a poor cook and a
poor housekeeper; I don't do anything well; but it would be good enough
for just him and me. I wouldn't ever utter one word of com----"

"Oh, goodness!" Alice lamented. "What IS it all about?"

"It's about this," said Mrs. Adams, swallowing. "You and Walter are a
new generation and you ought to have the same as the rest of the new
generation get. Poor Walter--asking you to go to the movies and a
Chinese restaurant: the best he had to offer! Don't you suppose _I_ see
how the poor boy is deteriorating? Don't you suppose I know what YOU
have to go through, Alice? And when I think of that man upstairs----"
The agitated voice grew louder. "When I think of him and know that
nothing in the world but his STUBBORNNESS keeps my children from having
all they want and what they OUGHT to have, do you suppose I'm going to
hold myself bound to keep to the absolute letter of a silly promise he
got from me by behaving like a crazy man? I can't! I can't do it! No
mother could sit by and see him lock up a horn of plenty like that in
his closet when the children were starving!"

"Oh, goodness, goodness me!" Alice protested. "We aren't precisely
'starving,' are we?"

Mrs. Adams began to weep. "It's just the same. Didn't I see how flushed
and pretty you looked, this afternoon, after you'd been walking with
this young man that's come here? Do you suppose he'd LOOK at a girl like
Mildred Palmer if you had what you ought to have? Do you suppose he'd be
going into business with her father if YOUR father----"

"Good heavens, mama; you're worse than Walter: I just barely know the
man! DON'T be so absurd!"

"Yes, I'm always 'absurd,'" Mrs. Adams moaned. "All I can do is cry,
while your father sits upstairs, and his horn of plenty----"

But Alice interrupted with a peal of desperate laughter. "Oh, that
'horn of plenty!' Do come down to earth, mama. How can you call a GLUE
factory, that doesn't exist except in your mind, a 'horn of plenty'? Do
let's be a little rational!"

"It COULD be a horn of plenty," the tearful Mrs. Adams insisted. "It
could! You don't understand a thing about it."

"Well, I'm willing," Alice said, with tired skepticism. "Make me
understand, then. Where'd you ever get the idea?"

Mrs. Adams withdrew her hands from the water, dried them on a towel,
and then wiped her eyes with a handkerchief. "Your father could make a
fortune if he wanted to," she said, quietly. "At least, I don't say a
fortune, but anyhow a great deal more than he does make."

"Yes, I've heard that before, mama, and you think he could make it out
of a glue factory. What I'm asking is: How?"

"How? Why, by making glue and selling it. Don't you know how bad most
glue is when you try to mend anything? A good glue is one of the rarest
things there is; and it would just sell itself, once it got started.
Well, your father knows how to make as good a glue as there is in the
world."

Alice was not interested. "What of it? I suppose probably anybody could
make it if they wanted to."

"I SAID you didn't know anything about it. Nobody else could make it.
Your father knows a formula for making it."

"What of that?"

"It's a secret formula. It isn't even down on paper. It's worth any
amount of money."

"'Any amount?'" Alice said, remaining incredulous. "Why hasn't papa sold
it then?"

"Just because he's too stubborn to do anything with it at all!"

"How did papa get it?"

"He got it before you were born, just after we were married. I didn't
think much about it then: it wasn't till you were growing up and I saw
how much we needed money that I----"

"Yes, but how did papa get it?" Alice began to feel a little more
curious about this possible buried treasure. "Did he invent it?"

"Partly," Mrs. Adams said, looking somewhat preoccupied. "He and another
man invented it."

"Then maybe the other man----"

"He's dead."

"Then his family----"

"I don't think he left any family," Mrs. Adams said. "Anyhow, it belongs
to your father. At least it belongs to him as much as it does to any one
else. He's got an absolutely perfect right to do anything he wants to
with it, and it would make us all comfortable if he'd do what I want him
to--and he KNOWS it would, too!"

Alice shook her head pityingly. "Poor mama!" she said. "Of course he
knows it wouldn't do anything of the kind, or else he'd have done it
long ago."

"He would, you say?" her mother cried. "That only shows how little you
know him!"

"Poor mama!" Alice said again, soothingly. "If papa were like what you
say he is, he'd be--why, he'd be crazy!"

Mrs. Adams agreed with a vehemence near passion. "You're right about him
for once: that's just what he is! He sits up there in his stubbornness
and lets us slave here in the kitchen when if he wanted to--if he'd so
much as lift his little finger----"

"Oh, come, now!" Alice laughed. "You can't build even a glue factory
with just one little finger."

Mrs. Adams seemed about to reply that finding fault with a figure
of speech was beside the point; but a ringing of the front door bell
forestalled the retort. "Now, who do you suppose that is?" she wondered
aloud, then her face brightened. "Ah--did Mr. Russell ask if he
could----"

"No, he wouldn't be coming this evening," Alice said. "Probably it's the
great J. A. Lamb: he usually stops for a minute on Thursdays to ask how
papa's getting along. I'll go."

She tossed her apron off, and as she went through the house her
expression was thoughtful. She was thinking vaguely about the glue
factory and wondering if there might be "something in it" after all. If
her mother was right about the rich possibilities of Adams's secret--but
that was as far as Alice's speculations upon the matter went at this
time: they were checked, partly by the thought that her father probably
hadn't enough money for such an enterprise, and partly by the fact that
she had arrived at the front door.



CHAPTER XII

The fine old gentleman revealed when she opened the door was probably
the last great merchant in America to wear the chin beard. White as
white frost, it was trimmed short with exquisite precision, while his
upper lip and the lower expanses of his cheeks were clean and rosy from
fresh shaving. With this trim white chin beard, the white waistcoat,
the white tie, the suit of fine gray cloth, the broad and brilliantly
polished black shoes, and the wide-brimmed gray felt hat, here was a
man who had found his style in the seventies of the last century, and
thenceforth kept it. Files of old magazines of that period might show
him, in woodcut, as, "Type of Boston Merchant"; Nast might have drawn
him as an honest statesman. He was eighty, hale and sturdy, not aged;
and his quick blue eyes, still unflecked, and as brisk as a boy's, saw
everything.

"Well, well, well!" he said, heartily. "You haven't lost any of your
good looks since last week, I see, Miss Alice, so I guess I'm to take
it you haven't been worrying over your daddy. The young feller's getting
along all right, is he?"

"He's much better; he's sitting up, Mr. Lamb. Won't you come in?"

"Well, I don't know but I might." He turned to call toward twin disks of
light at the curb, "Be out in a minute, Billy"; and the silhouette of a
chauffeur standing beside a car could be seen to salute in response, as
the old gentleman stepped into the hall. "You don't suppose your daddy's
receiving callers yet, is he?"

"He's a good deal stronger than he was when you were here last week, but
I'm afraid he's not very presentable, though."

"'Presentable?'" The old man echoed her jovially. "Pshaw! I've seen lots
of sick folks. _I_ know what they look like and how they love to kind of
nest in among a pile of old blankets and wrappers. Don't you worry about
THAT, Miss Alice, if you think he'd like to see me."

"Of course he would--if----" Alice hesitated; then said quickly, "Of
course he'd love to see you and he's quite able to, if you care to come
up."

She ran up the stairs ahead of him, and had time to snatch the crocheted
wrap from her father's shoulders. Swathed as usual, he was sitting
beside a table, reading the evening paper; but when his employer
appeared in the doorway he half rose as if to come forward in greeting.

"Sit still!" the old gentleman shouted. "What do you mean? Don't you
know you're weak as a cat? D'you think a man can be sick as long as you
have and NOT be weak as a cat? What you trying to do the polite with ME
for?"

Adams gratefully protracted the handshake that accompanied these
inquiries. "This is certainly mighty fine of you, Mr. Lamb," he said.
"I guess Alice has told you how much our whole family appreciate your
coming here so regularly to see how this old bag o' bones was getting
along. Haven't you, Alice?"

"Yes, papa," she said; and turned to go out, but Lamb checked her.

"Stay right here, Miss Alice; I'm not even going to sit down. I know
how it upsets sick folks when people outside the family come in for the
first time."

"You don't upset me," Adams said. "I'll feel a lot better for getting a
glimpse of you, Mr. Lamb."

The visitor's laugh was husky, but hearty and re-assuring, like his
voice in speaking. "That's the way all my boys blarney me, Miss Alice,"
he said. "They think I'll make the work lighter on 'em if they can
get me kind of flattered up. You just tell your daddy it's no use; he
doesn't get on MY soft side, pretending he likes to see me even when
he's sick."

"Oh, I'm not so sick any more," Adams said. "I expect to be back in my
place ten days from now at the longest."

"Well, now, don't hurry it, Virgil; don't hurry it. You take your time;
take your time."

This brought to Adams's lips a feeble smile not lacking in a kind of
vanity, as feeble. "Why?" he asked. "I suppose you think my department
runs itself down there, do you?"

His employer's response was another husky laugh. "Well, well, well!" he
cried, and patted Adams's shoulder with a strong pink hand. "Listen to
this young feller, Miss Alice, will you! He thinks we can't get along
without him a minute! Yes, sir, this daddy of yours believes the whole
works 'll just take and run down if he isn't there to keep 'em wound up.
I always suspected he thought a good deal of himself, and now I know he
does!"

Adams looked troubled. "Well, I don't like to feel that my salary's
going on with me not earning it."

"Listen to him, Miss Alice! Wouldn't you think, now, he'd let me be the
one to worry about that? Why, on my word, if your daddy had his way, _I_
wouldn't be anywhere. He'd take all my worrying and everything else off
my shoulders and shove me right out of Lamb and Company! He would!"

"It seems to me I've been soldiering on you a pretty long while, Mr.
Lamb," the convalescent said, querulously. "I don't feel right about it;
but I'll be back in ten days. You'll see."

The old man took his hand in parting. "All right; we'll see, Virgil. Of
course we do need you, seriously speaking; but we don't need you so bad
we'll let you come down there before you're fully fit and able." He went
to the door. "You hear, Miss Alice? That's what I wanted to make the old
feller understand, and what I want you to kind of enforce on him. The
old place is there waiting for him, and it'd wait ten years if it took
him that long to get good and well. You see that he remembers it, Miss
Alice!"

She went down the stairs with him, and he continued to impress this upon
her until he had gone out of the front door. And even after that, the
husky voice called back from the darkness, as he went to his car, "Don't
forget, Miss Alice; let him take his own time. We always want him, but
we want him to get good and well first. Good-night, good-night, young
lady!"

When she closed the door her mother came from the farther end of the
"living-room," where there was no light; and Alice turned to her.

"I can't help liking that old man, mama," she said. "He always sounds
so--well, so solid and honest and friendly! I do like him."

But Mrs. Adams failed in sympathy upon this point. "He didn't say
anything about raising your father's salary, did he?" she asked, dryly.

"No."

"No. I thought not."

She would have said more, but Alice, indisposed to listen, began to
whistle, ran up the stairs, and went to sit with her father. She found
him bright-eyed with the excitement a first caller brings into a slow
convalescence: his cheeks showed actual hints of colour; and he was
smiling tremulously as he filled and lit his pipe. She brought the
crocheted scarf and put it about his shoulders again, then took a chair
near him.

"I believe seeing Mr. Lamb did do you good, papa," she said. "I sort of
thought it might, and that's why I let him come up. You really look a
little like your old self again."

Adams exhaled a breathy "Ha!" with the smoke from his pipe as he waved
the match to extinguish it. "That's fine," he said. "The smoke I had
before dinner didn't taste the way it used to, and I kind of wondered if
I'd lost my liking for tobacco, but this one seems to be all right. You
bet it did me good to see J. A. Lamb! He's the biggest man that's ever
lived in this town or ever will live here; and you can take all the
Governors and Senators or anything they've raised here, and put 'em in
a pot with him, and they won't come out one-two-three alongside o' him!
And to think as big a man as that, with all his interests and everything
he's got on his mind--to think he'd never let anything prevent him from
coming here once every week to ask how I was getting along, and then
walk right upstairs and kind of CALL on me, as it were well, it makes
me sort of feel as if I wasn't so much of a nobody, so to speak, as your
mother seems to like to make out sometimes."

"How foolish, papa! Of COURSE you're not 'a nobody.'"

Adams chuckled faintly upon his pipe-stem, what vanity he had seeming to
be further stimulated by his daughter's applause. "I guess there aren't
a whole lot of people in this town that could claim J. A. showed that
much interest in 'em," he said. "Of course I don't set up to believe
it's all because of merit, or anything like that. He'd do the same for
anybody else that'd been with the company as long as I have, but still
it IS something to be with the company that long and have him show he
appreciates it."

"Yes, indeed, it is, papa."

"Yes, sir," Adams said, reflectively. "Yes, sir, I guess that's so. And
besides, it all goes to show the kind of a man he is. Simon pure, that's
what that man is, Alice. Simon pure! There's never been anybody work
for him that didn't respect him more than they did any other man in the
world, I guess. And when you work for him you know he respects you,
too. Right from the start you get the feeling that J. A. puts absolute
confidence in you; and that's mighty stimulating: it makes you want to
show him he hasn't misplaced it. There's great big moral values to the
way a man like him gets you to feeling about your relations with the
business: it ain't all just dollars and cents--not by any means!"

He was silent for a time, then returned with increasing enthusiasm to
this theme, and Alice was glad to see so much renewal of life in him; he
had not spoken with a like cheerful vigour since before his illness. The
visit of his idolized great man had indeed been good for him, putting
new spirit into him; and liveliness of the body followed that of the
spirit. His improvement carried over the night: he slept well and
awoke late, declaring that he was "pretty near a well man and ready for
business right now." Moreover, having slept again in the afternoon,
he dressed and went down to dinner, leaning but lightly on Alice, who
conducted him.

"My! but you and your mother have been at it with your scrubbing and
dusting!" he said, as they came through the "living-room." "I don't know
I ever did see the house so spick and span before!" His glance fell upon
a few carnations in a vase, and he chuckled admiringly. "Flowers, too!
So THAT'S what you coaxed that dollar and a half out o 'me for, this
morning!"

Other embellishments brought forth his comment when he had taken his old
seat at the head of the small dinner-table. "Why, I declare, Alice!" he
exclaimed. "I been so busy looking at all the spick-and-spanishness
after the house-cleaning, and the flowers out in the parlour--'living
room' I suppose you want me to call it, if I just GOT to be
fashionable--I been so busy studying over all this so-and-so, I declare
I never noticed YOU till this minute! My, but you ARE all dressed up!
What's goin' on? What's it about: you so all dressed up, and flowers in
the parlour and everything?"

"Don't you see, papa? It's in honour of your coming downstairs again, of
course."

"Oh, so that's it," he said. "I never would 'a' thought of that, I
guess."

But Walter looked sidelong at his father, and gave forth his sly and
knowing laugh. "Neither would I!" he said.

Adams lifted his eyebrows jocosely. "You're jealous, are you, sonny? You
don't want the old man to think our young lady'd make so much fuss over
him, do you?"

"Go on thinkin' it's over you," Walter retorted, amused. "Go on and
think it. It'll do you good."

"Of course I'll think it," Adams said. "It isn't anybody's birthday.
Certainly the decorations are on account of me coming downstairs. Didn't
you hear Alice say so?"

"Sure, I heard her say so."

"Well, then----"

Walter interrupted him with a little music. Looking shrewdly at Alice,
he sang:

     "I was walkin' out on Monday with my sweet thing.
     She's my neat thing,
     My sweet thing:
     I'll go round on Tuesday night to see her.
     Oh, how we'll spoon----"


"Walter!" his mother cried. "WHERE do you learn such vulgar songs?"
However, she seemed not greatly displeased with him, and laughed as she
spoke.

"So that's it, Alice!" said Adams. "Playing the hypocrite with your old
man, are you? It's some new beau, is it?"

"I only wish it were," she said, calmly. "No. It's just what I said:
it's all for you, dear."

"Don't let her con you," Walter advised his father. "She's got
expectations. You hang around downstairs a while after dinner and you'll
see."

But the prophecy failed, though Adams went to his own room without
waiting to test it. No one came.

Alice stayed in the "living-room" until half-past nine, when she went
slowly upstairs. Her mother, almost tearful, met her at the top, and
whispered, "You mustn't mind, dearie."

"Mustn't mind what?" Alice asked, and then, as she went on her way,
laughed scornfully. "What utter nonsense!" she said.

Next day she cut the stems of the rather scant show of carnations and
refreshed them with new water. At dinner, her father, still in high
spirits, observed that she had again "dressed up" in honour of his
second descent of the stairs; and Walter repeated his fragment of
objectionable song; but these jocularities were rendered pointless by
the eventless evening that followed; and in the morning the carnations
began to appear tarnished and flaccid.

Alice gave them a long look, then threw them away; and neither Walter
nor her father was inspired to any rallying by her plain costume for
that evening. Mrs. Adams was visibly depressed.

When Alice finished helping her mother with the dishes, she went
outdoors and sat upon the steps of the little front veranda. The night,
gentle with warm air from the south, surrounded her pleasantly, and the
perpetual smoke was thinner. Now that the furnaces of dwelling-houses
were no longer fired, life in that city had begun to be less like life
in a railway tunnel; people were aware of summer in the air, and in
the thickened foliage of the shade-trees, and in the sky. Stars were
unveiled by the passing of the denser smoke fogs, and to-night they
could be seen clearly; they looked warm and near. Other girls sat upon
verandas and stoops in Alice's street, cheerful as young fishermen along
the banks of a stream.

Alice could hear them from time to time; thin sopranos persistent in
laughter that fell dismally upon her ears. She had set no lines or nets
herself, and what she had of "expectations," as Walter called them, were
vanished. For Alice was experienced; and one of the conclusions she drew
from her experience was that when a man says, "I'd take you for anything
you wanted me to," he may mean it or, he may not; but, if he does, he
will not postpone the first opportunity to say something more. Little
affairs, once begun, must be warmed quickly; for if they cool they are
dead.

But Alice was not thinking of Arthur Russell. When she tossed away the
carnations she likewise tossed away her thoughts of that young man. She
had been like a boy who sees upon the street, some distance before him,
a bit of something round and glittering, a possible dime. He hopes it is
a dime, and, until he comes near enough to make sure, he plays that it
is a dime. In his mind he has an adventure with it: he buys something
delightful. If he picks it up, discovering only some tin-foil which has
happened upon a round shape, he feels a sinking. A dulness falls upon
him.

So Alice was dull with the loss of an adventure; and when the laughter
of other girls reached her, intermittently, she had not sprightliness
enough left in her to be envious of their gaiety. Besides, these
neighbours were ineligible even for her envy, being of another caste;
they could never know a dance at the Palmers', except remotely, through
a newspaper. Their laughter was for the encouragement of snappy young
men of the stores and offices down-town, clerks, bookkeepers, what
not--some of them probably graduates of Frincke's Business College.

Then, as she recalled that dark portal, with its dusty stairway mounting
between close walls to disappear in the upper shadows, her mind drew
back as from a doorway to Purgatory. Nevertheless, it was a picture
often in her reverie; and sometimes it came suddenly, without sequence,
into the midst of her other thoughts, as if it leaped up among them from
a lower darkness; and when it arrived it wanted to stay. So a traveller,
still roaming the world afar, sometimes broods without apparent reason
upon his family burial lot: "I wonder if I shall end there."

The foreboding passed abruptly, with a jerk of her breath, as the
street-lamp revealed a tall and easy figure approaching from the north,
swinging a stick in time to its stride. She had given Russell up--and he
came.

"What luck for me!" he exclaimed. "To find you alone!"

Alice gave him her hand for an instant, not otherwise moving. "I'm glad
it happened so," she said. "Let's stay out here, shall we? Do you think
it's too provincial to sit on a girl's front steps with her?"

"'Provincial?' Why, it's the very best of our institutions," he
returned, taking his place beside her. "At least, I think so to-night."

"Thanks! Is that practice for other nights somewhere else?"

"No," he laughed. "The practicing all led up to this. Did I come too
soon?"

"No," she replied, gravely. "Just in time!"

"I'm glad to be so accurate; I've spent two evenings wanting to come,
Miss Adams, instead of doing what I was doing."

"What was that?"

"Dinners. Large and long dinners. Your fellow-citizens are immensely
hospitable to a newcomer."

"Oh, no," Alice said. "We don't do it for everybody. Didn't you find
yourself charmed?"

"One was a men's dinner," he explained. "Mr. Palmer seemed to think I
ought to be shown to the principal business men."

"What was the other dinner?"

"My cousin Mildred gave it."

"Oh, DID she!" Alice said, sharply, but she recovered herself in the
same instant, and laughed. "She wanted to show you to the principal
business women, I suppose."

"I don't know. At all events, I shouldn't give myself out to be so much
feted by your 'fellow-citizens,' after all, seeing these were both done
by my relatives, the Palmers. However, there are others to follow, I'm
afraid. I was wondering--I hoped maybe you'd be coming to some of them.
Aren't you?"

"I rather doubt it," Alice said, slowly. "Mildred's dance was almost the
only evening I've gone out since my father's illness began. He seemed
better that day; so I went. He was better the other day when he wanted
those cigars. He's very much up and down." She paused. "I'd almost
forgotten that Mildred is your cousin."

"Not a very near one," he explained. "Mr. Palmer's father was my
great-uncle."

"Still, of course you are related."

"Yes; that distantly."

Alice said placidly, "It's quite an advantage."

He agreed. "Yes. It is."

"No," she said, in the same placid tone. "I mean for Mildred."

"I don't see----"

She laughed. "No. You wouldn't. I mean it's an advantage over the rest
of us who might like to compete for some of your time; and the worst of
it is we can't accuse her of being unfair about it. We can't prove she
showed any trickiness in having you for a cousin. Whatever else she
might plan to do with you, she didn't plan that. So the rest of us must
just bear it!"

"The 'rest of you!'" he laughed. "It's going to mean a great deal of
suffering!"

Alice resumed her placid tone. "You're staying at the Palmers', aren't
you?"

"No, not now. I've taken an apartment. I'm going to live here; I'm
permanent. Didn't I tell you?"

"I think I'd heard somewhere that you were," she said. "Do you think
you'll like living here?"

"How can one tell?"

"If I were in your place I think I should be able to tell, Mr. Russell."

"How?"

"Why, good gracious!" she cried. "Haven't you got the most perfect
creature in town for your--your cousin? SHE expects to make you like
living here, doesn't she? How could you keep from liking it, even if you
tried not to, under the circumstances?"

"Well, you see, there's such a lot of circumstances," he explained; "I'm
not sure I'll like getting back into a business again. I suppose most
of the men of my age in the country have been going through the same
experience: the War left us with a considerable restlessness of spirit."

"You were in the War?" she asked, quickly, and as quickly answered
herself, "Of course you were!"

"I was a left-over; they only let me out about four months ago," he
said. "It's quite a shake-up trying to settle down again."

"You were in France, then?"

"Oh, yes; but I didn't get up to the front much--only two or three
times, and then just for a day or so. I was in the transportation
service."

"You were an officer, of course."

"Yes," he said. "They let me play I was a major."

"I guessed a major," she said. "You'd always be pretty grand, of
course."

Russell was amused. "Well, you see," he informed her, "as it happened,
we had at least several other majors in our army. Why would I always be
something 'pretty grand?'"

"You're related to the Palmers. Don't you notice they always affect the
pretty grand?"

"Then you think I'm only one of their affectations, I take it."

"Yes, you seem to be the most successful one they've got!" Alice said,
lightly. "You certainly do belong to them." And she laughed as if at
something hidden from him. "Don't you?"

"But you've just excused me for that," he protested. "You said nobody
could be blamed for my being their third cousin. What a contradictory
girl you are!"

Alice shook her head. "Let's keep away from the kind of girl I am."

"No," he said. "That's just what I came here to talk about."

She shook her head again. "Let's keep first to the kind of man you are.
I'm glad you were in the War."

"Why?"

"Oh, I don't know." She was quiet a moment, for she was thinking that
here she spoke the truth: his service put about him a little glamour
that helped to please her with him. She had been pleased with him during
their walk; pleased with him on his own account; and now that pleasure
was growing keener. She looked at him, and though the light in which
she saw him was little more than starlight, she saw that he was looking
steadily at her with a kindly and smiling seriousness. All at once it
seemed to her that the night air was sweeter to breathe, as if a distant
fragrance of new blossoms had been blown to her. She smiled back to him,
and said, "Well, what kind of man are you?"

"I don't know; I've often wondered," he replied. "What kind of girl are
you?"

"Don't you remember? I told you the other day. I'm just me!"

"But who is that?"

"You forget everything;" said Alice. "You told me what kind of a girl
I am. You seemed to think you'd taken quite a fancy to me from the very
first."

"So I did," he agreed, heartily.

"But how quickly you forgot it!"

"Oh, no. I only want YOU to say what kind of a girl you are."

She mocked him. "'I don't know; I've often wondered!' What kind of a
girl does Mildred tell you I am? What has she said about me since she
told you I was 'a Miss Adams?'"

"I don't know; I haven't asked her."

"Then DON'T ask her," Alice said, quickly.

"Why?"

"Because she's such a perfect creature and I'm such an imperfect one.
Perfect creatures have the most perfect way of ruining the imperfect
ones."

"But then they wouldn't be perfect. Not if they----"

"Oh, yes, they remain perfectly perfect," she assured him. "That's
because they never go into details. They're not so vulgar as to come
right out and TELL that you've been in jail for stealing chickens.
They just look absent-minded and say in a low voice, 'Oh, very; but I
scarcely think you'd like her particularly'; and then begin to talk of
something else right away."

His smile had disappeared. "Yes," he said, somewhat ruefully. "That
does sound like Mildred. You certainly do seem to know her! Do you know
everybody as well as that?"

"Not myself," Alice said. "I don't know myself at all. I got to
wondering about that--about who I was--the other day after you walked
home with me."

He uttered an exclamation, and added, explaining it, "You do give a man
a chance to be fatuous, though! As if it were walking home with me that
made you wonder about yourself!"

"It was," Alice informed him, coolly. "I was wondering what I wanted to
make you think of me, in case I should ever happen to see you again."

This audacity appeared to take his breath. "By George!" he cried.

"You mustn't be astonished," she said. "What I decided then was that I
would probably never dare to be just myself with you--not if I cared
to have you want to see me again--and yet here I am, just being myself
after all!"

"You ARE the cheeriest series of shocks," Russell exclaimed, whereupon
Alice added to the series.

"Tell me: Is it a good policy for me to follow with you?" she asked, and
he found the mockery in her voice delightful. "Would you advise me to
offer you shocks as a sort of vacation from suavity?"

"Suavity" was yet another sketch of Mildred; a recognizable one, or it
would not have been humorous. In Alice's hands, so dexterous in this
work, her statuesque friend was becoming as ridiculous as a fine figure
of wax left to the mercies of a satirist.

But the lively young sculptress knew better than to overdo: what she did
must appear to spring all from mirth; so she laughed as if unwillingly,
and said, "I MUSTN'T laugh at Mildred! In the first place, she's
your--your cousin. And in the second place, she's not meant to be funny;
it isn't right to laugh at really splendid people who take themselves
seriously. In the third place, you won't come again if I do."

"Don't be sure of that," Russell said, "whatever you do."

"'Whatever I do?'" she echoed. "That sounds as if you thought I COULD be
terrific! Be careful; there's one thing I could do that would keep you
away."

"What's that?"

"I could tell you not to come," she said. "I wonder if I ought to."

"Why do you wonder if you 'ought to?'"

"Don't you guess?"

"No."

"Then let's both be mysteries to each other," she suggested. "I mystify
you because I wonder, and you mystify me because you don't guess why I
wonder. We'll let it go at that, shall we?"

"Very well; so long as it's certain that you DON'T tell me not to come
again."

"I'll not tell you that--yet," she said. "In fact----" She paused,
reflecting, with her head to one side. "In fact, I won't tell you not
to come, probably, until I see that's what you want me to tell you.
I'll let you out easily--and I'll be sure to see it. Even before you do,
perhaps."

"That arrangement suits me," Russell returned, and his voice held no
trace of jocularity: he had become serious. "It suits me better if
you're enough in earnest to mean that I can come--oh, not whenever I
want to; I don't expect so much!--but if you mean that I can see you
pretty often."

"Of course I'm in earnest," she said. "But before I say you can come
'pretty often,' I'd like to know how much of my time you'd need if you
did come 'whenever you want to'; and of course you wouldn't dare
make any answer to that question except one. Wouldn't you let me have
Thursdays out?"

"No, no," he protested. "I want to know. Will you let me come pretty
often?"

"Lean toward me a little," Alice said. "I want you to understand." And
as he obediently bent his head near hers, she inclined toward him as if
to whisper; then, in a half-shout, she cried,

"YES!"

He clapped his hands. "By George!" he said. "What a girl you are!"

"Why?"

"Well, for the first reason, because you have such gaieties as that one.
I should think your father would actually like being ill, just to be in
the house with you all the time."

"You mean by that," Alice inquired, "I keep my family cheerful with my
amusing little ways?"

"Yes. Don't you?"

"There were only boys in your family, weren't there, Mr. Russell?"

"I was an only child, unfortunately."

"Yes," she said. "I see you hadn't any sisters."

For a moment he puzzled over her meaning, then saw it, and was more
delighted with her than ever. "I can answer a question of yours, now,
that I couldn't a while ago."

"Yes, I know," she returned, quietly.

"But how could you know?"

"It's the question I asked you about whether you were going to like
living here," she said. "You're about to tell me that now you know you
WILL like it."

"More telepathy!" he exclaimed. "Yes, that was it, precisely. I suppose
the same thing's been said to you so many times that you----"

"No, it hasn't," Alice said, a little confused for the moment. "Not at
all. I meant----" She paused, then asked in a gentle voice, "Would you
really like to know?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, I was only afraid you didn't mean it."

"See here," he said. "I did mean it. I told you it was being pretty
difficult for me to settle down to things again. Well, it's more
difficult than you know, but I think I can pull through in fair spirits
if I can see a girl like you 'pretty often.'"

"All right," she said, in a business-like tone. "I've told you that you
can if you want to."

"I do want to," he assured her. "I do, indeed!"

"How often is 'pretty often,' Mr. Russell?"

"Would you walk with me sometimes? To-morrow?"

"Sometimes. Not to-morrow. The day after."

"That's splendid!" he said. "You'll walk with me day after to-morrow,
and the night after that I'll see you at Miss Lamb's dance, won't I?"

But this fell rather chillingly upon Alice. "Miss Lamb's dance? Which
Miss Lamb?" she asked.

"I don't know--it's the one that's just coming out of mourning."

"Oh, Henrietta--yes. Is her dance so soon? I'd forgotten."

"You'll be there, won't you?" he asked. "Please say you're going."

Alice did not respond at once, and he urged her again: "Please do
promise you'll be there."

"No, I can't promise anything," she said, slowly. "You see, for one
thing, papa might not be well enough."

"But if he is?" said Russell. "If he is you'll surely come, won't you?
Or, perhaps----" He hesitated, then went on quickly, "I don't know the
rules in this place yet, and different places have different rules; but
do you have to have a chaperone, or don't girls just go to dances with
the men sometimes? If they do, would you--would you let me take you?"

Alice was startled. "Good gracious!"

"What's the matter?"

"Don't you think your relatives----Aren't you expected to go with
Mildred--and Mrs. Palmer?"

"Not necessarily. It doesn't matter what I might be expected to do," he
said. "Will you go with me?"

"I----No; I couldn't."

"Why not?"

"I can't. I'm not going."

"But why?"

"Papa's not really any better," Alice said, huskily. "I'm too worried
about him to go to a dance." Her voice sounded emotional, genuinely
enough; there was something almost like a sob in it. "Let's talk of
other things, please."

He acquiesced gently; but Mrs. Adams, who had been listening to the
conversation at the open window, just overhead, did not hear him. She
had correctly interpreted the sob in Alice's voice, and, trembling
with sudden anger, she rose from her knees, and went fiercely to her
husband's room.



CHAPTER XIII

He had not undressed, and he sat beside the table, smoking his pipe and
reading his newspaper. Upon his forehead the lines in that old pattern,
the historical map of his troubles, had grown a little vaguer lately;
relaxed by the complacency of a man who not only finds his health
restored, but sees the days before him promising once more a familiar
routine that he has always liked to follow.

As his wife came in, closing the door behind her, he looked up
cheerfully, "Well, mother," he said, "what's the news downstairs?"

"That's what I came to tell you," she informed him, grimly.

Adams lowered his newspaper to his knee and peered over his spectacles
at her. She had remained by the door, standing, and the great greenish
shadow of the small lamp-shade upon his table revealed her but
dubiously. "Isn't everything all right?" he asked. "What's the matter?"

"Don't worry: I'm going to tell you," she said, her grimness not
relaxed. "There's matter enough, Virgil Adams. Matter enough to make me
sick of being alive!"

With that, the markings on his brows began to emerge again in all their
sharpness; the old pattern reappeared. "Oh, my, my!" he lamented. "I
thought maybe we were all going to settle down to a little peace for a
while. What's it about now?"

"It's about Alice. Did you think it was about ME or anything for
MYSELF?"

Like some ready old machine, always in order, his irritability responded
immediately and automatically to her emotion. "How in thunder could I
think what it's about, or who it's for? SAY it, and get it over!"

"Oh, I'll 'say' it," she promised, ominously. "What I've come to ask you
is, How much longer do you expect me to put up with that old man and his
doings?"

"Whose doings? What old man?"

She came at him, fiercely accusing. "You know well enough what old man,
Virgil Adams! That old man who was here the other night."

"Mr. Lamb?"

"Yes; 'Mister Lamb!'" She mocked his voice. "What other old man would I
be likely to mean except J. A. Lamb?"

"What's he been doing now?" her husband inquired, satirically. "Where'd
you get something new against him since the last time you----"

"Just this!" she cried. "The other night when that man was here, if I'd
known how he was going to make my child suffer, I'd never have let him
set his foot in my house."

Adams leaned back in his chair as though her absurdity had eased his
mind. "Oh, I see," he said. "You've just gone plain crazy. That's the
only explanation of such talk, and it suits the case."

"Hasn't that man made us all suffer every day of our lives?" she
demanded. "I'd like to know why it is that my life and my children's
lives have to be sacrificed to him?"

"How are they 'sacrificed' to him?"

"Because you keep on working for him! Because you keep on letting him
hand out whatever miserable little pittance he chooses to give you;
that's why! It's as if he were some horrible old Juggernaut and I had to
see my children's own father throwing them under the wheels to keep him
satisfied."

"I won't hear any more such stuff!" Lifting his paper, Adams affected to
read.

"You'd better listen to me," she admonished him. "You might be sorry
you didn't, in case he ever tried to set foot in my house again! I might
tell him to his face what I think of him."

At this, Adams slapped the newspaper down upon his knee. "Oh, the devil!
What's it matter what you think of him?"

"It had better matter to you!" she cried. "Do you suppose I'm going
to submit forever to him and his family and what they're doing to my
child?"

"What are he and his family doing to 'your child?'"

Mrs. Adams came out with it. "That snippy little Henrietta Lamb has
always snubbed Alice every time she's ever had the chance. She's
followed the lead of the other girls; they've always all of 'em been
jealous of Alice because she dared to try and be happy, and because
she's showier and better-looking than they are, even though you do give
her only about thirty-five cents a year to do it on! They've all done
everything on earth they could to drive the young men away from her
and belittle her to 'em; and this mean little Henrietta Lamb's been the
worst of the whole crowd to Alice, every time she could see a chance."

"What for?" Adams asked, incredulously. "Why should she or anybody else
pick on Alice?"

"'Why?' 'What for?'" his wife repeated with a greater vehemence. "Do YOU
ask me such a thing as that? Do you really want to know?"

"Yes; I'd want to know--I would if I believed it."

"Then I'll tell you," she said in a cold fury. "It's on account of you,
Virgil, and nothing else in the world."

He hooted at her. "Oh, yes! These girls don't like ME, so they pick on
Alice."

"Quit your palavering and evading," she said. "A crowd of girls like
that, when they get a pretty girl like Alice among them, they act just
like wild beasts. They'll tear her to pieces, or else they'll chase
her and run her out, because they know if she had half a chance she'd
outshine 'em. They can't do that to a girl like Mildred Palmer because
she's got money and family to back her. Now you listen to me, Virgil
Adams: the way the world is now, money IS family. Alice would have just
as much 'family' as any of 'em every single bit--if you hadn't fallen
behind in the race."

"How did I----"

"Yes, you did!" she cried. "Twenty-five years ago when we were starting
and this town was smaller, you and I could have gone with any of 'em
if we'd tried hard enough. Look at the people we knew then that do hold
their heads up alongside of anybody in this town! WHY can they? Because
the men of those families made money and gave their children everything
that makes life worth living! Why can't we hold our heads up? Because
those men passed you in the race. They went up the ladder, and
you--you're still a clerk down at that old hole!"

"You leave that out, please," he said. "I thought you were going to tell
me something Henrietta Lamb had done to our Alice."

"You BET I'm going to tell you," she assured him, vehemently. "But first
I'm telling WHY she does it. It's because you've never given Alice any
backing nor any background, and they all know they can do anything they
like to her with perfect impunity. If she had the hundredth part of what
THEY have to fall back on she'd have made 'em sing a mighty different
song long ago!"

"How would she?"

"Oh, my heavens, but you're slow!" Mrs. Adams moaned. "Look here! You
remember how practically all the nicest boys in this town used to come
here a few years ago. Why, they were all crazy over her; and the girls
HAD to be nice to her then. Look at the difference now! There'll be a
whole month go by and not a young man come to call on her, let alone
send her candy or flowers, or ever think of TAKING her any place and
yet she's prettier and brighter than she was when they used to come. It
isn't the child's fault she couldn't hold 'em, is it? Poor thing, SHE
tried hard enough! I suppose you'd say it was her fault, though."

"No; I wouldn't."

"Then whose fault is it?"

"Oh, mine, mine," he said, wearily. "I drove the young men away, of
course."

"You might as well have driven 'em, Virgil. It amounts to just the same
thing."

"How does it?"

"Because as they got older a good many of 'em began to think more about
money; that's one thing. Money's at the bottom of it all, for that
matter. Look at these country clubs and all such things: the other
girls' families belong and we don't, and Alice don't; and she can't go
unless somebody takes her, and nobody does any more. Look at the other
girls' houses, and then look at our house, so shabby and old-fashioned
she'd be pretty near ashamed to ask anybody to come in and sit down
nowadays! Look at her clothes--oh, yes; you think you shelled out a lot
for that little coat of hers and the hat and skirt she got last March;
but it's nothing. Some of these girls nowadays spend more than your
whole salary on their clothes. And what jewellery has she got? A plated
watch and two or three little pins and rings of the kind people's maids
wouldn't wear now. Good Lord, Virgil Adams, wake up! Don't sit there and
tell me you don't know things like this mean SUFFERING for the child!"

He had begun to rub his hands wretchedly back and forth over his bony
knees, as if in that way he somewhat alleviated the tedium caused by her
racking voice. "Oh, my, my!" he muttered. "OH, my, my!"

"Yes, I should think you WOULD say 'Oh, my, my!'" she took him up,
loudly. "That doesn't help things much! If you ever wanted to DO
anything about it, the poor child might see some gleam of hope in her
life. You don't CARE for her, that's the trouble; you don't care a
single thing about her."

"I don't?"

"No; you don't. Why, even with your miserable little salary you could
have given her more than you have. You're the closest man I ever knew:
it's like pulling teeth to get a dollar out of you for her, now and
then, and yet you hide some away, every month or so, in some wretched
little investment or other. You----"

"Look here, now," he interrupted, angrily. "You look here! If I didn't
put a little by whenever I could, in a bond or something, where would
you be if anything happened to me? The insurance doctors never passed
me; YOU know that. Haven't we got to have SOMETHING to fall back on?"

"Yes, we have!" she cried. "We ought to have something to go on with
right now, too, when we need it. Do you suppose these snippets would
treat Alice the way they do if she could afford to ENTERTAIN? They leave
her out of their dinners and dances simply because they know she can't
give any dinners and dances to leave them out of! They know she can't
get EVEN, and that's the whole story! That's why Henrietta Lamb's done
this thing to her now."

Adams had gone back to his rubbing of his knees. "Oh, my, my!" he said.
"WHAT thing?"

She told him. "Your dear, grand, old Mister Lamb's Henrietta has sent
out invitations for a large party--a LARGE one. Everybody that is
anybody in this town is asked, you can be sure. There's a very fine
young man, a Mr. Russell, has just come to town, and he's interested
in Alice, and he's asked her to go to this dance with him. Well, Alice
can't accept. She can't go with him, though she'd give anything in
the world to do it. Do you understand? The reason she can't is because
Henrietta Lamb hasn't invited her. Do you want to know why Henrietta
hasn't invited her? It's because she knows Alice can't get even, and
because she thinks Alice ought to be snubbed like this on account of
only being the daughter of one of her grandfather's clerks. I HOPE you
understand!"

"Oh, my, my!" he said. "OH, my, my!"

"That's your sweet old employer," his wife cried, tauntingly. "That's
your dear, kind, grand old Mister Lamb! Alice has been left out of a
good many smaller things, like big dinners and little dances, but this
is just the same as serving her notice that she's out of everything! And
it's all done by your dear, grand old----"

"Look here!" Adams exclaimed. "I don't want to hear any more of that!
You can't hold him responsible for everything his grandchildren do, I
guess! He probably doesn't know a thing about it. You don't suppose he's
troubling HIS head over----"

But she burst out at him passionately. "Suppose you trouble YOUR head
about it! You'd better, Virgil Adams! You'd better, unless you want to
see your child just dry up into a miserable old maid! She's still young
and she has a chance for happiness, if she had a father that didn't
bring a millstone to hang around her neck, instead of what he ought to
give her! You just wait till you die and God asks you what you had in
your breast instead of a heart!"

"Oh, my, my!" he groaned. "What's my heart got to do with it?"

"Nothing! You haven't got one or you'd give her what she needed. Am I
asking anything you CAN'T do? You know better; you know I'm not!"

At this he sat suddenly rigid, his troubled hands ceasing to rub his
knees; and he looked at her fixedly. "Now, tell me," he said, slowly.
"Just what ARE you asking?"

"You know!" she sobbed.

"You mean you've broken your word never to speak of THAT to me again?"

"What do _I_ care for my word?" she cried, and, sinking to the floor at
his feet, rocked herself back and forth there. "Do you suppose I'll
let my 'word' keep me from struggling for a little happiness for my
children? It won't, I tell you; it won't! I'll struggle for that till I
die! I will, till I die till I die!"

He rubbed his head now instead of his knees, and, shaking all over, he
got up and began with uncertain steps to pace the floor.

"Hell, hell, hell!" he said. "I've got to go through THAT again!"

"Yes, you have!" she sobbed. "Till I die."

"Yes; that's what you been after all the time I was getting well."

"Yes, I have, and I'll keep on till I die!"

"A fine wife for a man," he said. "Beggin' a man to be a dirty dog!"

"No! To be a MAN--and I'll keep on till I die!"

Adams again fell back upon his last solace: he walked, half staggering,
up and down the room, swearing in a rhythmic repetition.

His wife had repetitions of her own, and she kept at them in a voice
that rose to a higher and higher pitch, like the sound of an old
well-pump. "Till I die! Till I die! Till I DIE!"

She ended in a scream; and Alice, coming up the stairs, thanked heaven
that Russell had gone. She ran to her father's door and went in.

Adams looked at her, and gesticulated shakily at the convulsive figure
on the floor. "Can you get her out of here?"

Alice helped Mrs. Adams to her feet; and the stricken woman threw her
arms passionately about her daughter.

"Get her out!" Adams said, harshly; then cried, "Wait!"

Alice, moving toward the door, halted, and looked at him blankly, over
her mother's shoulder. "What is it, papa?"

He stretched out his arm and pointed at her. "She says--she says you
have a mean life, Alice."

"No, papa."

Mrs. Adams turned in her daughter's arms. "Do you hear her lie? Couldn't
you be as brave as she is, Virgil?"

"Are you lying, Alice?" he asked. "Do you have a mean time?"

"No, papa."

He came toward her. "Look at me!" he said. "Things like this dance
now--is that so hard to bear?"

Alice tried to say, "No, papa," again, but she couldn't. Suddenly and in
spite of herself she began to cry.

"Do you hear her?" his wife sobbed. "Now do you----"

He waved at them fiercely. "Get out of here!" he said. "Both of you! Get
out of here!"

As they went, he dropped in his chair and bent far forward, so that his
haggard face was concealed from them. Then, as Alice closed the door, he
began to rub his knees again, muttering, "Oh, my, my! OH, my, my!"



CHAPTER XIV

There shone a jovial sun overhead on the appointed "day after
to-morrow"; a day not cool yet of a temperature friendly to walkers; and
the air, powdered with sunshine, had so much life in it that it seemed
to sparkle. To Arthur Russell this was a day like a gay companion who
pleased him well; but the gay companion at his side pleased him even
better. She looked her prettiest, chattered her wittiest, smiled her
wistfulest, and delighted him with all together.

"You look so happy it's easy to see your father's taken a good turn," he
told her.

"Yes; he has this afternoon, at least," she said. "I might have other
reasons for looking cheerful, though."

"For instance?"

"Exactly!" she said, giving him a sweet look just enough mocked by her
laughter. "For instance!"

"Well, go on," he begged.

"Isn't it expected?" she asked.

"Of you, you mean?"

"No," she returned. "For you, I mean!"

In this style, which uses a word for any meaning that quick look and
colourful gesture care to endow it with, she was an expert; and she
carried it merrily on, leaving him at liberty (one of the great values
of the style) to choose as he would how much or how little she meant. He
was content to supply mere cues, for although he had little coquetry of
his own, he had lately begun to find that the only interesting moments
in his life were those during which Alice Adams coquetted with him.
Happily, these obliging moments extended themselves to cover all
the time he spent with her. However serious she might seem, whatever
appeared to be her topic, all was thou-and-I.

He planned for more of it, seeing otherwise a dull evening ahead; and
reverted, afterwhile, to a forbidden subject. "About that dance at Miss
Lamb's--since your father's so much better----"

She flushed a little. "Now, now!" she chided him. "We agreed not to say
any more about that."

"Yes, but since he IS better----"

Alice shook her head. "He won't be better to-morrow. He always has a bad
day after a good one especially after such a good one as this is."

"But if this time it should be different," Russell persisted; "wouldn't
you be willing to come if he's better by to-morrow evening? Why not wait
and decide at the last minute?"

She waved her hands airily. "What a pother!" she cried. "What does it
matter whether poor little Alice Adams goes to a dance or not?"

"Well, I thought I'd made it clear that it looks fairly bleak to me if
you don't go."

"Oh, yes!" she jeered.

"It's the simple truth," he insisted. "I don't care a great deal about
dances these days; and if you aren't going to be there----"

"You could stay away," she suggested. "You wouldn't!"

"Unfortunately, I can't. I'm afraid I'm supposed to be the excuse. Miss
Lamb, in her capacity as a friend of my relatives----"

"Oh, she's giving it for YOU! I see! On Mildred's account you mean?"

At that his face showed an increase of colour. "I suppose just on
account of my being a cousin of Mildred's and of----"

"Of course! You'll have a beautiful time, too. Henrietta'll see that you
have somebody to dance with besides Miss Dowling, poor man!"

"But what I want somebody to see is that I dance with you! And perhaps
your father----"

"Wait!" she said, frowning as if she debated whether or not to tell him
something of import; then, seeming to decide affirmatively, she asked:
"Would you really like to know the truth about it?"

"If it isn't too unflattering."

"It hasn't anything to do with you at all," she said. "Of course I'd
like to go with you and to dance with you--though you don't seem to
realize that you wouldn't be permitted much time with me."

"Oh, yes, I----"

"Never mind!" she laughed. "Of course you wouldn't. But even if papa
should be better to-morrow, I doubt if I'd go. In fact, I know I
wouldn't. There's another reason besides papa."

"Is there?"

"Yes. The truth is, I don't get on with Henrietta Lamb. As a matter of
fact, I dislike her, and of course that means she dislikes me. I should
never think of asking her to anything I gave, and I really wonder she
asks me to things SHE gives." This was a new inspiration; and Alice,
beginning to see her way out of a perplexity, wished that she had
thought of it earlier: she should have told him from the first that she
and Henrietta had a feud, and consequently exchanged no invitations.
Moreover, there was another thing to beset her with little anxieties:
she might better not have told him from the first, as she had indeed
told him by intimation, that she was the pampered daughter of an
indulgent father, presumably able to indulge her; for now she must
elaborately keep to the part. Veracity is usually simple; and its
opposite, to be successful, should be as simple; but practitioners of
the opposite are most often impulsive, like Alice; and, like her, they
become enmeshed in elaborations.

"It wouldn't be very nice for me to go to her house," Alice went on,
"when I wouldn't want her in mine. I've never admired her. I've always
thought she was lacking in some things most people are supposed to be
equipped with--for instance, a certain feeling about the death of a
father who was always pretty decent to his daughter. Henrietta's father
died just, eleven months and twenty-seven days before your cousin's
dance, but she couldn't stick out those few last days and make it a
year; she was there."

Alice stopped, then laughed ruefully, exclaiming, "But this is dreadful
of me!"

"Is it?"

"Blackguarding her to you when she's giving a big party for you! Just
the way Henrietta would blackguard me to you--heaven knows what she
WOULDN'T say if she talked about me to you! It would be fair, of course,
but--well, I'd rather she didn't!" And with that, Alice let her pretty
hand, in its white glove, rest upon his arm for a moment; and he looked
down at it, not unmoved to see it there. "I want to be unfair about
just this," she said, letting a troubled laughter tremble through
her appealing voice as she spoke. "I won't take advantage of her with
anybody, except just--you! I'd a little rather you didn't hear anybody
blackguard me, and, if you don't mind--could you promise not to give
Henrietta the chance?"

It was charmingly done, with a humorous, faint pathos altogether
genuine; and Russell found himself suddenly wanting to shout at her,
"Oh, you DEAR!" Nothing else seemed adequate; but he controlled the
impulse in favour of something more conservative.

"Imagine any one speaking unkindly of you--not praising you!"

"Who HAS praised me to you?" she asked, quickly.

"I haven't talked about you with any one; but if I did, I know
they'd----"

"No, no!" she cried, and went on, again accompanying her words with
little tremulous runs of laughter. "You don't understand this town yet.
You'll be surprised when you do; we're different. We talk about one
another fearfully! Haven't I just proved it, the way I've been going for
Henrietta? Of course I didn't say anything really very terrible about
her, but that's only because I don't follow that practice the way most
of the others do. They don't stop with the worst of the truth they can
find: they make UP things--yes, they really do! And, oh, I'd RATHER they
didn't make up things about me--to you!"

"What difference would it make if they did?" he inquired, cheerfully.
"I'd know they weren't true."

"Even if you did know that, they'd make a difference," she said. "Oh,
yes, they would! It's too bad, but we don't like anything quite so well
that's had specks on it, even if we've wiped the specks off;--it's just
that much spoiled, and some things are all spoiled the instant they're
the least bit spoiled. What a man thinks about a girl, for instance. Do
you want to have what you think about me spoiled, Mr. Russell?"

"Oh, but that's already far beyond reach," he said, lightly.

"But it can't be!" she protested.

"Why not?"

"Because it never can be. Men don't change their minds about one another
often: they make it quite an event when they do, and talk about it as
if something important had happened. But a girl only has to go down-town
with a shoe-string unfastened, and every man who sees her will change
his mind about her. Don't you know that's true?"

"Not of myself, I think."

"There!" she cried. "That's precisely what every man in the world would
say!"

"So you wouldn't trust me?"

"Well--I'll be awfully worried if you give 'em a chance to tell you that
I'm too lazy to tie my shoe-strings!"

He laughed delightedly. "Is that what they do say?" he asked.

"Just about! Whatever they hope will get results." She shook her head
wisely. "Oh, yes; we do that here!"

"But I don't mind loose shoe-strings," he said. "Not if they're yours."

"They'll find out what you do mind."

"But suppose," he said, looking at her whimsically; "suppose I wouldn't
mind anything--so long as it's yours?"

She courtesied. "Oh, pretty enough! But a girl who's talked about has a
weakness that's often a fatal one."

"What is it?"

"It's this: when she's talked about she isn't THERE. That's how they
kill her."

"I'm afraid I don't follow you."

"Don't you see? If Henrietta--or Mildred--or any of 'em--or some of
their mothers--oh, we ALL do it! Well, if any of 'em told you I didn't
tie my shoe-strings, and if I were there, so that you could see me,
you'd know it wasn't true. Even if I were sitting so that you couldn't
see my feet, and couldn't tell whether the strings were tied or not just
then, still you could look at me, and see that I wasn't the sort of girl
to neglect my shoe-strings. But that isn't the way it happens: they'll
get at you when I'm nowhere around and can't remind you of the sort of
girl I really am."

"But you don't do that," he complained. "You don't remind me you don't
even tell me--the sort of girl you really are! I'd like to know."

"Let's be serious then," she said, and looked serious enough herself.
"Would you honestly like to know?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, you must be careful."

"'Careful?'" The word amused him.

"I mean careful not to get me mixed up," she said. "Careful not to mix
up the girl you might hear somebody talking about with the me I honestly
try to make you see. If you do get those two mixed up--well, the whole
show'll be spoiled!"

"What makes you think so?"

"Because it's----" She checked herself, having begun to speak too
impulsively; and she was disturbed, realizing in what tricky stuff she
dealt. What had been on her lips to say was, "Because it's
happened before!" She changed to, "Because it's so easy to spoil
anything--easiest of all to spoil anything that's pleasant."

"That might depend."

"No; it's so. And if you care at all about--about knowing a girl who'd
like someone to know her----"

"Just 'someone?' That's disappointing."

"Well--you," she said.

"Tell me how 'careful' you want me to be, then!"

"Well, don't you think it would be nice if you didn't give anybody the
chance to talk about me the way--the way I've just been talking about
Henrietta Lamb?"

With that they laughed together, and he said, "You may be cutting me off
from a great deal of information, you know."

"Yes," Alice admitted. "Somebody might begin to praise me to you, too;
so it's dangerous to ask you to change the subject if I ever happen to
be mentioned. But after all----" She paused.

"'After all' isn't the end of a thought, is it?"

"Sometimes it is of a girl's thought; I suppose men are neater about
their thoughts, and always finish 'em. It isn't the end of the thought I
had then, though."

"What is the end of it?"

She looked at him impulsively. "Oh, it's foolish," she said, and she
laughed as laughs one who proposes something probably impossible. "But,
WOULDN'T it be pleasant if two people could ever just keep themselves
TO themselves, so far as they two were concerned? I mean, if they could
just manage to be friends without people talking about it, or talking to
THEM about it?"

"I suppose that might be rather difficult," he said, more amused than
impressed by her idea.

"I don't know: it might be done," she returned, hopefully. "Especially
in a town of this size; it's grown so it's quite a huge place these
days. People can keep themselves to themselves in a big place better,
you know. For instance, nobody knows that you and I are taking a walk
together today."

"How absurd, when here we are on exhibition!"

"No; we aren't."

"We aren't?"

"Not a bit of it!" she laughed. "We were the other day, when you walked
home with me, but anybody could tell that had just happened by chance,
on account of your overtaking me; people can always see things like
that. But we're not on exhibition now. Look where I've led you!"

Amused and a little bewildered, he looked up and down the street,
which was one of gaunt-faced apartment-houses, old, sooty, frame
boarding-houses, small groceries and drug-stores, laundries and one-room
plumbers' shops, with the sign of a clairvoyant here and there.

"You see?" she said. "I've been leading you without your knowing it. Of
course that's because you're new to the town, and you give yourself up
to the guidance of an old citizen."

"I'm not so sure, Miss Adams. It might mean that I don't care where I
follow so long as I follow you."

"Very well," she said. "I'd like you to keep on following me at least
long enough for me to show you that there's something nicer ahead of us
than this dingy street."

"Is that figurative?" he asked.

"Might be!" she returned, gaily. "There's a pretty little park at the
end, but it's very proletarian, and nobody you and I know will be more
likely to see us there than on this street."

"What an imagination you have!" he exclaimed. "You turn our proper
little walk into a Parisian adventure."

She looked at him in what seemed to be a momentary grave puzzlement.
"Perhaps you feel that a Parisian adventure mightn't please your--your
relatives?"

"Why, no," he returned. "You seem to think of them oftener than I do."

This appeared to amuse Alice, or at least to please her, for she
laughed. "Then I can afford to quit thinking of them, I suppose. It's
only that I used to be quite a friend of Mildred's--but there! we
needn't to go into that. I've never been a friend of Henrietta Lamb's,
though, and I almost wish she weren't taking such pains to be a friend
of yours."

"Oh, but she's not. It's all on account of----"

"On Mildred's account," Alice finished this for him, coolly. "Yes, of
course."

"It's on account of the two families," he was at pains to explain, a
little awkwardly. "It's because I'm a relative of the Palmers, and the
Palmers and the Lambs seem to be old family friends."

"Something the Adamses certainly are not," Alice said. "Not with either
of 'em; particularly not with the Lambs!" And here, scarce aware of what
impelled her, she returned to her former elaborations and colourings.
"You see, the differences between Henrietta and me aren't entirely
personal: I couldn't go to her house even if I liked her. The Lambs and
Adamses don't get on with each other, and we've just about come to the
breaking-point as it happens."

"I hope it's nothing to bother you."

"Why? A lot of things bother me."

"I'm sorry they do," he said, and seemed simply to mean it.

She nodded gratefully. "That's nice of you, Mr. Russell. It helps. The
break between the Adamses and the Lambs is a pretty bothersome thing.
It's been coming on a long time." She sighed deeply, and the sigh
was half genuine; this half being for her father, but the other half
probably belonged to her instinctive rendering of Juliet Capulet,
daughter to a warring house. "I hate it all so!" she added.

"Of course you must."

"I suppose most quarrels between families are on account of business,"
she said. "That's why they're so sordid. Certainly the Lambs seem a
sordid lot to me, though of course I'm biased." And with that she began
to sketch a history of the commercial antagonism that had risen between
the Adamses and the Lambs.

The sketching was spontaneous and dramatic. Mathematics had no part in
it; nor was there accurate definition of Mr. Adams's relation to the
institution of Lamb and Company. The point was clouded, in fact; though
that might easily be set down to the general haziness of young ladies
confronted with the mysteries of trade or commerce. Mr. Adams either had
been a vague sort of junior member of the firm, it appeared, or else
he should have been made some such thing; at all events, he was an old
mainstay of the business; and he, as much as any Lamb, had helped to
build up the prosperity of the company. But at last, tired of providing
so much intelligence and energy for which other people took profit
greater than his own, he had decided to leave the company and found a
business entirely for himself. The Lambs were going to be enraged when
they learned what was afoot.

Such was the impression, a little misted, wrought by Alice's quick
narrative. But there was dolorous fact behind it: Adams had succumbed.

His wife, grave and nervous, rather than triumphant, in success, had
told their daughter that the great J. A. would be furious and possibly
vindictive. Adams was afraid of him, she said.

"But what for, mama?" Alice asked, since this seemed a turn of affairs
out of reason. "What in the world has Mr. Lamb to do with papa's leaving
the company to set up for himself? What right has he to be angry about
it? If he's such a friend as he claims to be, I should think he'd be
glad--that is, if the glue factory turns out well. What will he be angry
for?"

Mrs. Adams gave Alice an uneasy glance, hesitated, and then explained
that a resignation from Lamb's had always been looked upon, especially
by "that old man," as treachery. You were supposed to die in the
service, she said bitterly, and her daughter, a little mystified,
accepted this explanation. Adams had not spoken to her of his surrender;
he seemed not inclined to speak to her at all, or to any one.

Alice was not serious too long, and she began to laugh as she came
to the end of her decorative sketch. "After all, the whole thing is
perfectly ridiculous," she said. "In fact, it's FUNNY! That's on account
of what papa's going to throw over the Lamb business FOR! To save your
life you couldn't imagine what he's going to do!"

"I won't try, then," Russell assented.

"It takes all the romance out of ME," she laughed. "You'll never go for
a Parisian walk with me again, after I tell you what I'll be heiress
to." They had come to the entrance of the little park; and, as Alice had
said, it was a pretty place, especially on a day so radiant. Trees of
the oldest forest stood there, hale and serene over the trim, bright
grass; and the proletarians had not come from their factories at this
hour; only a few mothers and their babies were to be seen, here and
there, in the shade. "I think I'll postpone telling you about it till we
get nearly home again," Alice said, as they began to saunter down one of
the gravelled paths. "There's a bench beside a spring farther on; we
can sit there and talk about a lot of things--things not so sticky as my
dowry's going to be."

"'Sticky?'" he echoed. "What in the world----" She laughed despairingly.

"A glue factory!"

Then he laughed, too, as much from friendliness as from amusement; and
she remembered to tell him that the project of a glue factory was still
"an Adams secret." It would be known soon, however, she added; and the
whole Lamb connection would probably begin saying all sorts of things,
heaven knew what!

Thus Alice built her walls of flimsy, working always gaily, or with at
least the air of gaiety; and even as she rattled on, there was somewhere
in her mind a constant little wonder. Everything she said seemed to be
necessary to support something else she had said. How had it happened?
She found herself telling him that since her father had decided on
making so great a change in his ways, she and her mother hoped at last
to persuade him to give up that "foolish little house" he had been so
obstinate about; and she checked herself abruptly on this declivity just
as she was about to slide into a remark concerning her own preference
for a "country place." Discretion caught her in time; and something
else, in company with discretion, caught her, for she stopped short in
her talk and blushed.

They had taken possession of the bench beside the spring, by this time;
and Russell, his elbow on the back of the bench and his chin on his
hand, the better to look at her, had no guess at the cause of the blush,
but was content to find it lovely. At his first sight of Alice she had
seemed pretty in the particular way of being pretty that he happened
to like best; and, with every moment he spent with her, this prettiness
appeared to increase. He felt that he could not look at her enough: his
gaze followed the fluttering of the graceful hands in almost continual
gesture as she talked; then lifted happily to the vivacious face again.
She charmed him.

After her abrupt pause, she sighed, then looked at him with her eyebrows
lifted in a comedy appeal. "You haven't said you wouldn't give Henrietta
the chance," she said, in the softest voice that can still have a little
laugh running in it.

He was puzzled. "Give Henrietta the chance?"

"YOU know! You'll let me keep on being unfair, won't you? Not give the
other girls a chance to get even?"

He promised, heartily.



CHAPTER XV

Alice had said that no one who knew either Russell or herself would be
likely to see them in the park or upon the dingy street; but although
they returned by that same ungenteel thoroughfare they were seen by
a person who knew them both. Also, with some surprise on the part of
Russell, and something more poignant than surprise for Alice, they saw
this person.

All of the dingy street was ugly, but the greater part of it appeared to
be honest. The two pedestrians came upon a block or two, however, where
it offered suggestions of a less upright character, like a steady enough
workingman with a naughty book sticking out of his pocket. Three or four
dim shops, a single story in height, exhibited foul signboards, yet fair
enough so far as the wording went; one proclaiming a tobacconist, one
a junk-dealer, one a dispenser of "soft drinks and cigars." The most
credulous would have doubted these signboards; for the craft of the
modern tradesman is exerted to lure indoors the passing glance, since if
the glance is pleased the feet may follow; but this alleged tobacconist
and his neighbours had long been fond of dust on their windows,
evidently, and shades were pulled far down on the glass of their doors.
Thus the public eye, small of pupil in the light of the open street, was
intentionally not invited to the dusky interiors. Something different
from mere lack of enterprise was apparent; and the signboards might have
been omitted; they were pains thrown away, since it was plain to the
world that the business parts of these shops were the brighter back
rooms implied by the dark front rooms; and that the commerce there was
in perilous new liquors and in dice and rough girls.

Nothing could have been more innocent than the serenity with which these
wicked little places revealed themselves for what they were; and, bound
by this final tie of guilelessness, they stood together in a row which
ended with a companionable barbershop, much like them. Beyond was a
series of soot-harried frame two-story houses, once part of a cheerful
neighbourhood when the town was middle-aged and settled, and not old and
growing. These houses, all carrying the label. "Rooms," had the worried
look of vacancy that houses have when they are too full of everybody
without being anybody's home; and there was, too, a surreptitious
air about them, as if, like the false little shops, they advertised
something by concealing it.

One of them--the one next to the barber-shop--had across its front an
ample, jig-sawed veranda, where aforetime, no doubt, the father of a
family had fanned himself with a palm-leaf fan on Sunday afternoons,
watching the surreys go by, and where his daughter listened to mandolins
and badinage on starlit evenings; but, although youth still held the
veranda, both the youth and the veranda were in decay. The four or five
young men who lounged there this afternoon were of a type known to shady
pool-parlours. Hats found no favour with them; all of them wore caps;
and their tight clothes, apparently from a common source, showed
a vivacious fancy for oblique pockets, false belts, and Easter-egg
colourings. Another thing common to the group was the expression of
eye and mouth; and Alice, in the midst of her other thoughts, had a
distasteful thought about this.

The veranda was within a dozen feet of the sidewalk, and as she and her
escort came nearer, she took note of the young men, her face hardening
a little, even before she suspected there might be a resemblance between
them and any one she knew. Then she observed that each of these loungers
wore not for the occasion, but as of habit, a look of furtively
amused contempt; the mouth smiled to one side as if not to dislodge a
cigarette, while the eyes kept languidly superior. All at once Alice was
reminded of Walter; and the slight frown caused by this idea had just
begun to darken her forehead when Walter himself stepped out of the open
door of the house and appeared upon the veranda. Upon his head was a new
straw hat, and in his hand was a Malacca stick with an ivory top, for
Alice had finally decided against it for herself and had given it to
him. His mood was lively: he twirled the stick through his fingers like
a drum-major's baton, and whistled loudly.

Moreover, he was indeed accompanied. With him was a thin girl who had
made a violent black-and-white poster of herself: black dress, black
flimsy boa, black stockings, white slippers, great black hat down upon
the black eyes; and beneath the hat a curve of cheek and chin made white
as whitewash, and in strong bilateral motion with gum.

The loungers on the veranda were familiars of the pair; hailed them with
cacklings; and one began to sing, in a voice all tin:

     "Then my skirt, Sal, and me did go
     Right straight to the moving-pitcher show.
     OH, you bashful vamp!"


The girl laughed airily. "God, but you guys are wise!" she said.

"Come on, Wallie."

Walter stared at his sister; then grinned faintly, and nodded at Russell
as the latter lifted his hat in salutation. Alice uttered an incoherent
syllable of exclamation, and, as she began to walk faster, she bit her
lip hard, not in order to look wistful, this time, but to help her keep
tears of anger from her eyes.

Russell laughed cheerfully. "Your brother certainly seems to have found
the place for 'colour' today," he said. "That girl's talk must be full
of it."

But Alice had forgotten the colour she herself had used in accounting
for Walter's peculiarities, and she did not understand. "What?" she
said, huskily.

"Don't you remember telling me about him? How he was going to write,
probably, and would go anywhere to pick up types and get them to talk?"

She kept her eyes ahead, and said sharply, "I think his literary tastes
scarcely cover this case!"

"Don't be too sure. He didn't look at all disconcerted. He didn't seem
to mind your seeing him."

"That's all the worse, isn't it?"

"Why, no," her friend said, genially. "It means he didn't consider
that he was engaged in anything out of the way. You can't expect to
understand everything boys do at his age; they do all sorts of queer
things, and outgrow them. Your brother evidently has a taste for queer
people, and very likely he's been at least half sincere when he's made
you believe he had a literary motive behind it. We all go through----"

"Thanks, Mr. Russell," she interrupted. "Let's don't say any more."

He looked at her flushed face and enlarged eyes; and he liked her all
the better for her indignation: this was how good sisters ought to feel,
he thought, failing to understand that most of what she felt was not
about Walter. He ventured only a word more. "Try not to mind it so much;
it really doesn't amount to anything."

She shook her head, and they went on in silence; she did not look at him
again until they stopped before her own house. Then she gave him only
one glimpse of her eyes before she looked down. "It's spoiled, isn't
it?" she said, in a low voice.

"What's 'spoiled?'"

"Our walk--well, everything. Somehow it always--is."

"'Always is' what?" he asked.

"Spoiled," she said.

He laughed at that; but without looking at him she suddenly offered him
her hand, and, as he took it, he felt a hurried, violent pressure upon
his fingers, as if she meant to thank him almost passionately for being
kind. She was gone before he could speak to her again.


In her room, with the door locked, she did not go to her mirror, but to
her bed, flinging herself face down, not caring how far the pillows
put her hat awry. Sheer grief had followed her anger; grief for
the calamitous end of her bright afternoon, grief for the "end of
everything," as she thought then. Nevertheless, she gradually grew more
composed, and, when her mother tapped on the door presently, let her in.
Mrs. Adams looked at her with quick apprehension.

"Oh, poor child! Wasn't he----"

Alice told her. "You see how it--how it made me look, mama," she
quavered, having concluded her narrative. "I'd tried to cover up
Walter's awfulness at the dance with that story about his being
'literary,' but no story was big enough to cover this up--and oh! it
must make him think I tell stories about other things!"

"No, no, no!" Mrs. Adams protested. "Don't you see? At the worst, all HE
could think is that Walter told stories to you about why he likes to be
with such dreadful people, and you believed them. That's all HE'D think;
don't you see?"

Alice's wet eyes began to show a little hopefulness. "You honestly think
it might be that way, mama?"

"Why, from what you've told me he said, I KNOW it's that way. Didn't he
say he wanted to come again?"

"N-no," Alice said, uncertainly. "But I think he will. At least I begin
to think so now. He----" She stopped.

"From all you tell me, he seems to be a very desirable young man," Mrs.
Adams said, primly.

Her daughter was silent for several moments; then new tears gathered
upon her downcast lashes. "He's just--dear!" she faltered.

Mrs. Adams nodded. "He's told you he isn't engaged, hasn't he?"

"No. But I know he isn't. Maybe when he first came here he was near it,
but I know he's not."

"I guess Mildred Palmer would LIKE him to be, all right!" Mrs. Adams
was frank enough to say, rather triumphantly; and Alice, with a lowered
head, murmured:

"Anybody--would."

The words were all but inaudible.

"Don't you worry," her mother said, and patted her on the shoulder.
"Everything will come out all right; don't you fear, Alice. Can't you
see that beside any other girl in town you're just a perfect QUEEN? Do
you think any young man that wasn't prejudiced, or something, would need
more than just one look to----"

But Alice moved away from the caressing hand. "Never mind, mama. I
wonder he looks at me at all. And if he does again, after seeing my
brother with those horrible people----"

"Now, now!" Mrs. Adams interrupted, expostulating mournfully. "I'm sure
Walter's a GOOD boy----"

"You are?" Alice cried, with a sudden vigour. "You ARE?"

"I'm sure he's GOOD, yes--and if he isn't, it's not his fault. It's
mine."

"What nonsense!"

"No, it's true," Mrs. Adams lamented. "I tried to bring him up to be
good, God knows; and when he was little he was the best boy I ever saw.
When he came from Sunday-school he'd always run to me and we'd go over
the lesson together; and he let me come in his room at night to hear his
prayers almost until he was sixteen. Most boys won't do that with
their mothers--not nearly that long. I tried so hard to bring him up
right--but if anything's gone wrong it's my fault."

"How could it be? You've just said----"

"It's because I didn't make your father this--this new step earlier.
Then Walter might have had all the advantages that other----"

"Oh, mama, PLEASE!" Alice begged her. "Let's don't go over all that
again. Isn't it more important to think what's to be done about him? Is
he going to be allowed to go on disgracing us as he does?"

Mrs. Adams sighed profoundly. "I don't know what to do," she confessed,
unhappily. "Your father's so upset about--about this new step he's
taking--I don't feel as if we ought to----"

"No, no!" Alice cried. "Papa mustn't be distressed with this, on top of
everything else. But SOMETHING'S got to be done about Walter."

"What can be?" her mother asked, helplessly. "What can be?"

Alice admitted that she didn't know.


At dinner, an hour later, Walter's habitually veiled glance lifted,
now and then, to touch her furtively;--he was waiting, as he would have
said, for her to "spring it"; and he had prepared a brief and sincere
defense to the effect that he made his own living, and would like
to inquire whose business it was to offer intrusive comment upon his
private conduct. But she said nothing, while his father and mother were
as silent as she. Walter concluded that there was to be no attack, but
changed his mind when his father, who ate only a little, and broodingly
at that, rose to leave the table and spoke to him.

"Walter," he said, "when you've finished I wish you'd come up to my
room. I got something I want to say to you."

Walter shot a hard look at his apathetic sister, then turned to his
father. "Make it to-morrow," he said. "This is Satad'y night and I got a
date."

"No," Adams said, frowning. "You come up before you go out. It's
important."

"All right; I've had all I want to eat," Walter returned. "I got a few
minutes. Make it quick."

He followed his father upstairs, and when they were in the room together
Adams shut the door, sat down, and began to rub his knees.

"Rheumatism?" the boy inquired, slyly. "That what you want to talk to me
about?"

"No." But Adams did not go on; he seemed to be in difficulties for
words, and Walter decided to help him.

"Hop ahead and spring it," he said. "Get it off your mind: I'll tell the
world _I_ should worry! You aren't goin' to bother ME any, so why bother
yourself? Alice hopped home and told you she saw me playin' around with
some pretty gay-lookin' berries and you----"

"Alice?" his father said, obviously surprised. "It's nothing about
Alice."

"Didn't she tell you----"

"I haven't talked with her all day."

"Oh, I see," Walter said. "She told mother and mother told you."

"No, neither of 'em have told me anything. What was there to tell?"

Walter laughed. "Oh, it's nothin'," he said. "I was just startin' out
to buy a girl friend o' mine a rhinestone buckle I lost to her on a bet,
this afternoon, and Alice came along with that big Russell fish; and I
thought she looked sore. She expects me to like the kind she likes, and
I don't like 'em. I thought she'd prob'ly got you all stirred up about
it."

"No, no," his father said, peevishly. "I don't know anything about it,
and I don't care to know anything about it. I want to talk to you about
something important."

Then, as he was again silent, Walter said, "Well, TALK about it; I'm
listening."

"It's this," Adams began, heavily. "It's about me going into this glue
business. Your mother's told you, hasn't she?"

"She said you were goin' to leave the old place down-town and start a
glue factory. That's all I know about it; I got my own affairs to 'tend
to."

"Well, this is your affair," his father said, frowning. "You can't stay
with Lamb and Company."

Walter looked a little startled. "What you mean, I can't? Why not?"

"You've got to help me," Adams explained slowly; and he frowned more
deeply, as if the interview were growing increasingly laborious for him.
"It's going to be a big pull to get this business on its feet."

"Yes!" Walter exclaimed with a sharp skepticism. "I should say it was!"
He stared at his father incredulously. "Look here; aren't you just a
little bit sudden, the way you're goin' about things? You've let mother
shove you a little too fast, haven't you? Do you know anything about
what it means to set up a new business these days?"

"Yes, I know all about it," Adams said. "About this business, I do."

"How do you?"

"Because I made a long study of it. I'm not afraid of going about it the
wrong way; but it's a hard job and you'll have to put in all whatever
sense and strength you've got."

Walter began to breathe quickly, and his lips were agitated; then he set
them obstinately. "Oh; I will," he said.

"Yes, you will," Adams returned, not noticing that his son's inflection
was satiric. "It's going to take every bit of energy in your body, and
all the energy I got left in mine, and every cent of the little I've
saved, besides something I'll have to raise on this house. I'm going
right at it, now I've got to; and you'll have to quit Lamb's by the end
of next week."

"Oh, I will?" Walter's voice grew louder, and there was a shrillness
in it. "I got to quit Lamb's the end of next week, have I?" He stepped
forward, angrily. "Listen!" he said. "I'm not walkin' out o' Lamb's,
see? I'm not quittin' down there: I stay with 'em, see?"

Adams looked up at him, astonished. "You'll leave there next Saturday,"
he said. "I've got to have you."

"You don't anything o' the kind," Walter told him, sharply. "Do you
expect to pay me anything?"

"I'd pay you about what you been getting down there."

"Then pay somebody else; _I_ don't know anything about glue. You get
somebody else."

"No. You've got to---"

Walter cut him off with the utmost vehemence. "Don't tell me what I got
to do! I know what I got to do better'n you, I guess! I stay at Lamb's,
see?"

Adams rose angrily. "You'll do what I tell you. You can't stay down
there."

"Why can't I?"

"Because I won't let you."

"Listen! Keep on not lettin' me: I'll be there just the same."

At that his father broke into a sour laughter. "THEY won't let you,
Walter! They won't have you down there after they find out I'm going."

"Why won't they? You don't think they're goin' to be all shot to pieces
over losin' YOU, do you?"

"I tell you they won't let you stay," his father insisted, loudly.

"Why, what do they care whether you go or not?"

"They'll care enough to fire YOU, my boy!"

"Look here, then; show me why."

"They'll do it!"

"Yes," Walter jeered; "you keep sayin' they will, but when I ask you to
show me why, you keep sayin' they will! That makes little headway with
ME, I can tell you!"

Adams groaned, and, rubbing his head, began to pace the floor. Walter's
refusal was something he had not anticipated; and he felt the weakness
of his own attempt to meet it: he seemed powerless to do anything but
utter angry words, which, as Walter said, made little headway. "Oh, my,
my!" he muttered, "OH, my, my!"

Walter, usually sallow, had grown pale: he watched his father narrowly,
and now took a sudden resolution. "Look here," he said. "When you say
Lamb's is likely to fire me because you're goin' to quit, you talk like
the people that have to be locked up. I don't know where you get such
things in your head; Lamb and Company won't know you're gone. Listen: I
can stay there long as I want to. But I'll tell you what I'll do: make
it worth my while and I'll hook up with your old glue factory, after
all."

Adams stopped his pacing abruptly, and stared at him. "'Make it worth
your while?' What you mean?"

"I got a good use for three hundred dollars right now," Walter said.
"Let me have it and I'll quit Lamb's to work for you. Don't let me have
it and I SWEAR I won't!"

"Are you crazy?"

"Is everybody crazy that needs three hundred dollars?"

"Yes," Adams said. "They are if they ask ME for it, when I got to
stretch every cent I can lay my hands on to make it look like a dollar!"

"You won't do it?"

Adams burst out at him. "You little fool! If I had three hundred dollars
to throw away, besides the pay I expected to give you, haven't you got
sense enough to see I could hire a man worth three hundred dollars
more to me than you'd be? It's a FINE time to ask me for three hundred
dollars, isn't it! What FOR? Rhinestone buckles to throw around on your
'girl friends?' Shame on you! Ask me to BRIBE you to help yourself and
your own family!"

"I'll give you a last chance," Walter said. "Either you do what I want,
or I won't do what you want. Don't ask me again after this, because----"

Adams interrupted him fiercely. "'Ask you again!' Don't worry about
that, my boy! All I ask you is to get out o' my room."

"Look here," Walter said, quietly; and his lopsided smile distorted his
livid cheek. "Look here: I expect YOU wouldn't give me three hundred
dollars to save my life, would you?"

"You make me sick," Adams said, in his bitterness. "Get out of here."

Walter went out, whistling; and Adams drooped into his old chair again
as the door closed. "OH, my, my!" he groaned. "Oh, Lordy, Lordy! The way
of the transgressor----"



CHAPTER XVI

He meant his own transgression and his own way; for Walter's stubborn
refusal appeared to Adams just then as one of the inexplicable but
righteous besettings he must encounter in following that way. "Oh,
Lordy, Lord!" he groaned, and then, as resentment moved him--"That dang
boy! Dang idiot!" Yet he knew himself for a greater idiot because he had
not been able to tell Walter the truth. He could not bring himself to do
it, nor even to state his case in its best terms; and that was because
he felt that even in its best terms the case was a bad one.

Of all his regrets the greatest was that in a moment of vanity and
tenderness, twenty-five years ago, he had told his young wife a business
secret. He had wanted to show how important her husband was becoming,
and how much the head of the universe, J. A. Lamb, trusted to his
integrity and ability. The great man had an idea: he thought of
"branching out a little," he told Adams confidentially, and there were
possibilities of profit in glue.

What he wanted was a liquid glue to be put into little bottles and sold
cheaply. "The kind of thing that sells itself," he said; "the kind of
thing that pays its own small way as it goes along, until it has profits
enough to begin advertising it right. Everybody has to use glue, and if
I make mine convenient and cheap, everybody'll buy mine. But it's got
to be glue that'll STICK; it's got to be the best; and if we find how
to make it we've got to keep it a big secret, of course, or anybody can
steal it from us. There was a man here last month; he knew a formula
he wanted to sell me, 'sight unseen'; but he was in such a hurry I got
suspicious, and I found he'd managed to steal it, working for the big
packers in their glue-works. We've got to find a better glue than that,
anyhow. I'm going to set you and Campbell at it. You're a practical,
wide-awake young feller, and Campbell's a mighty good chemist; I guess
you two boys ought to make something happen."

His guess was shrewd enough. Working in a shed a little way outside the
town, where their cheery employer visited them sometimes to study their
malodorous stews, the two young men found what Lamb had set them to
find. But Campbell was thoughtful over the discovery. "Look here," he
said. "Why ain't this just about yours and mine? After all, it may be
Lamb's money that's paid for the stuff we've used, but it hasn't cost
much."

"But he pays US," Adams remonstrated, horrified by his companion's idea.
"He paid us to do it. It belongs absolutely to him."

"Oh, I know he THINKS it does," Campbell admitted, plaintively. "I
suppose we've got to let him take it. It's not patentable, and he'll
have to do pretty well by us when he starts his factory, because he's
got to depend on us to run the making of the stuff so that the workmen
can't get onto the process. You better ask him the same salary I do, and
mine's going to be high."

But the high salary, thus pleasantly imagined, was never paid. Campbell
died of typhoid fever, that summer, leaving Adams and his employer the
only possessors of the formula, an unwritten one; and Adams, pleased to
think himself more important to the great man than ever, told his wife
that there could be little doubt of his being put in sole charge of
the prospective glue-works. Unfortunately, the enterprise remained
prospective.

Its projector had already become "inveigled into another side-line,"
as he told Adams. One of his sons had persuaded him to take up a
"cough-lozenge," to be called the "Jalamb Balm Trochee"; and the lozenge
did well enough to amuse Mr. Lamb and occupy his spare time, which was
really about all he had asked of the glue project. He had "all the MONEY
anybody ought to want," he said, when Adams urged him; and he could
"start up this little glue side-line" at any time; the formula was safe
in their two heads.

At intervals Adams would seek opportunity to speak of "the little glue
side-line" to his patron, and to suggest that the years were passing;
but Lamb, petting other hobbies, had lost interest. "Oh, I'll start it
up some day, maybe. If I don't, I may turn it over to my heirs: it's
always an asset, worth something or other, of course. We'll probably
take it up some day, though, you and I."

The sun persistently declined to rise on that day, and, as time went
on, Adams saw that his rather timid urgings bored his employer, and he
ceased to bring up the subject. Lamb apparently forgot all about glue,
but Adams discovered that unfortunately there was someone else who
remembered it.

"It's really YOURS," she argued, that painful day when for the first
time she suggested his using his knowledge for the benefit of himself
and his family. "Mr. Campbell might have had a right to part of it, but
he died and didn't leave any kin, so it belongs to you."

"Suppose J. A. Lamb hired me to saw some wood," Adams said. "Would the
sticks belong to me?"

"He hasn't got any right to take your invention and bury it," she
protested. "What good is it doing him if he doesn't DO anything with it?
What good is it doing ANYBODY? None in the world! And what harm would
it do him if you went ahead and did this for yourself and for your
children? None in the world! And what could he do to you if he WAS old
pig enough to get angry with you for doing it? He couldn't do a single
thing, and you've admitted he couldn't, yourself. So what's your reason
for depriving your children and your wife of the benefits you know you
could give 'em?"

"Nothing but decency," he answered; and she had her reply ready for
that. It seemed to him that, strive as he would, he could not reach her
mind with even the plainest language; while everything that she said to
him, with such vehemence, sounded like so much obstinate gibberish.
Over and over he pressed her with the same illustration, on the point of
ownership, though he thought he was varying it.

"Suppose he hired me to build him a house: would that be MY house?"

"He didn't hire you to build him a house. You and Campbell invented----"

"Look here: suppose you give a cook a soup-bone and some vegetables, and
pay her to make you a soup: has she got a right to take and sell it? You
know better!"

"I know ONE thing: if that old man tried to keep your own invention from
you he's no better than a robber!"

They never found any point of contact in all their passionate
discussions of this ethical question; and the question was no more
settled between them, now that Adams had succumbed, than it had ever
been. But at least the wrangling about it was over: they were grave
together, almost silent, and an uneasiness prevailed with her as much as
with him.

He had already been out of the house, to walk about the small green
yard; and on Monday afternoon he sent for a taxicab and went down-town,
but kept a long way from the "wholesale section," where stood the
formidable old oblong pile of Lamb and Company. He arranged for the
sale of the bonds he had laid away, and for placing a mortgage upon his
house; and on his way home, after five o'clock, he went to see an old
friend, a man whose term of service with Lamb and Company was even a
little longer than his own.

This veteran, returned from the day's work, was sitting in front of the
apartment house where he lived, but when the cab stopped at the curb he
rose and came forward, offering a jocular greeting. "Well, well, Virgil
Adams! I always thought you had a sporty streak in you. Travel in
your own hired private automobile nowadays, do you? Pamperin' yourself
because you're still layin' off sick, I expect."

"Oh, I'm well enough again, Charley Lohr," Adams said, as he got out and
shook hands. Then, telling the driver to wait, he took his friend's arm,
walked to the bench with him, and sat down. "I been practically well for
some time," he said. "I'm fixin' to get into harness again."

"Bein' sick has certainly produced a change of heart in you," his
friend laughed. "You're the last man I ever expected to see blowin'
yourself--or anybody else to a taxicab! For that matter, I never heard
of you bein' in ANY kind of a cab, 'less'n it might be when you been
pall-bearer for somebody. What's come over you?"

"Well, I got to turn over a new leaf, and that's a fact," Adams said. "I
got a lot to do, and the only way to accomplish it, it's got to be done
soon, or I won't have anything to live on while I'm doing it."

"What you talkin' about? What you got to do except to get strong enough
to come back to the old place?"

"Well----" Adams paused, then coughed, and said slowly, "Fact is,
Charley Lohr, I been thinking likely I wouldn't come back."

"What! What you talkin' about?"

"No," said Adams. "I been thinking I might likely kind of branch out on
my own account."

"Well, I'll be doggoned!" Old Charley Lohr was amazed; he ruffled up
his gray moustache with thumb and forefinger, leaving his mouth open
beneath, like a dark cave under a tangled wintry thicket. "Why, that's
the doggonedest thing I ever heard!" he said. "I already am the oldest
inhabitant down there, but if you go, there won't be anybody else of the
old generation at all. What on earth you thinkin' of goin' into?"

"Well," said Adams, "I rather you didn't mention it till I get started
of course anybody'll know what it is by then--but I HAVE been kind of
planning to put a liquid glue on the market."

His friend, still ruffling the gray moustache upward, stared at him in
frowning perplexity. "Glue?" he said. "GLUE!"

"Yes. I been sort of milling over the idea of taking up something like
that."

"Handlin' it for some firm, you mean?"

"No. Making it. Sort of a glue-works likely."

Lohr continued to frown. "Let me think," he said. "Didn't the ole man
have some such idea once, himself?"

Adams leaned forward, rubbing his knees; and he coughed again before he
spoke. "Well, yes. Fact is, he did. That is to say, a mighty long while
ago he did."

"I remember," said Lohr. "He never said anything about it that I know
of; but seems to me I recollect we had sort of a rumour around the place
how you and that man--le's see, wasn't his name Campbell, that died of
typhoid fever? Yes, that was it, Campbell. Didn't the ole man have you
and Campbell workin' sort of private on some glue proposition or other?"

"Yes, he did." Adams nodded. "I found out a good deal about glue then,
too."

"Been workin' on it since, I suppose?"

"Yes. Kept it in my mind and studied out new things about it."

Lohr looked serious. "Well, but see here," he said. "I hope it ain't
anything the ole man'll think might infringe on whatever he had you
doin' for HIM. You know how he is: broad-minded, liberal, free-handed
man as walks this earth, and if he thought he owed you a cent he'd sell
his right hand for a pork-chop to pay it, if that was the only way; but
if he got the idea anybody was tryin' to get the better of him, he'd
sell BOTH his hands, if he had to, to keep 'em from doin' it. Yes, at
eighty, he would! Not that I mean I think you might be tryin' to get the
better of him, Virg. You're a mighty close ole codger, but such a thing
ain't in you. What I mean: I hope there ain't any chance for the ole man
to THINK you might be----"

"Oh, no," Adams interrupted. "As a matter of fact, I don't believe he'll
ever think about it at all, and if he did he wouldn't have any real
right to feel offended at me: the process I'm going to use is one I
expect to change and improve a lot different from the one Campbell and I
worked on for him."

"Well, that's good," said Lohr. "Of course you know what you're up to:
you're old enough, God knows!" He laughed ruefully. "My, but it will
seem funny to me--down there with you gone! I expect you and I both
been gettin' to be pretty much dead-wood in the place, the way the young
fellows look at it, and the only one that'd miss either of us would be
the other one! Have you told the ole man yet?"

"Well----" Adams spoke laboriously. "No. No, I haven't. I thought--well,
that's what I wanted to see you about."

"What can I do?"

"I thought I'd write him a letter and get you to hand it to him for me."

"My soul!" his friend exclaimed. "Why on earth don't you just go down
there and tell him?"

Adams became pitiably embarrassed. He stammered, coughed, stammered
again, wrinkling his face so deeply he seemed about to weep; but finally
he contrived to utter an apologetic laugh. "I ought to do that, of
course; but in some way or other I just don't seem to be able to--to
manage it."

"Why in the world not?" the mystified Lohr inquired.

"I could hardly tell you--'less'n it is to say that when you been with
one boss all your life it's so--so kind of embarrassing--to quit him, I
just can't make up my mind to go and speak to him about it. No; I got it
in my head a letter's the only satisfactory way to do it, and I thought
I'd ask you to hand it to him."

"Well, of course I don't mind doin' that for you," Lohr said, mildly.
"But why in the world don't you just mail it to him?"

"Well, I'll tell you," Adams returned. "You know, like that, it'd have
to go through a clerk and that secretary of his, and I don't know who
all. There's a couple of kind of delicate points I want to put in it:
for instance, I want to explain to him how much improvement and so on
I'm going to introduce on the old process I helped to work out with
Campbell when we were working for him, so't he'll understand it's a
different article and no infringement at all. Then there's another
thing: you see all during while I was sick he had my salary paid to
me it amounts to considerable, I was on my back so long. Under the
circumstances, because I'm quitting, I don't feel as if I ought to
accept it, and so I'll have a check for him in the letter to cover it,
and I want to be sure he knows it, and gets it personally. If it had to
go through a lot of other people, the way it would if I put it in the
mail, why, you can't tell. So what I thought: if you'd hand it to him
for me, and maybe if he happened to read it right then, or anything,
it might be you'd notice whatever he'd happen to say about it--and you
could tell me afterward."

"All right," Lohr said. "Certainly if you'd rather do it that way, I'll
hand it to him and tell you what he says; that is, if he says anything
and I hear him. Got it written?"

"No; I'll send it around to you last of the week." Adams moved
toward his taxicab. "Don't say anything to anybody about it, Charley,
especially till after that."

"All right."

"And, Charley, I'll be mighty obliged to you," Adams said, and came back
to shake hands in farewell. "There's one thing more you might do--if
you'd ever happen to feel like it." He kept his eyes rather vaguely
fixed on a point above his friend's head as he spoke, and his voice was
not well controlled. "I been--I been down there a good many years and
I may not 'a' been so much use lately as I was at first, but I always
tried to do my best for the old firm. If anything turned out so's they
DID kind of take offense with me, down there, why, just say a good word
for me--if you'd happen to feel like it, maybe."

Old Charley Lohr assured him that he would speak a good word if
opportunity became available; then, after the cab had driven away,
he went up to his small apartment on the third floor and muttered
ruminatively until his wife inquired what he was talking to himself
about.

"Ole Virg Adams," he told her. "He's out again after his long spell of
sickness, and the way it looks to me he'd better stayed in bed."

"You mean he still looks too bad to be out?"

"Oh, I expect he's gettin' his HEALTH back," Lohr said, frowning.

"Then what's the matter with him? You mean he's lost his mind?"

"My goodness, but women do jump at conclusions!" he exclaimed.

"Well," said Mrs. Lohr, "what other conclusion did you leave me to jump
at?"

Her husband explained with a little heat: "People can have a sickness
that AFFECTS their mind, can't they? Their mind can get some affected
without bein' LOST, can't it?"

"Then you mean the poor man's mind does seem affected?"

"Why, no; I'd scarcely go as far as that," Lohr said, inconsistently,
and declined to be more definite.


Adams devoted the latter part of that evening to the composition of his
letter--a disquieting task not completed when, at eleven o'clock, he
heard his daughter coming up the stairs. She was singing to herself in a
low, sweet voice, and Adams paused to listen incredulously, with his
pen lifted and his mouth open, as if he heard the strangest sound in the
world. Then he set down the pen upon a blotter, went to his door, and
opened it, looking out at her as she came.

"Well, dearie, you seem to be feeling pretty good," he said. "What you
been doing?"

"Just sitting out on the front steps, papa."

"All alone, I suppose."

"No. Mr. Russell called."

"Oh, he did?" Adams pretended to be surprised. "What all could you and
he find to talk about till this hour o' the night?"

She laughed gaily. "You don't know me, papa!"

"How's that?"

"You've never found out that I always do all the talking."

"Didn't you let him get a word in all evening?"

"Oh, yes; every now and then."

Adams took her hand and petted it. "Well, what did he say?"

Alice gave him a radiant look and kissed him. "Not what you think!" she
laughed; then slapped his cheek with saucy affection, pirouetted across
the narrow hall and into her own room, and curtsied to him as she closed
her door.

Adams went back to his writing with a lighter heart; for since Alice
was born she had been to him the apple of his eye, his own phrase in
thinking of her; and what he was doing now was for her.

He smiled as he picked up his pen to begin a new draft of the painful
letter; but presently he looked puzzled. After all, she could be happy
just as things were, it seemed. Then why had he taken what his wife
called "this new step," which he had so long resisted?

He could only sigh and wonder. "Life works out pretty peculiarly," he
thought; for he couldn't go back now, though the reason he couldn't was
not clearly apparent. He had to go ahead.



CHAPTER XVII

He was out in his taxicab again the next morning, and by noon he had
secured what he wanted.

It was curiously significant that he worked so quickly. All the years
during which his wife had pressed him toward his present shift he had
sworn to himself, as well as to her, that he would never yield; and yet
when he did yield he had no plans to make, because he found them
already prepared and worked out in detail in his mind; as if he had long
contemplated the "step" he believed himself incapable of taking.

Sometimes he had thought of improving his income by exchanging his
little collection of bonds for a "small rental property," if he could
find "a good buy"; and he had spent many of his spare hours rambling
over the enormously spreading city and its purlieus, looking for the
ideal "buy." It remained unattainable, so far as he was concerned; but
he found other things.

Not twice a crow's mile from his own house there was a dismal and
slummish quarter, a decayed "industrial district" of earlier days. Most
of the industries were small; some of them died, perishing of bankruptcy
or fire; and a few had moved, leaving their shells. Of the relics, the
best was a brick building which had been the largest and most important
factory in the quarter: it had been injured by a long vacancy almost
as serious as a fire, in effect, and Adams had often guessed at the sum
needed to put it in repair.

When he passed it, he would look at it with an interest which he
supposed detached and idly speculative. "That'd be just the thing," he
thought. "If a fellow had money enough, and took a notion to set up some
new business on a big scale, this would be a pretty good place--to make
glue, for instance, if that wasn't out of the question, of course.
It would take a lot of money, though; a great deal too much for me to
expect to handle--even if I'd ever dream of doing such a thing."

Opposite the dismantled factory was a muddy, open lot of two acres
or so, and near the middle of the lot, a long brick shed stood in
a desolate abandonment, not happily decorated by old coatings of
theatrical and medicinal advertisements. But the brick shed had two
wooden ells, and, though both shed and ells were of a single story, here
was empty space enough for a modest enterprise--"space enough for almost
anything, to start with," Adams thought, as he walked through the low
buildings, one day, when he was prospecting in that section. "Yes, I
suppose I COULD swing this," he thought. "If the process belonged to
me, say, instead of being out of the question because it isn't my
property--or if I was the kind of man to do such a thing anyhow, here
would be something I could probably get hold of pretty cheap. They'd
want a lot of money for a lease on that big building over the way--but
this, why, I should think it'd be practically nothing at all."

Then, by chance, meeting an agent he knew, he made inquiries--merely to
satisfy a casual curiosity, he thought--and he found matters much as he
had supposed, except that the owners of the big building did not wish
to let, but to sell it, and this at a price so exorbitant that Adams
laughed. But the long brick shed in the great muddy lot was for sale or
to let, or "pretty near to be given away," he learned, if anybody would
take it.

Adams took it now, though without seeing that he had been destined
to take it, and that some dreary wizard in the back of his head had
foreseen all along that he would take it, and planned to be ready. He
drove in his taxicab to look the place over again, then down-town to
arrange for a lease; and came home to lunch with his wife and daughter.
Things were "moving," he told them.

He boasted a little of having acted so decisively, and said that since
the dang thing had to be done, it was "going to be done RIGHT!" He was
almost cheerful, in a feverish way, and when the cab came for him again,
soon after lunch, he explained that he intended not only to get things
done right, but also to "get 'em done quick!" Alice, following him to
the front door, looked at him anxiously and asked if she couldn't help.
He laughed at her grimly.

"Then let me go along with you in the cab," she begged. "You don't look
able to start in so hard, papa, just when you're barely beginning to get
your strength back. Do let me go with you and see if I can't help--or at
least take care of you if you should get to feeling badly."

He declined, but upon pressure let her put a tiny bottle of spirits of
ammonia in his pocket, and promised to make use of it if he "felt faint
or anything." Then he was off again; and the next morning had men at
work in his sheds, though the wages he had to pay frightened him.

He directed the workmen in every detail, hurrying them by example and
exhortations, and receiving, in consequence, several declarations of
independence, as well as one resignation, which took effect immediately.
"Yous capitalusts seem to think a man's got nothin' to do but break his
back p'doosin' wealth fer yous to squander," the resigning person loudly
complained. "You look out: the toiler's day is a-comin', and it ain't so
fur off, neither!" But the capitalist was already out of hearing, gone
to find a man to take this orator's place.

By the end of the week, Adams felt that he had moved satisfactorily
forward in his preparations for the simple equipment he needed; but
he hated the pause of Sunday. He didn't WANT any rest, he told Alice
impatiently, when she suggested that the idle day might be good for him.

Late that afternoon he walked over to the apartment house where old
Charley Lohr lived, and gave his friend the letter he wanted the head
of Lamb and Company to receive "personally." "I'll take it as a mighty
great favour in you to hand it to him personally, Charley," he said, in
parting. "And you won't forget, in case he says anything about it--and
remember if you ever do get a chance to put in a good word for me later,
you know----"

Old Charley promised to remember, and, when Mrs. Lohr came out of the
"kitchenette," after the door closed, he said thoughtfully, "Just skin
and bones."

"You mean Mr. Adams is?" Mrs. Lohr inquired.

"Who'd you think I meant?" he returned. "One o' these partridges in the
wall-paper?"

"Did he look so badly?"

"Looked kind of distracted to me," her husband replied. "These little
thin fellers can stand a heap sometimes, though. He'll be over here
again Monday."

"Did he say he would?"

"No," said Lohr. "But he will. You'll see. He'll be over to find out
what the big boss says when I give him this letter. Expect I'd be kind
of anxious, myself, if I was him."

"Why would you? What's Mr. Adams doing to be so anxious about?"

Lohr's expression became one of reserve, the look of a man who has
found that when he speaks his inner thoughts his wife jumps too far to
conclusions. "Oh, nothing," he said. "Of course any man starting up a
new business is bound to be pretty nervous a while. He'll be over here
to-morrow evening, all right; you'll see."

The prediction was fulfilled: Adams arrived just after Mrs. Lohr had
removed the dinner dishes to her "kitchenette"; but Lohr had little
information to give his caller.

"He didn't say a word, Virgil; nary a word. I took it into his office
and handed it to him, and he just sat and read it; that's all. I kind of
stood around as long as I could, but he was sittin' at his desk with his
side to me, and he never turned around full toward me, as it were, so I
couldn't hardly even tell anything. All I know: he just read it."

"Well, but see here," Adams began, nervously. "Well----"

"Well what, Virg?"

"Well, but what did he say when he DID speak?"

"He didn't speak. Not so long I was in there, anyhow. He just sat there
and read it. Read kind of slow. Then, when he came to the end, he turned
back and started to read it all over again. By that time there was three
or four other men standin' around in the office waitin' to speak to him,
and I had to go."

Adams sighed, and stared at the floor, irresolute. "Well, I'll be
getting along back home then, I guess, Charley. So you're sure you
couldn't tell anything what he might have thought about it, then?"

"Not a thing in the world. I've told you all I know, Virg."

"I guess so, I guess so," Adams said, mournfully. "I feel mighty
obliged to you, Charley Lohr; mighty obliged. Good-night to you." And he
departed, sighing in perplexity.

On his way home, preoccupied with many thoughts, he walked so slowly
that once or twice he stopped and stood motionless for a few moments,
without being aware of it; and when he reached the juncture of the
sidewalk with the short brick path that led to his own front door, he
stopped again, and stood for more than a minute. "Ah, I wish I knew," he
whispered, plaintively. "I do wish I knew what he thought about it."

He was roused by a laugh that came lightly from the little veranda near
by. "Papa!" Alice called gaily. "What are you standing there muttering
to yourself about?"

"Oh, are you there, dearie?" he said, and came up the path. A tall
figure rose from a chair on the veranda.

"Papa, this is Mr. Russell."

The two men shook hands, Adams saying, "Pleased to make your
acquaintance," as they looked at each other in the faint light diffused
through the opaque glass in the upper part of the door. Adams's
impression was of a strong and tall young man, fashionable but gentle;
and Russell's was of a dried, little old business man with a grizzled
moustache, worried bright eyes, shapeless dark clothes, and a homely
manner.

"Nice evening," Adams said further, as their hands parted. "Nice time o'
year it is, but we don't always have as good weather as this; that's
the trouble of it. Well----" He went to the door. "Well--I bid you good
evening," he said, and retired within the house.

Alice laughed. "He's the old-fashionedest man in town, I suppose and
frightfully impressed with you, I could see!"

"What nonsense!" said Russell. "How could anybody be impressed with me?"

"Why not? Because you're quiet? Good gracious! Don't you know that
you're the most impressive sort? We chatterers spend all our time
playing to you quiet people."

"Yes; we're only the audience."

"'Only!'" she echoed. "Why, we live for you, and we can't live without
you."

"I wish you couldn't," said Russell. "That would be a new experience for
both of us, wouldn't it?"

"It might be a rather bleak one for me," she answered, lightly. "I'm
afraid I'll miss these summer evenings with you when they're over. I'll
miss them enough, thanks!"

"Do they have to be over some time?" he asked.

"Oh, everything's over some time, isn't it?"

Russell laughed at her. "Don't let's look so far ahead as that," he
said. "We don't need to be already thinking of the cemetery, do we?"

"I didn't," she said, shaking her head. "Our summer evenings will be
over before then, Mr. Russell."

"Why?" he asked.

"Good heavens!" she said. "THERE'S laconic eloquence: almost a proposal
in a single word! Never mind, I shan't hold you to it. But to answer
you: well, I'm always looking ahead, and somehow I usually see about how
things are coming out."

"Yes," he said. "I suppose most of us do; at least it seems as if we
did, because we so seldom feel surprised by the way they do come out.
But maybe that's only because life isn't like a play in a theatre, and
most things come about so gradually we get used to them."

"No, I'm sure I can see quite a long way ahead," she insisted, gravely.
"And it doesn't seem to me as if our summer evenings could last very
long. Something'll interfere--somebody will, I mean--they'll SAY
something----"

"What if they do?"

She moved her shoulders in a little apprehensive shiver. "It'll change
you," she said. "I'm just sure something spiteful's going to happen to
me. You'll feel differently about--things."

"Now, isn't that an idea!" he exclaimed.

"It will," she insisted. "I know something spiteful's going to happen!"

"You seem possessed by a notion not a bit flattering to me," he
remarked.

"Oh, but isn't it? That's just what it is! Why isn't it?"

"Because it implies that I'm made of such soft material the slightest
breeze will mess me all up. I'm not so like that as I evidently appear;
and if it's true that we're afraid other people will do the things we'd
be most likely to do ourselves, it seems to me that I ought to be the
one to be afraid. I ought to be afraid that somebody may say something
about me to you that will make you believe I'm a professional forger."

"No. We both know they won't," she said. "We both know you're the sort
of person everybody in the world says nice things about." She lifted
her hand to silence him as he laughed at this. "Oh, of course you are! I
think perhaps you're a little flirtatious--most quiet men have that one
sly way with 'em--oh, yes, they do! But you happen to be the kind of
man everybody loves to praise. And if you weren't, _I_ shouldn't hear
anything terrible about you. I told you I was unpopular: I don't see
anybody at all any more. The only man except you who's been to see me in
a month is that fearful little fat Frank Dowling, and I sent word to HIM
I wasn't home. Nobody'd tell me of your wickedness, you see."

"Then let me break some news to you," Russell said. "Nobody would tell
me of yours, either. Nobody's even mentioned you to me."

She burlesqued a cry of anguish. "That IS obscurity! I suppose I'm
too apt to forget that they say the population's about half a million
nowadays. There ARE other people to talk about, you feel, then?"

"None that I want to," he said. "But I should think the size of the
place might relieve your mind of what seems to insist on burdening it.
Besides, I'd rather you thought me a better man than you do."

"What kind of a man do I think you are?"

"The kind affected by what's said about people instead of by what they
do themselves."

"Aren't you?"

"No, I'm not," he said. "If you want our summer evenings to be over
you'll have to drive me away yourself."

"Nobody else could?"

"No."

She was silent, leaning forward, with her elbows on her knees and her
clasped hands against her lips. Then, not moving, she said softly:

"Well--I won't!"

She was silent again, and he said nothing, but looked at her, seeming
to be content with looking. Her attitude was one only a graceful person
should assume, but she was graceful; and, in the wan light, which made
a prettily shaped mist of her, she had beauty. Perhaps it was beauty of
the hour, and of the love scene almost made into form by what they had
both just said, but she had it; and though beauty of the hour passes, he
who sees it will long remember it and the hour when it came.

"What are you thinking of?" he asked.

She leaned back in her chair and did not answer at once. Then she said:

"I don't know; I doubt if I was thinking of anything. It seems to me I
wasn't. I think I was just being sort of sadly happy just then."

"Were you? Was it 'sadly,' too?"

"Don't you know?" she said. "It seems to me that only little children
can be just happily happy. I think when we get older our happiest
moments are like the one I had just then: it's as if we heard strains of
minor music running through them--oh, so sweet, but oh, so sad!"

"But what makes it sad for YOU?"

"I don't know," she said, in a lighter tone. "Perhaps it's a kind of
useless foreboding I seem to have pretty often. It may be that--or it
may be poor papa."

"You ARE a funny, delightful girl, though!" Russell laughed. "When your
father's so well again that he goes out walking in the evenings!"

"He does too much walking," Alice said. "Too much altogether, over at
his new plant. But there isn't any stopping him." She laughed and shook
her head. "When a man gets an ambition to be a multi-millionaire his
family don't appear to have much weight with him. He'll walk all he
wants to, in spite of them."

"I suppose so," Russell said, absently; then he leaned forward. "I wish
I could understand better why you were 'sadly' happy."

Meanwhile, as Alice shed what further light she could on this point, the
man ambitious to be a "multi-millionaire" was indeed walking too much
for his own good. He had gone to bed, hoping to sleep well and rise
early for a long day's work, but he could not rest, and now, in his
nightgown and slippers, he was pacing the floor of his room.

"I wish I DID know," he thought, over and over. "I DO wish I knew how he
feels about it."



CHAPTER XVIII

That was a thought almost continuously in his mind, even when he was
hardest at work; and, as the days went on and he could not free himself,
he became querulous about it. "I guess I'm the biggest dang fool alive,"
he told his wife as they sat together one evening. "I got plenty else
to bother me, without worrying my head off about what HE thinks. I
can't help what he thinks; it's too late for that. So why should I keep
pestering myself about it?"

"It'll wear off, Virgil," Mrs. Adams said, reassuringly. She was gentle
and sympathetic with him, and for the first time in many years he would
come to sit with her and talk, when he had finished his day's work. He
had told her, evading her eye, "Oh, I don't blame you. You didn't get
after me to do this on your own account; you couldn't help it."

"Yes; but it don't wear off," he complained. "This afternoon I was
showing the men how I wanted my vats to go, and I caught my fool self
standing there saying to my fool self, 'It's funny I don't hear how he
feels about it from SOMEbody.' I was saying it aloud, almost--and it IS
funny I don't hear anything!"

"Well, you see what it means, don't you, Virgil? It only means he hasn't
said anything to anybody about it. Don't you think you're getting kind
of morbid over it?"

"Maybe, maybe," he muttered.

"Why, yes," she said, briskly. "You don't realize what a little bit of
a thing all this is to him. It's been a long, long while since the
last time you even mentioned glue to him, and he's probably forgotten
everything about it."

"You're off your base; it isn't like him to forget things," Adams
returned, peevishly. "He may seem to forget 'em, but he don't."

"But he's not thinking about this, or you'd have heard from him before
now."

Her husband shook his head. "Ah, that's just it!" he said. "Why HAVEN'T
I heard from him?"

"It's all your morbidness, Virgil. Look at Walter: if Mr. Lamb held this
up against you, would he still let Walter stay there? Wouldn't he have
discharged Walter if he felt angry with you?"

"That dang boy!" Adams said. "If he WANTED to come with me now, I
wouldn't hardly let him, What do you suppose makes him so bull-headed?"

"But hasn't he a right to choose for himself?" she asked. "I suppose
he feels he ought to stick to what he thinks is sure pay. As soon as he
sees that you're going to succeed with the glue-works he'll want to be
with you quick enough."

"Well, he better get a little sense in his head," Adams returned,
crossly. "He wanted me to pay him a three-hundred-dollar bonus in
advance, when anybody with a grain of common sense knows I need every
penny I can lay my hands on!"

"Never mind," she said. "He'll come around later and be glad of the
chance."

"He'll have to beg for it then! _I_ won't ask him again."

"Oh, Walter will come out all right; you needn't worry. And don't you
see that Mr. Lamb's not discharging him means there's no hard feeling
against you, Virgil?"

"I can't make it out at all," he said, frowning. "The only thing I can
THINK it means is that J. A. Lamb is so fair-minded--and of course he
IS one of the fair-mindedest men alive I suppose that's the reason he
hasn't fired Walter. He may know," Adams concluded, morosely--"he may
know that's just another thing to make me feel all the meaner: keeping
my boy there on a salary after I've done him an injury."

"Now, now!" she said, trying to comfort him. "You couldn't do anybody an
injury to save your life, and everybody knows it."

"Well, anybody ought to know I wouldn't WANT to do an injury, but
this world isn't built so't we can do just what we want." He paused,
reflecting. "Of course there may be one explanation of why Walter's
still there: J. A. maybe hasn't noticed that he IS there. There's so
many I expect he hardly knows him by sight."

"Well, just do quit thinking about it," she urged him. "It only bothers
you without doing any good. Don't you know that?"

"Don't I, though!" he laughed, feebly. "I know it better'n anybody! How
funny that is: when you know thinking about a thing only pesters you
without helping anything at all, and yet you keep right on pestering
yourself with it!"

"But WHY?" she said. "What's the use when you know you haven't done
anything wrong, Virgil? You said yourself you were going to improve the
process so much it would be different from the old one, and you'd REALLY
have a right to it."

Adams had persuaded himself of this when he yielded; he had found it
necessary to persuade himself of it--though there was a part of him, of
course, that remained unpersuaded; and this discomfiting part of him was
what made his present trouble. "Yes, I know," he said. "That's true, but
I can't quite seem to get away from the fact that the principle of the
process is a good deal the same--well, it's more'n that; it's just about
the same as the one he hired Campbell and me to work out for him. Truth
is, nobody could tell the difference, and I don't know as there IS
any difference except in these improvements I'm making. Of course, the
improvements do give me pretty near a perfect right to it, as a person
might say; and that's one of the things I thought of putting in my
letter to him; but I was afraid he'd just think I was trying to make up
excuses, so I left it out. I kind of worried all the time I was writing
that letter, because if he thought I WAS just making up excuses, why, it
might set him just so much more against me."

Ever since Mrs. Adams had found that she was to have her way, the depths
of her eyes had been troubled by a continuous uneasiness; and, although
she knew it was there, and sometimes veiled it by keeping the revealing
eyes averted from her husband and children, she could not always cover
it under that assumption of absent-mindedness. The uneasy look became
vivid, and her voice was slightly tremulous now, as she said, "But
what if he SHOULD be against you--although I don't believe he is, of
course--you told me he couldn't DO anything to you, Virgil."

"No," he said, slowly. "I can't see how he could do anything. It was
just a secret, not a patent; the thing ain't patentable. I've tried to
think what he could do--supposing he was to want to--but I can't figure
out anything at all that would be any harm to me. There isn't any way in
the world it could be made a question of law. Only thing he could do'd
be to TELL people his side of it, and set 'em against me. I been kind of
waiting for that to happen, all along."

She looked somewhat relieved. "So did I expect it," she said. "I was
dreading it most on Alice's account: it might have--well, young men are
so easily influenced and all. But so far as the business is concerned,
what if Mr. Lamb did talk? That wouldn't amount to much. It wouldn't
affect the business; not to hurt. And, besides, he isn't even doing
that."

"No; anyhow not yet, it seems." And Adams sighed again, wistfully. "But
I WOULD give a good deal to know what he thinks!"

Before his surrender he had always supposed that if he did such an
unthinkable thing as to seize upon the glue process for himself, what he
would feel must be an overpowering shame. But shame is the rarest thing
in the world: what he felt was this unremittent curiosity about his old
employer's thoughts. It was an obsession, yet he did not want to hear
what Lamb "thought" from Lamb himself, for Adams had a second obsession,
and this was his dread of meeting the old man face to face. Such an
encounter could happen only by chance and unexpectedly; since Adams
would have avoided any deliberate meeting, so long as his legs had
strength to carry him, even if Lamb came to the house to see him.

But people do meet unexpectedly; and when Adams had to be down-town he
kept away from the "wholesale district." One day he did see Lamb, as the
latter went by in his car, impassive, going home to lunch; and Adams,
in the crowd at a corner, knew that the old man had not seen him.
Nevertheless, in a street car, on the way back to his sheds, an hour
later, he was still subject to little shivering seizures of horror.

He worked unceasingly, seeming to keep at it even in his sleep, for he
always woke in the midst of a planning and estimating that must have
been going on in his mind before consciousness of himself returned.
Moreover, the work, thus urged, went rapidly, in spite of the high wages
he had to pay his labourers for their short hours. "It eats money," he
complained, and, in fact, by the time his vats and boilers were in
place it had eaten almost all he could supply; but in addition to his
equipment he now owned a stock of "raw material," raw indeed; and when
operations should be a little further along he was confident his banker
would be willing to "carry" him.

Six weeks from the day he had obtained his lease he began his
glue-making. The terrible smells came out of the sheds and went writhing
like snakes all through that quarter of the town. A smiling man,
strolling and breathing the air with satisfaction, would turn a corner
and smile no more, but hurry. However, coloured people had almost all
the dwellings of this old section to themselves; and although even they
were troubled, there was recompense for them. Being philosophic about
what appeared to them as in the order of nature, they sought neither
escape nor redress, and soon learned to bear what the wind brought them.
They even made use of it to enrich those figures of speech with which
the native impulses of coloured people decorate their communications:
they flavoured metaphor, simile, and invective with it; and thus may be
said to have enjoyed it. But the man who produced it took a hot bath
as soon as he reached his home the evening of that first day when his
manufacturing began. Then he put on fresh clothes; but after dinner he
seemed to be haunted, and asked his wife if she "noticed anything."

She laughed and inquired what he meant.

"Seems to me as if that glue-works smell hadn't quit hanging to me," he
explained. "Don't you notice it?"

"No! What an idea!"

He laughed, too, but uneasily; and told her he was sure "the dang glue
smell" was somehow sticking to him. Later, he went outdoors and walked
up and down the small yard in the dusk; but now and then he stood still,
with his head lifted, and sniffed the air suspiciously. "Can YOU smell
it?" he called to Alice, who sat upon the veranda, prettily dressed and
waiting in a reverie.

"Smell what, papa?"

"That dang glue-works."

She did the same thing her mother had done: laughed, and said, "No! How
foolish! Why, papa, it's over two miles from here!"

"You don't get it at all?" he insisted.

"The idea! The air is lovely to-night, papa."

The air did not seem lovely to him, for he was positive that he detected
the taint. He wondered how far it carried, and if J. A. Lamb would smell
it, too, out on his own lawn a mile to the north; and if he did, would
he guess what it was? Then Adams laughed at himself for such nonsense;
but could not rid his nostrils of their disgust. To him the whole town
seemed to smell of his glue-works.

Nevertheless, the glue was making, and his sheds were busy. "Guess
we're stirrin' up this ole neighbourhood with more than the smell," his
foreman remarked one morning.

"How's that?" Adams inquired.

"That great big, enormous ole dead butterine factory across the street
from our lot," the man said. "Nothin' like settin' an example to bring
real estate to life. That place is full o' carpenters startin' in to
make a regular buildin' of it again. Guess you ought to have the
credit of it, because you was the first man in ten years to see any
possibilities in this neighbourhood."

Adams was pleased, and, going out to see for himself, heard a great
hammering and sawing from within the building; while carpenters were
just emerging gingerly upon the dangerous roof. He walked out over the
dried mud of his deep lot, crossed the street, and spoke genially to
a workman who was removing the broken glass of a window on the ground
floor.

"Here! What's all this howdy-do over here?"

"Goin' to fix her all up, I guess," the workman said. "Big job it is,
too."

"Sh' think it would be."

"Yes, sir; a pretty big job--a pretty big job. Got men at it on all four
floors and on the roof. They're doin' it RIGHT."

"Who's doing it?"

"Lord! I d' know. Some o' these here big manufacturing corporations, I
guess."

"What's it going to be?"

"They tell ME," the workman answered--"they tell ME she's goin' to be a
butterine factory again. Anyways, I hope she won't be anything to smell
like that glue-works you got over there not while I'm workin' around
her, anyways!"

"That smell's all right," Adams said. "You soon get used to it."

"You do?" The man appeared incredulous. "Listen! I was over in France:
it's a good thing them Dutchmen never thought of it; we'd of had to
quit!"

Adams laughed, and went back to his sheds. "I guess my foreman was
right," he told his wife, that evening, with a little satisfaction.
"As soon as one man shows enterprise enough to found an industry in a
broken-down neighbourhood, somebody else is sure to follow. I kind of
like the look of it: it'll help make our place seem sort of more busy
and prosperous when it comes to getting a loan from the bank--and I got
to get one mighty soon, too. I did think some that if things go as well
as there's every reason to think they OUGHT to, I might want to spread
out and maybe get hold of that old factory myself; but I hardly expected
to be able to handle a proposition of that size before two or three
years from now, and anyhow there's room enough on the lot I got, if we
need more buildings some day. Things are going about as fine as I could
ask: I hired some girls to-day to do the bottling--coloured girls along
about sixteen to twenty years old. Afterwhile, I expect to get a machine
to put the stuff in the little bottles, when we begin to get good
returns; but half a dozen of these coloured girls can do it all right
now, by hand. We're getting to have really quite a little plant over
there: yes, sir, quite a regular little plant!"

He chuckled, and at this cheerful sound, of a kind his wife had almost
forgotten he was capable of producing, she ventured to put her hand upon
his arm. They had gone outdoors, after dinner, taking two chairs with
them, and were sitting through the late twilight together, keeping well
away from the "front porch," which was not yet occupied, however Alice
was in her room changing her dress.

"Well, honey," Mrs. Adams said, taking confidence not only to put her
hand upon his arm, but to revive this disused endearment;--"it's grand
to have you so optimistic. Maybe some time you'll admit I was right,
after all. Everything's going so well, it seems a pity you didn't take
this--this step--long ago. Don't you think maybe so, Virgil?"

"Well--if I was ever going to, I don't know but I might as well of.
I got to admit the proposition begins to look pretty good: I know the
stuff'll sell, and I can't see a thing in the world to stop it. It does
look good, and if--if----" He paused.

"If what?" she said, suddenly anxious.

He laughed plaintively, as if confessing a superstition. "It's
funny--well, it's mighty funny about that smell. I've got so used to it
at the plant I never seem to notice it at all over there. It's only when
I get away. Honestly, can't you notice----?"

"Virgil!" She lifted her hand to strike his arm chidingly. "Do quit
harping on that nonsense!"

"Oh, of course it don't amount to anything," he said. "A person can
stand a good deal of just smell. It don't WORRY me any."

"I should think not especially as there isn't any."

"Well," he said, "I feel pretty fair over the whole thing--a lot
better'n I ever expected to, anyhow. I don't know as there's any reason
I shouldn't tell you so."

She was deeply pleased with this acknowledgment, and her voice had
tenderness in it as she responded: "There, honey! Didn't I always say
you'd be glad if you did it?"

Embarrassed, he coughed loudly, then filled his pipe and lit it. "Well,"
he said, slowly, "it's a puzzle. Yes, sir, it's a puzzle."

"What is?"

"Pretty much everything, I guess."

As he spoke, a song came to them from a lighted window over their heads.
Then the window darkened abruptly, but the song continued as Alice went
down through the house to wait on the little veranda. "Mi chiamo Mimi,"
she sang, and in her voice throbbed something almost startling in its
sweetness. Her father and mother listened, not speaking until the song
stopped with the click of the wire screen at the front door as Alice
came out.

"My!" said her father. "How sweet she does sing! I don't know as I ever
heard her voice sound nicer than it did just then."

"There's something that makes it sound that way," his wife told him.

"I suppose so," he said, sighing. "I suppose so. You think----"

"She's just terribly in love with him!"

"I expect that's the way it ought to be," he said, then drew upon
his pipe for reflection, and became murmurous with the symptoms of
melancholy laughter. "It don't make things less of a puzzle, though,
does it?"

"In what way, Virgil?"

"Why, here," he said--"here we go through all this muck and moil to help
fix things nicer for her at home, and what's it all amount to? Seems
like she's just gone ahead the way she'd 'a' gone anyhow; and now, I
suppose, getting ready to up and leave us! Ain't that a puzzle to you?
It is to me."

"Oh, but things haven't gone that far yet."

"Why, you just said----"

She gave a little cry of protest. "Oh, they aren't ENGAGED yet. Of
course they WILL be; he's just as much interested in her as she is in
him, but----"

"Well, what's the trouble then?"

"You ARE a simple old fellow!" his wife exclaimed, and then rose from
her chair. "That reminds me," she said.

"What of?" he asked. "What's my being simple remind you of?"

"Nothing!" she laughed. "It wasn't you that reminded me. It was just
something that's been on my mind. I don't believe he's actually ever
been inside our house!"

"Hasn't he?"

"I actually don't believe he ever has," she said. "Of course we
must----" She paused, debating.

"We must what?"

"I guess I better talk to Alice about it right now," she said. "He don't
usually come for about half an hour yet; I guess I've got time." And
with that she walked away, leaving him to his puzzles.



CHAPTER XIX

Alice was softly crooning to herself as her mother turned the corner of
the house and approached through the dusk.

"Isn't it the most BEAUTIFUL evening!" the daughter said. "WHY can't
summer last all year? Did you ever know a lovelier twilight than this,
mama?"

Mrs. Adams laughed, and answered, "Not since I was your age, I expect."

Alice was wistful at once. "Don't they stay beautiful after my age?"

"Well, it's not the same thing."

"Isn't it? Not ever?"

"You may have a different kind from mine," the mother said, a little
sadly. "I think you will, Alice. You deserve----"

"No, I don't. I don't deserve anything, and I know it. But I'm getting
a great deal these days--more than I ever dreamed COULD come to me.
I'm--I'm pretty happy, mama!"

"Dearie!" Her mother would have kissed her, but Alice drew away.

"Oh, I don't mean----" She laughed nervously. "I wasn't meaning to
tell you I'm ENGAGED, mama. We're not. I mean--oh! things seem pretty
beautiful in spite of all I've done to spoil 'em."

"You?" Mrs. Adams cried, incredulously. "What have you done to spoil
anything?"

"Little things," Alice said. "A thousand little silly--oh, what's
the use? He's so honestly what he is--just simple and good and
intelligent--I feel a tricky mess beside him! I don't see why he likes
me; and sometimes I'm afraid he wouldn't if he knew me."

"He'd just worship you," said the fond mother. "And the more he knew
you, the more he'd worship you."

Alice shook her head. "He's not the worshiping kind. Not like that at
all. He's more----"

But Mrs. Adams was not interested in this analysis, and she interrupted
briskly, "Of course it's time your father and I showed some interest in
him. I was just saying I actually don't believe he's ever been inside
the house."

"No," Alice said, musingly; "that's true: I don't believe he has. Except
when we've walked in the evening we've always sat out here, even those
two times when it was drizzly. It's so much nicer."

"We'll have to do SOMETHING or other, of course," her mother said.

"What like?"

"I was thinking----" Mrs. Adams paused. "Well, of course we could hardly
put off asking him to dinner, or something, much longer."

Alice was not enthusiastic; so far from it, indeed, that there was a
melancholy alarm in her voice. "Oh, mama, must we? Do you think so?"

"Yes, I do. I really do."

"Couldn't we--well, couldn't we wait?"

"It looks queer," Mrs. Adams said. "It isn't the thing at all for a
young man to come as much as he does, and never more than just barely
meet your father and mother. No. We ought to do something."

"But a dinner!" Alice objected. "In the first place, there isn't anybody
I want to ask. There isn't anybody I WOULD ask."

"I didn't mean trying to give a big dinner," her mother explained. "I
just mean having him to dinner. That mulatto woman, Malena Burns, goes
out by the day, and she could bring a waitress. We can get some flowers
for the table and some to put in the living-room. We might just as well
go ahead and do it to-morrow as any other time; because your father's in
a fine mood, and I saw Malena this afternoon and told her I might want
her soon. She said she didn't have any engagements this week, and I can
let her know to-night. Suppose when he comes you ask him for to-morrow,
Alice. Everything'll be very nice, I'm sure. Don't worry about it."

"Well--but----" Alice was uncertain.

"But don't you see, it looks so queer, not to do SOMETHING?" her mother
urged. "It looks so kind of poverty-stricken. We really oughtn't to wait
any longer."

Alice assented, though not with a good heart. "Very well, I'll ask him,
if you think we've got to."

"That matter's settled then," Mrs. Adams said. "I'll go telephone
Malena, and then I'll tell your father about it."

But when she went back to her husband, she found him in an excited
state of mind, and Walter standing before him in the darkness. Adams was
almost shouting, so great was his vehemence.

"Hush, hush!" his wife implored, as she came near them. "They'll hear
you out on the front porch!"

"I don't care who hears me," Adams said, harshly, though he tempered his
loudness. "Do you want to know what this boy's asking me for? I thought
he'd maybe come to tell me he'd got a little sense in his head at last,
and a little decency about what's due his family! I thought he was
going to ask me to take him into my plant. No, ma'am; THAT'S not what he
wants!"

"No, it isn't," Walter said. In the darkness his face could not be seen;
he stood motionless, in what seemed an apathetic attitude; and he spoke
quietly, "No," he repeated. "That isn't what I want."

"You stay down at that place," Adams went on, hotly, "instead of trying
to be a little use to your family; and the only reason you're ALLOWED to
stay there is because Mr. Lamb's never happened to notice you ARE still
there! You just wait----"

"You're off," Walter said, in the same quiet way. "He knows I'm there.
He spoke to me yesterday: he asked me how I was getting along with my
work."

"He did?" Adams said, seeming not to believe him.

"Yes. He did."

"What else did he say, Walter?" Mrs. Adams asked quickly.

"Nothin'. Just walked on."

"I don't believe he knew who you were," Adams declared.

"Think not? He called me 'Walter Adams.'"

At this Adams was silent; and Walter, after waiting a moment, said:

"Well, are you going to do anything about me? About what I told you I
got to have?"

"What is it, Walter?" his mother asked, since Adams did not speak.

Walter cleared his throat, and replied in a tone as quiet as that he
had used before, though with a slight huskiness, "I got to have three
hundred and fifty dollars. You better get him to give it to me if you
can."

Adams found his voice. "Yes," he said, bitterly. "That's all he asks!
He won't do anything I ask HIM to, and in return he asks me for three
hundred and fifty dollars! That's all!"

"What in the world!" Mrs. Adams exclaimed. "What FOR, Walter?"

"I got to have it," Walter said.

"But what FOR?"

His quiet huskiness did not alter. "I got to have it."

"But can't you tell us----"

"I got to have it."

"That's all you can get out of him," Adams said. "He seems to think
it'll bring him in three hundred and fifty dollars!"

A faint tremulousness became evident in the husky voice. "Haven't you
got it?"

"NO, I haven't got it!" his father answered. "And I've got to go to a
bank for more than my pay-roll next week. Do you think I'm a mint?"

"I don't understand what you mean, Walter," Mrs. Adams interposed,
perplexed and distressed. "If your father had the money, of course
he'd need every cent of it, especially just now, and, anyhow, you could
scarcely expect him to give it to you, unless you told us what you want
with it. But he hasn't got it."

"All right," Walter said; and after standing a moment more, in silence,
he added, impersonally, "I don't see as you ever did anything much for
me, anyhow either of you."

Then, as if this were his valedictory, he turned his back upon them,
walked away quickly, and was at once lost to their sight in the
darkness.

"There's a fine boy to've had the trouble of raising!" Adams grumbled.
"Just crazy, that's all."

"What in the world do you suppose he wants all that money for?" his
wife said, wonderingly. "I can't imagine what he could DO with it. I
wonder----" She paused. "I wonder if he----"

"If he what?" Adams prompted her irritably.

"If he COULD have bad--associates."

"God knows!" said Adams. "_I_ don't! It just looks to me like he had
something in him I don't understand. You can't keep your eye on a boy
all the time in a city this size, not a boy Walter's age. You got a girl
pretty much in the house, but a boy'll follow his nature. _I_ don't know
what to do with him!"

Mrs. Adams brightened a little. "He'll come out all right," she said.
"I'm sure he will. I'm sure he'd never be anything really bad: and he'll
come around all right about the glue-works, too; you'll see. Of course
every young man wants money--it doesn't prove he's doing anything wrong
just because he asks you for it."

"No. All it proves to me is that he hasn't got good sense asking me for
three hundred and fifty dollars, when he knows as well as you do the
position I'm in! If I wanted to, I couldn't hardly let him have three
hundred and fifty cents, let alone dollars!"

"I'm afraid you'll have to let ME have that much--and maybe a little
more," she ventured, timidly; and she told him of her plans for the
morrow. He objected vehemently.

"Oh, but Alice has probably asked him by this time," Mrs. Adams said.
"It really must be done, Virgil: you don't want him to think she's
ashamed of us, do you?"

"Well, go ahead, but just let me stay away," he begged. "Of course I
expect to undergo a kind of talk with him, when he gets ready to say
something to us about Alice, but I do hate to have to sit through a
fashionable dinner."

"Why, it isn't going to bother you," she said; "just one young man as a
guest."

"Yes, I know; but you want to have all this fancy cookin'; and I see
well enough you're going to get that old dress suit out of the cedar
chest in the attic, and try to make me put it on me."

"I do think you better, Virgil."

"I hope the moths have got in it," he said. "Last time I wore it was to
the banquet, and it was pretty old then. Of course I didn't mind wearing
it to the banquet so much, because that was what you might call quite an
occasion." He spoke with some reminiscent complacency; "the banquet,"
an affair now five years past, having provided the one time in his
life when he had been so distinguished among his fellow-citizens as to
receive an invitation to be present, with some seven hundred others, at
the annual eating and speech-making of the city's Chamber of Commerce.
"Anyhow, as you say, I think it would look foolish of me to wear a dress
suit for just one young man," he went on protesting, feebly. "What's the
use of all so much howdy-do, anyway? You don't expect him to believe we
put on all that style every night, do you? Is that what you're after?"

"Well, we want him to think we live nicely," she admitted.

"So that's it!" he said, querulously. "You want him to think that's our
regular gait, do you? Well, he'll know better about me, no matter how
you fix me up, because he saw me in my regular suit the evening she
introduced me to him, and he could tell anyway I'm not one of these
moving-picture sporting-men that's always got a dress suit on. Besides,
you and Alice certainly have some idea he'll come AGAIN, haven't you?
If they get things settled between 'em he'll be around the house and to
meals most any time, won't he? You don't hardly expect to put on style
all the time, I guess. Well, he'll see then that this kind of thing was
all show-off, and bluff, won't he? What about it?"

"Oh, well, by THAT time----" She left the sentence unfinished, as if
absently. "You could let us have a little money for to-morrow, couldn't
you, honey?"

"Oh, I reckon, I reckon," he mumbled. "A girl like Alice is some
comfort: she don't come around acting as if she'd commit suicide if she
didn't get three hundred and fifty dollars in the next five minutes. I
expect I can spare five or six dollars for your show-off if I got to."

However, she finally obtained fifteen before his bedtime; and the next
morning "went to market" after breakfast, leaving Alice to make the
beds. Walter had not yet come downstairs. "You had better call him,"
Mrs. Adams said, as she departed with a big basket on her arm. "I expect
he's pretty sleepy; he was out so late last night I didn't hear him come
in, though I kept awake till after midnight, listening for him. Tell him
he'll be late to work if he doesn't hurry; and see that he drinks his
coffee, even if he hasn't time for anything else. And when Malena comes,
get her started in the kitchen: show her where everything is." She
waved her hand, as she set out for a corner where the cars stopped.
"Everything'll be lovely. Don't forget about Walter."

Nevertheless, Alice forgot about Walter for a few minutes. She closed
the door, went into the "living-room" absently, and stared vaguely at
one of the old brown-plush rocking-chairs there. Upon her forehead
were the little shadows of an apprehensive reverie, and her thoughts
overlapped one another in a fretful jumble. "What will he think? These
old chairs--they're hideous. I'll scrub those soot-streaks on
the columns: it won't do any good, though. That long crack in the
column--nothing can help it. What will he think of papa? I hope
mama won't talk too much. When he thinks of Mildred's house, or of
Henrietta's, or any of 'em, beside this--She said she'd buy plenty
of roses; that ought to help some. Nothing could be done about these
horrible chairs: can't take 'em up in the attic--a room's got to have
chairs! Might have rented some. No; if he ever comes again he'd see they
weren't here. 'If he ever comes again'--oh, it won't be THAT bad! But
it won't be what he expects. I'm responsible for what he expects: he
expects just what the airs I've put on have made him expect. What did I
want to pose so to him for--as if papa were a wealthy man and all that?
What WILL he think? The photograph of the Colosseum's a rather good
thing, though. It helps some--as if we'd bought it in Rome perhaps. I
hope he'll think so; he believes I've been abroad, of course. The
other night he said, 'You remember the feeling you get in the
Sainte-Chapelle'.--There's another lie of mine, not saying I didn't
remember because I'd never been there. What makes me do it? Papa MUST
wear his evening clothes. But Walter----"

With that she recalled her mother's admonition, and went upstairs to
Walter's door. She tapped upon it with her fingers.

"Time to get up, Walter. The rest of us had breakfast over half an hour
ago, and it's nearly eight o'clock. You'll be late. Hurry down and I'll
have some coffee and toast ready for you." There came no sound from
within the room, so she rapped louder.

"Wake up, Walter!"

She called and rapped again, without getting any response, and then,
finding that the door yielded to her, opened it and went in. Walter was
not there.

He had been there, however; had slept upon the bed, though not inside
the covers; and Alice supposed he must have come home so late that he
had been too sleepy to take off his clothes. Near the foot of the bed
was a shallow closet where he kept his "other suit" and his evening
clothes; and the door stood open, showing a bare wall. Nothing whatever
was in the closet, and Alice was rather surprised at this for a moment.
"That's queer," she murmured; and then she decided that when he woke he
found the clothes he had slept in "so mussy" he had put on his "other
suit," and had gone out before breakfast with the mussed clothes to have
them pressed, taking his evening things with them. Satisfied with this
explanation, and failing to observe that it did not account for the
absence of shoes from the closet floor, she nodded absently, "Yes, that
must be it"; and, when her mother returned, told her that Walter had
probably breakfasted down-town. They did not delay over this; the
coloured woman had arrived, and the basket's disclosures were important.

"I stopped at Worlig's on the way back," said Mrs. Adams, flushed with
hurry and excitement. "I bought a can of caviar there. I thought we'd
have little sandwiches brought into the 'living-room' before dinner, the
way you said they did when you went to that dinner at the----"

"But I think that was to go with cocktails, mama, and of course we
haven't----"

"No," Mrs. Adams said. "Still, I think it would be nice. We can make
them look very dainty, on a tray, and the waitress can bring them in. I
thought we'd have the soup already on the table; and we can walk right
out as soon as we have the sandwiches, so it won't get cold. Then, after
the soup, Malena says she can make sweetbread pates with mushrooms: and
for the meat course we'll have larded fillet. Malena's really a
fancy cook, you know, and she says she can do anything like that to
perfection. We'll have peas with the fillet, and potato balls and
Brussels sprouts. Brussels sprouts are fashionable now, they told me
at market. Then will come the chicken salad, and after that the
ice-cream--she's going to make an angel-food cake to go with it--and
then coffee and crackers and a new kind of cheese I got at Worlig's, he
says is very fine."

Alice was alarmed. "Don't you think perhaps it's too much, mama?"

"It's better to have too much than too little," her mother said,
cheerfully. "We don't want him to think we're the kind that skimp. Lord
knows we have to enough, though, most of the time! Get the flowers in
water, child. I bought 'em at market because they're so much cheaper
there, but they'll keep fresh and nice. You fix 'em any way you want.
Hurry! It's got to be a busy day."

She had bought three dozen little roses. Alice took them and began to
arrange them in vases, keeping the stems separated as far as possible so
that the clumps would look larger. She put half a dozen in each of three
vases in the "living-room," placing one vase on the table in the center
of the room, and one at each end of the mantelpiece. Then she took the
rest of the roses to the dining-room; but she postponed the arrangement
of them until the table should be set, just before dinner. She was
thoughtful; planning to dry the stems and lay them on the tablecloth
like a vine of roses running in a delicate design, if she found that the
dozen and a half she had left were enough for that. If they weren't she
would arrange them in a vase.

She looked a long time at the little roses in the basin of water, where
she had put them; then she sighed, and went away to heavier tasks,
while her mother worked in the kitchen with Malena. Alice dusted the
"living-room" and the dining-room vigorously, though all the time with a
look that grew more and more pensive; and having dusted everything, she
wiped the furniture; rubbed it hard. After that, she washed the floors
and the woodwork.

Emerging from the kitchen at noon, Mrs. Adams found her daughter on
hands and knees, scrubbing the bases of the columns between the hall and
the "living-room."

"Now, dearie," she said, "you mustn't tire yourself out, and you'd
better come and eat something. Your father said he'd get a bite
down-town to-day--he was going down to the bank--and Walter eats
down-town all the time lately, so I thought we wouldn't bother to set
the table for lunch. Come on and we'll have something in the kitchen."

"No," Alice said, dully, as she went on with the work. "I don't want
anything."

Her mother came closer to her. "Why, what's the matter?" she asked,
briskly. "You seem kind of pale, to me; and you don't look--you don't
look HAPPY."

"Well----" Alice began, uncertainly, but said no more.

"See here!" Mrs. Adams exclaimed. "This is all just for you! You ought
to be ENJOYING it. Why, it's the first time we've--we've entertained
in I don't know how long! I guess it's almost since we had that little
party when you were eighteen. What's the matter with you?"

"Nothing. I don't know."

"But, dearie, aren't you looking FORWARD to this evening?"

The girl looked up, showing a pallid and solemn face. "Oh, yes, of
course," she said, and tried to smile. "Of course we had to do it--I do
think it'll be nice. Of course I'm looking forward to it."



CHAPTER XX

She was indeed "looking forward" to that evening, but in a cloud of
apprehension; and, although she could never have guessed it, this was
the simultaneous condition of another person--none other than the guest
for whose pleasure so much cooking and scrubbing seemed to be necessary.
Moreover, Mr. Arthur Russell's premonitions were no product of mere
coincidence; neither had any magical sympathy produced them. His state
of mind was rather the result of rougher undercurrents which had all the
time been running beneath the surface of a romantic friendship.

Never shrewder than when she analyzed the gentlemen, Alice did not
libel him when she said he was one of those quiet men who are a bit
flirtatious, by which she meant that he was a bit "susceptible," the
same thing--and he had proved himself susceptible to Alice upon his
first sight of her. "There!" he said to himself. "Who's that?" And in
the crowd of girls at his cousin's dance, all strangers to him, she was
the one he wanted to know.

Since then, his summer evenings with her had been as secluded as if, for
three hours after the falling of dusk, they two had drawn apart from
the world to some dear bower of their own. The little veranda was that
glamorous nook, with a faint golden light falling through the glass of
the closed door upon Alice, and darkness elsewhere, except for the one
round globe of the street lamp at the corner. The people who passed
along the sidewalk, now and then, were only shadows with voices, moving
vaguely under the maple trees that loomed in obscure contours against
the stars. So, as the two sat together, the back of the world was the
wall and closed door behind them; and Russell, when he was away from
Alice, always thought of her as sitting there before the closed door. A
glamour was about her thus, and a spell upon him; but he had a formless
anxiety never put into words: all the pictures of her in his mind
stopped at the closed door.

He had another anxiety; and, for the greater part, this was of her own
creating. She had too often asked him (no matter how gaily) what he
heard about her, too often begged him not to hear anything. Then, hoping
to forestall whatever he might hear, she had been at too great pains to
account for it, to discredit and mock it; and, though he laughed at her
for this, telling her truthfully he did not even hear her mentioned, the
everlasting irony that deals with all such human forefendings prevailed.

Lately, he had half confessed to her what a nervousness she had
produced. "You make me dread the day when I'll hear somebody speaking of
you. You're getting me so upset about it that if I ever hear anybody so
much as say the name 'Alice Adams,' I'll run!" The confession was but
half of one because he laughed; and she took it for an assurance of
loyalty in the form of burlesque.

She misunderstood: he laughed, but his nervousness was genuine.

After any stroke of events, whether a happy one or a catastrophe, we
see that the materials for it were a long time gathering, and the only
marvel is that the stroke was not prophesied. What bore the air of fatal
coincidence may remain fatal indeed, to this later view; but, with the
haphazard aspect dispelled, there is left for scrutiny the same ancient
hint from the Infinite to the effect that since events have never yet
failed to be law-abiding, perhaps it were well for us to deduce that
they will continue to be so until further notice.

. . . On the day that was to open the closed door in the background of
his pictures of Alice, Russell lunched with his relatives. There were
but the four people, Russell and Mildred and her mother and father, in
the great, cool dining-room. Arched French windows, shaded by awnings,
admitted a mellow light and looked out upon a green lawn ending in a
long conservatory, which revealed through its glass panes a carnival of
plants in luxuriant blossom. From his seat at the table, Russell
glanced out at this pretty display, and informed his cousins that he
was surprised. "You have such a glorious spread of flowers all over the
house," he said, "I didn't suppose you'd have any left out yonder. In
fact, I didn't know there were so many splendid flowers in the world."

Mrs. Palmer, large, calm, fair, like her daughter, responded with a mild
reproach: "That's because you haven't been cousinly enough to get used
to them, Arthur. You've almost taught us to forget what you look like."

In defense Russell waved a hand toward her husband. "You see, he's begun
to keep me so hard at work----"

But Mr. Palmer declined the responsibility. "Up to four or five in the
afternoon, perhaps," he said. "After that, the young gentleman is as
much a stranger to me as he is to my family. I've been wondering who she
could be."

"When a man's preoccupied there must be a lady then?" Russell inquired.

"That seems to be the view of your sex," Mrs. Palmer suggested. "It was
my husband who said it, not Mildred or I."

Mildred smiled faintly. "Papa may be singular in his ideas; they may
come entirely from his own experience, and have nothing to do with
Arthur."

"Thank you, Mildred," her cousin said, bowing to her gratefully. "You
seem to understand my character--and your father's quite as well!"

However, Mildred remained grave in the face of this customary
pleasantry, not because the old jest, worn round, like what preceded it,
rolled in an old groove, but because of some preoccupation of her own.
Her faint smile had disappeared, and, as her cousin's glance met hers,
she looked down; yet not before he had seen in her eyes the flicker of
something like a question--a question both poignant and dismayed. He may
have understood it; for his own smile vanished at once in favour of a
reciprocal solemnity.

"You see, Arthur," Mrs. Palmer said, "Mildred is always a good cousin.
She and I stand by you, even if you do stay away from us for weeks and
weeks." Then, observing that he appeared to be so occupied with a bunch
of iced grapes upon his plate that he had not heard her, she began to
talk to her husband, asking him what was "going on down-town."

Arthur continued to eat his grapes, but he ventured to look again at
Mildred after a few moments. She, also, appeared to be occupied with
a bunch of grapes though she ate none, and only pulled them from their
stems. She sat straight, her features as composed and pure as those of
a new marble saint in a cathedral niche; yet her downcast eyes seemed to
conceal many thoughts; and her cousin, against his will, was more aware
of what these thoughts might be than of the leisurely conversation
between her father and mother. All at once, however, he heard something
that startled him, and he listened--and here was the effect of all
Alice's forefendings; he listened from the first with a sinking heart.

Mr. Palmer, mildly amused by what he was telling his wife, had just
spoken the words, "this Virgil Adams." What he had said was, "this
Virgil Adams--that's the man's name. Queer case."

"Who told you?" Mrs. Palmer inquired, not much interested.

"Alfred Lamb," her husband answered. "He was laughing about his father,
at the club. You see the old gentleman takes a great pride in his
judgment of men, and always boasted to his sons that he'd never in his
life made a mistake in trusting the wrong man. Now Alfred and James
Albert, Junior, think they have a great joke on him; and they've twitted
him so much about it he'll scarcely speak to them. From the first,
Alfred says, the old chap's only repartee was, 'You wait and you'll
see!' And they've asked him so often to show them what they're going to
see that he won't say anything at all!"

"He's a funny old fellow," Mrs. Palmer observed. "But he's so shrewd I
can't imagine his being deceived for such a long time. Twenty years, you
said?"

"Yes, longer than that, I understand. It appears when this man--this
Adams--was a young clerk, the old gentleman trusted him with one of his
business secrets, a glue process that Mr. Lamb had spent some money to
get hold of. The old chap thought this Adams was going to have quite
a future with the Lamb concern, and of course never dreamed he was
dishonest. Alfred says this Adams hasn't been of any real use for years,
and they should have let him go as dead wood, but the old gentleman
wouldn't hear of it, and insisted on his being kept on the payroll; so
they just decided to look on it as a sort of pension. Well, one morning
last March the man had an attack of some sort down there, and Mr. Lamb
got his own car out and went home with him, himself, and worried about
him and went to see him no end, all the time he was ill."

"He would," Mrs. Palmer said, approvingly. "He's a kind-hearted
creature, that old man."

Her husband laughed. "Alfred says he thinks his kind-heartedness
is about cured! It seems that as soon as the man got well again he
deliberately walked off with the old gentleman's glue secret. Just
calmly stole it! Alfred says he believes that if he had a stroke in the
office now, himself, his father wouldn't lift a finger to help him!"

Mrs. Palmer repeated the name to herself thoughtfully. "'Adams'--'Virgil
Adams.' You said his name was Virgil Adams?"

"Yes."

She looked at her daughter. "Why, you know who that is, Mildred," she
said, casually. "It's that Alice Adams's father, isn't it? Wasn't his
name Virgil Adams?"

"I think it is," Mildred said.

Mrs. Palmer turned toward her husband. "You've seen this Alice Adams
here. Mr. Lamb's pet swindler must be her father."

Mr. Palmer passed a smooth hand over his neat gray hair, which was not
disturbed by this effort to stimulate recollection. "Oh, yes," he said.
"Of course--certainly. Quite a good-looking girl--one of Mildred's
friends. How queer!"

Mildred looked up, as if in a little alarm, but did not speak. Her
mother set matters straight. "Fathers ARE amusing," she said smilingly
to Russell, who was looking at her, though how fixedly she did not
notice; for she turned from him at once to enlighten her husband. "Every
girl who meets Mildred, and tries to push the acquaintance by coming
here until the poor child has to hide, isn't a FRIEND of hers, my dear!"

Mildred's eyes were downcast again, and a faint colour rose in her
cheeks. "Oh, I shouldn't put it quite that way about Alice Adams," she
said, in a low voice. "I saw something of her for a time. She's not
unattractive in a way."

Mrs. Palmer settled the whole case of Alice carelessly. "A pushing sort
of girl," she said. "A very pushing little person."

"I----" Mildred began; and, after hesitating, concluded, "I rather
dropped her."

"Fortunate you've done so," her father remarked, cheerfully. "Especially
since various members of the Lamb connection are here frequently. They
mightn't think you'd show great tact in having her about the place." He
laughed, and turned to his cousin. "All this isn't very interesting to
poor Arthur. How terrible people are with a newcomer in a town; they
talk as if he knew all about everybody!"

"But we don't know anything about these queer people, ourselves," said
Mrs. Palmer. "We know something about the girl, of course--she used to
be a bit too conspicuous, in fact! However, as you say, we might find a
subject more interesting for Arthur."

She smiled whimsically upon the young man. "Tell the truth," she said.
"Don't you fairly detest going into business with that tyrant yonder?"

"What? Yes--I beg your pardon!" he stammered.

"You were right," Mrs. Palmer said to her husband. "You've bored him so,
talking about thievish clerks, he can't even answer an honest question."

But Russell was beginning to recover his outward composure. "Try me
again," he said. "I'm afraid I was thinking of something else."

This was the best he found to say. There was a part of him that wanted
to protest and deny, but he had not heat enough, in the chill that had
come upon him. Here was the first "mention" of Alice, and with it the
reason why it was the first: Mr. Palmer had difficulty in recalling her,
and she happened to be spoken of, only because her father's betrayal of
a benefactor's trust had been so peculiarly atrocious that, in the view
of the benefactor's family, it contained enough of the element of humour
to warrant a mild laugh at a club. There was the deadliness of the
story: its lack of malice, even of resentment. Deadlier still were
Mrs. Palmer's phrases: "a pushing sort of girl," "a very pushing little
person," and "used to be a bit TOO conspicuous, in fact." But she spoke
placidly and by chance; being as obviously without unkindly motive as
Mr. Palmer was when he related the cause of Alfred Lamb's amusement.
Her opinion of the obscure young lady momentarily her topic had been
expressed, moreover, to her husband, and at her own table. She sat
there, large, kind, serene--a protest might astonish but could
not change her; and Russell, crumpling in his strained fingers the
lace-edged little web of a napkin on his knee, found heart enough to
grow red, but not enough to challenge her.

She noticed his colour, and attributed it to the embarrassment of a
scrupulously gallant gentleman caught in a lapse of attention to a lady.
"Don't be disturbed," she said, benevolently. "People aren't expected to
listen all the time to their relatives. A high colour's very becoming
to you, Arthur; but it really isn't necessary between cousins. You can
always be informal enough with us to listen only when you care to."

His complexion continued to be ruddier than usual, however, throughout
the meal, and was still somewhat tinted when Mrs. Palmer rose. "The
man's bringing you cigarettes here," she said, nodding to the two
gentlemen. "We'll give you a chance to do the sordid kind of talking we
know you really like. Afterwhile, Mildred will show you what's in bloom
in the hothouse, if you wish, Arthur."

Mildred followed her, and, when they were alone in another of the
spacious rooms, went to a window and looked out, while her mother seated
herself near the center of the room in a gilt armchair, mellowed with
old Aubusson tapestry. Mrs. Palmer looked thoughtfully at her daughter's
back, but did not speak to her until coffee had been brought for them.

"Thanks," Mildred said, not turning, "I don't care for any coffee, I
believe."

"No?" Mrs. Palmer said, gently. "I'm afraid our good-looking cousin
won't think you're very talkative, Mildred. You spoke only about twice
at lunch. I shouldn't care for him to get the idea you're piqued because
he's come here so little lately, should you?"

"No, I shouldn't," Mildred answered in a low voice, and with that she
turned quickly, and came to sit near her mother. "But it's what I am
afraid of! Mama, did you notice how red he got?"

"You mean when he was caught not listening to a question of mine? Yes;
it's very becoming to him."

"Mama, I don't think that was the reason. I don't think it was because
he wasn't listening, I mean."

"No?"

"I think his colour and his not listening came from the same reason,"
Mildred said, and although she had come to sit near her mother, she
did not look at her. "I think it happened because you and papa----" She
stopped.

"Yes?" Mrs. Palmer said, good-naturedly, to prompt her. "Your father and
I did something embarrassing?"

"Mama, it was because of those things that came out about Alice Adams."

"How could that bother Arthur? Does he know her?"

"Don't you remember?" the daughter asked. "The day after my dance I
mentioned how odd I thought it was in him--I was a little disappointed
in him. I'd been seeing that he met everybody, of course, but she was
the only girl HE asked to meet; and he did it as soon as he noticed her.
I hadn't meant to have him meet her--in fact, I was rather sorry I'd
felt I had to ask her, because she oh, well, she's the sort that 'tries
for the new man,' if she has half a chance; and sometimes they seem
quite fascinated--for a time, that is. I thought Arthur was above
all that; or at the very least I gave him credit for being too
sophisticated."

"I see," Mrs. Palmer said, thoughtfully. "I remember now that you spoke
of it. You said it seemed a little peculiar, but of course it really
wasn't: a 'new man' has nothing to go by, except his own first
impressions. You can't blame poor Arthur--she's quite a piquant looking
little person. You think he's seen something of her since then?"

Mildred nodded slowly. "I never dreamed such a thing till yesterday,
and even then I rather doubted it--till he got so red, just now! I was
surprised when he asked to meet her, but he just danced with her once
and didn't mention her afterward; I forgot all about it--in fact, I
virtually forgot all about HER. I'd seen quite a little of her----"

"Yes," said Mrs. Palmer. "She did keep coming here!"

"But I'd just about decided that it really wouldn't do," Mildred went
on. "She isn't--well, I didn't admire her."

"No," her mother assented, and evidently followed a direct connection
of thought in a speech apparently irrelevant. "I understand the young
Malone wants to marry Henrietta. I hope she won't; he seems rather a
gross type of person."

"Oh, he's just one," Mildred said. "I don't know that he and Alice Adams
were ever engaged--she never told me so. She may not have been engaged
to any of them; she was just enough among the other girls to get talked
about--and one of the reasons I felt a little inclined to be nice to
her was that they seemed to be rather edging her out of the circle. It
wasn't long before I saw they were right, though. I happened to mention
I was going to give a dance and she pretended to take it as a matter
of course that I meant to invite her brother--at least, I thought she
pretended; she may have really believed it. At any rate, I had to send
him a card; but I didn't intend to be let in for that sort of thing
again, of course. She's what you said, 'pushing'; though I'm awfully
sorry you said it."

"Why shouldn't I have said it, my dear?"

"Of course I didn't say 'shouldn't.'" Mildred explained, gravely. "I
meant only that I'm sorry it happened."

"Yes; but why?"

"Mama"--Mildred turned to her, leaning forward and speaking in a lowered
voice--"Mama, at first the change was so little it seemed as if Arthur
hardly knew it himself. He'd been lovely to me always, and he was still
lovely to me but--oh, well, you've understood--after my dance it was
more as if it was just his nature and his training to be lovely to me,
as he would be to everyone a kind of politeness. He'd never said he
CARED for me, but after that I could see he didn't. It was clear--after
that. I didn't know what had happened; I couldn't think of anything I'd
done. Mama--it was Alice Adams."

Mrs. Palmer set her little coffee-cup upon the table beside her, calmly
following her own motion with her eyes, and not seeming to realize with
what serious entreaty her daughter's gaze was fixed upon her. Mildred
repeated the last sentence of her revelation, and introduced a stress of
insistence.

"Mama, it WAS Alice Adams!"

But Mrs. Palmer declined to be greatly impressed, so far as her
appearance went, at least; and to emphasize her refusal, she smiled
indulgently. "What makes you think so?"

"Henrietta told me yesterday."

At this Mrs. Palmer permitted herself to laugh softly aloud. "Good
heavens! Is Henrietta a soothsayer? Or is she Arthur's particular
confidante?"

"No. Ella Dowling told her."

Mrs. Palmer's laughter continued. "Now we have it!" she exclaimed. "It's
a game of gossip: Arthur tells Ella, Ella tells Henrietta, and Henrietta
tells----"

"Don't laugh, please, mama," Mildred begged. "Of course Arthur didn't
tell anybody. It's roundabout enough, but it's true. I know it! I
hadn't quite believed it, but I knew it was true when he got so red. He
looked--oh, for a second or so he looked--stricken! He thought I didn't
notice it. Mama, he's been to see her almost every evening lately. They
take long walks together. That's why he hasn't been here."

Of Mrs. Palmer's laughter there was left only her indulgent smile, which
she had not allowed to vanish. "Well, what of it?" she said.

"Mama!"

"Yes," said Mrs. Palmer. "What of it?"

"But don't you see?" Mildred's well-tutored voice, though modulated and
repressed even in her present emotion, nevertheless had a tendency to
quaver. "It's true. Frank Dowling was going to see her one evening and
he saw Arthur sitting on the stoop with her, and didn't go in. And Ella
used to go to school with a girl who lives across the street from here.
She told Ella----"

"Oh, I understand," Mrs. Palmer interrupted. "Suppose he does go there.
My dear, I said, 'What of it?'"

"I don't see what you mean, mama. I'm so afraid he might think we knew
about it, and that you and papa said those things about her and her
father on that account--as if we abused them because he goes there
instead of coming here."

"Nonsense!" Mrs. Palmer rose, went to a window, and, turning there,
stood with her back to it, facing her daughter and looking at her
cheerfully. "Nonsense, my dear! It was perfectly clear that she was
mentioned by accident, and so was her father. What an extraordinary man!
If Arthur makes friends with people like that, he certainly knows better
than to expect to hear favourable opinions of them. Besides, it's only a
little passing thing with him."

"Mama! When he goes there almost every----"

"Yes," Mrs. Palmer said, dryly. "It seems to me I've heard somewhere
that other young men have gone there 'almost every!' She doesn't
last, apparently. Arthur's gallant, and he's impressionable--but
he's fastidious, and fastidiousness is always the check on
impressionableness. A girl belongs to her family, too--and this one does
especially, it strikes me! Arthur's very sensible; he sees more than
you'd think."

Mildred looked at her hopefully. "Then you don't believe he's likely to
imagine we said those things of her in any meaning way?"

At this, Mrs. Palmer laughed again. "There's one thing you seem not to
have noticed, Mildred."

"What's that?"

"It seems to have escaped your attention that he never said a word."

"Mightn't that mean----?" Mildred began, but she stopped.

"No, it mightn't," her mother replied, comprehending easily. "On the
contrary, it might mean that instead of his feeling it too deeply to
speak, he was getting a little illumination."

Mildred rose and came to her. "WHY do you suppose he never told us he
went there? Do you think he's--do you think he's pleased with her, and
yet ashamed of it? WHY do you suppose he's never spoken of it?"

"Ah, that," Mrs. Palmer said,--"that might possibly be her own doing.
If it is, she's well paid by what your father and I said, because we
wouldn't have said it if we'd known that Arthur----" She checked herself
quickly. Looking over her daughter's shoulder, she saw the two gentlemen
coming from the corridor toward the wide doorway of the room; and she
greeted them cheerfully. "If you've finished with each other for a
while," she added, "Arthur may find it a relief to put his thoughts on
something prettier than a trust company--and more fragrant."

Arthur came to Mildred.

"Your mother said at lunch that perhaps you'd----"

"I didn't say 'perhaps,' Arthur," Mrs. Palmer interrupted, to correct
him. "I said she would. If you care to see and smell those lovely things
out yonder, she'll show them to you. Run along, children!"


Half an hour later, glancing from a window, she saw them come from
the hothouses and slowly cross the lawn. Arthur had a fine rose in his
buttonhole and looked profoundly thoughtful.



CHAPTER XXI

That morning and noon had been warm, though the stirrings of a feeble
breeze made weather not flagrantly intemperate; but at about three
o'clock in the afternoon there came out of the southwest a heat like an
affliction sent upon an accursed people, and the air was soon dead of
it. Dripping negro ditch-diggers whooped with satires praising hell and
hot weather, as the tossing shovels flickered up to the street level,
where sluggish male pedestrians carried coats upon hot arms, and
fanned themselves with straw hats, or, remaining covered, wore soaked
handkerchiefs between scalp and straw. Clerks drooped in silent, big
department stores, stenographers in offices kept as close to electric
fans as the intervening bulk of their employers would let them; guests
in hotels left the lobbies and went to lie unclad upon their beds; while
in hospitals the patients murmured querulously against the heat, and
perhaps against some noisy motorist who strove to feel the air by
splitting it, not troubled by any foreboding that he, too, that hour
next week, might need quiet near a hospital. The "hot spell" was a
true spell, one upon men's spirits; for it was so hot that, in suburban
outskirts, golfers crept slowly back over the low undulations of their
club lands, abandoning their matches and returning to shelter.

Even on such a day, sizzling work had to be done, as in winter. There
were glowing furnaces to be stoked, liquid metals to be poured; but such
tasks found seasoned men standing to them; and in all the city probably
no brave soul challenged the heat more gamely than Mrs. Adams did, when,
in a corner of her small and fiery kitchen, where all day long her
hired African immune cooked fiercely, she pressed her husband's evening
clothes with a hot iron. No doubt she risked her life, but she risked
it cheerfully in so good and necessary a service for him. She would have
given her life for him at any time, and both his and her own for her
children.

Unconscious of her own heroism, she was surprised to find herself rather
faint when she finished her ironing. However, she took heart to believe
that the clothes looked better, in spite of one or two scorched places;
and she carried them upstairs to her husband's room before increasing
blindness forced her to grope for the nearest chair. Then, trying to
rise and walk, without having sufficiently recovered, she had to sit
down again; but after a little while she was able to get upon her feet;
and, keeping her hand against the wall, moved successfully to the door
of her own room. Here she wavered; might have gone down, had she not
been stimulated by the thought of how much depended upon her;--she made
a final great effort, and floundered across the room to her bureau,
where she kept some simple restoratives. They served her need, or her
faith in them did; and she returned to her work.

She went down the stairs, keeping a still tremulous hand upon the rail;
but she smiled brightly when Alice looked up from below, where the
woodwork was again being tormented with superfluous attentions.

"Alice, DON'T!" her mother said, commiseratingly. "You did all that this
morning and it looks lovely. What's the use of wearing yourself out on
it? You ought to be lying down, so's to look fresh for to-night."

"Hadn't you better lie down yourself?" the daughter returned. "Are you
ill, mama?"

"Certainly not. What in the world makes you think so?"

"You look pretty pale," Alice said, and sighed heavily. "It makes me
ashamed, having you work so hard--for me."

"How foolish! I think it's fun, getting ready to entertain a little
again, like this. I only wish it hadn't turned so hot: I'm afraid your
poor father'll suffer--his things are pretty heavy, I noticed. Well,
it'll do him good to bear something for style's sake this once, anyhow!"
She laughed, and coming to Alice, bent down and kissed her. "Dearie,"
she said, tenderly, "wouldn't you please slip upstairs now and take just
a little teeny nap to please your mother?"

But Alice responded only by moving her head slowly, in token of refusal.

"Do!" Mrs. Adams urged. "You don't want to look worn out, do you?"

"I'll LOOK all right," Alice said, huskily. "Do you like the way I've
arranged the furniture now? I've tried all the different ways it'll go."

"It's lovely," her mother said, admiringly. "I thought the last way you
had it was pretty, too. But you know best; I never knew anybody with so
much taste. If you'd only just quit now, and take a little rest----"

"There'd hardly be time, even if I wanted to; it's after five but I
couldn't; really, I couldn't. How do you think we can manage about
Walter--to see that he wears his evening things, I mean?"

Mrs. Adams pondered. "I'm afraid he'll make a lot of objections, on
account of the weather and everything. I wish we'd had a chance to
tell him last night or this morning. I'd have telephoned to him this
afternoon except--well, I scarcely like to call him up at that place,
since your father----"

"No, of course not, mama."

"If Walter gets home late," Mrs. Adams went on, "I'll just slip out and
speak to him, in case Mr. Russell's here before he comes. I'll just tell
him he's got to hurry and get his things on."

"Maybe he won't come home to dinner," Alice suggested, rather hopefully.
"Sometimes he doesn't."

"No; I think he'll be here. When he doesn't come he usually telephones
by this time to say not to wait for him; he's very thoughtful about
that. Well, it really is getting late: I must go and tell her she ought
to be preparing her fillet. Dearie, DO rest a little."

"You'd much better do that yourself," Alice called after her, but Mrs.
Adams shook her head cheerily, not pausing on her way to the fiery
kitchen.

Alice continued her useless labours for a time; then carried her bucket
to the head of the cellar stairway, where she left it upon the top step;
and, closing the door, returned to the "living-room;" Again she changed
the positions of the old plush rocking-chairs, moving them into the
corners where she thought they might be least noticeable; and while
thus engaged she was startled by a loud ringing of the door-bell. For
a moment her face was panic-stricken, and she stood staring, then
she realized that Russell would not arrive for another hour, at the
earliest, and recovering her equipoise, went to the door.

Waiting there, in a languid attitude, was a young coloured woman, with
a small bundle under her arm and something malleable in her mouth.
"Listen," she said. "You folks expectin' a coloured lady?"

"No," said Alice. "Especially not at the front door."

"Listen," the coloured woman said again. "Listen. Say, listen. Ain't
they another coloured lady awready here by the day? Listen. Ain't Miz
Malena Burns here by the day this evenin'? Say, listen. This the number
house she give ME."

"Are you the waitress?" Alice asked, dismally.

"Yes'm, if Malena here."

"Malena is here," Alice said, and hesitated; but she decided not to
send the waitress to the back door; it might be a risk. She let her in.
"What's your name?"

"Me? I'm name' Gertrude. Miss Gertrude Collamus."

"Did you bring a cap and apron?"

Gertrude took the little bundle from under her arm. "Yes'm. I'm all
fix'."

"I've already set the table," Alice said. "I'll show you what we want
done."

She led the way to the dining-room, and, after offering some instruction
there, received by Gertrude with languor and a slowly moving jaw, she
took her into the kitchen, where the cap and apron were put on. The
effect was not fortunate; Gertrude's eyes were noticeably bloodshot,
an affliction made more apparent by the white cap; and Alice drew her
mother apart, whispering anxiously,

"Do you suppose it's too late to get someone else?"

"I'm afraid it is," Mrs. Adams said. "Malena says it was hard enough to
get HER! You have to pay them so much that they only work when they feel
like it."

"Mama, could you ask her to wear her cap straighter? Every time she
moves her head she gets it on one side, and her skirt's too long behind
and too short in front--and oh, I've NEVER seen such FEET!" Alice
laughed desolately. "And she MUST quit that terrible chewing!"

"Never mind; I'll get to work with her. I'll straighten her out all I
can, dearie; don't worry." Mrs. Adams patted her daughter's shoulder
encouragingly. "Now YOU can't do another thing, and if you don't run and
begin dressing you won't be ready. It'll only take me a minute to dress,
myself, and I'll be down long before you will. Run, darling! I'll look
after everything."

Alice nodded vaguely, went up to her room, and, after only a moment with
her mirror, brought from her closet the dress of white organdie she
had worn the night when she met Russell for the first time. She laid it
carefully upon her bed, and began to make ready to put it on. Her mother
came in, half an hour later, to "fasten" her.

"I'M all dressed," Mrs. Adams said, briskly. "Of course it doesn't
matter. He won't know what the rest of us even look like: How could he?
I know I'm an old SIGHT, but all I want is to look respectable. Do I?"

"You look like the best woman in the world; that's all!" Alice said,
with a little gulp.

Her mother laughed and gave her a final scrutiny. "You might use just
a tiny bit more colour, dearie--I'm afraid the excitement's made you a
little pale. And you MUST brighten up! There's sort of a look in your
eyes as if you'd got in a trance and couldn't get out. You've had it all
day. I must run: your father wants me to help him with his studs. Walter
hasn't come yet, but I'll look after him; don't worry, And you better
HURRY, dearie, if you're going to take any time fixing the flowers on
the table."

She departed, while Alice sat at the mirror again, to follow her advice
concerning a "tiny bit more colour." Before she had finished, her father
knocked at the door, and, when she responded, came in. He was dressed
in the clothes his wife had pressed; but he had lost substantially in
weight since they were made for him; no one would have thought that they
had been pressed. They hung from him voluminously, seeming to be the
clothes of a larger man.

"Your mother's gone downstairs," he said, in a voice of distress.

"One of the buttonholes in my shirt is too large and I can't keep the
dang thing fastened. _I_ don't know what to do about it! I only got one
other white shirt, and it's kind of ruined: I tried it before I did this
one. Do you s'pose you could do anything?"

"I'll see," she said.

"My collar's got a frayed edge," he complained, as she examined his
troublesome shirt. "It's a good deal like wearing a saw; but I expect
it'll wilt down flat pretty soon, and not bother me long. I'm liable to
wilt down flat, myself, I expect; I don't know as I remember any such
hot night in the last ten or twelve years." He lifted his head and
sniffed the flaccid air, which was laden with a heavy odour. "My, but
that smell is pretty strong!" he said.

"Stand still, please, papa," Alice begged him. "I can't see what's the
matter if you move around. How absurd you are about your old glue smell,
papa! There isn't a vestige of it, of course."

"I didn't mean glue," he informed her. "I mean cabbage. Is that
fashionable now, to have cabbage when there's company for dinner?"

"That isn't cabbage, papa. It's Brussels sprouts."

"Oh, is it? I don't mind it much, because it keeps that glue smell off
me, but it's fairly strong. I expect you don't notice it so much because
you been in the house with it all along, and got used to it while it was
growing."

"It is pretty dreadful," Alice said. "Are all the windows open
downstairs?"

"I'll go down and see, if you'll just fix that hole up for me."

"I'm afraid I can't," she said. "Not unless you take your shirt off and
bring it to me. I'll have to sew the hole smaller."

"Oh, well, I'll go ask your mother to----"

"No," said Alice. "She's got everything on her hands. Run and take it
off. Hurry, papa; I've got to arrange the flowers on the table before he
comes."

He went away, and came back presently, half undressed, bringing the
shirt. "There's ONE comfort," he remarked, pensively, as she worked.
"I've got that collar off--for a while, anyway. I wish I could go to
table like this; I could stand it a good deal better. Do you seem to be
making any headway with the dang thing?"

"I think probably I can----"

Downstairs the door-bell rang, and Alice's arms jerked with the shock.

"Golly!" her father said. "Did you stick your finger with that fool
needle?"

She gave him a blank stare. "He's come!"

She was not mistaken, for, upon the little veranda, Russell stood facing
the closed door at last. However, it remained closed for a considerable
time after he rang. Inside the house the warning summons of the bell was
immediately followed by another sound, audible to Alice and her father
as a crash preceding a series of muffled falls. Then came a distant
voice, bitter in complaint.

"Oh, Lord!" said Adams. "What's that?"

Alice went to the top of the front stairs, and her mother appeared in
the hall below.

"Mama!"

Mrs. Adams looked up. "It's all right," she said, in a loud whisper.
"Gertrude fell down the cellar stairs. Somebody left a bucket there,
and----" She was interrupted by a gasp from Alice, and hastened to
reassure her. "Don't worry, dearie. She may limp a little, but----"

Adams leaned over the banisters. "Did she break anything?" he asked.

"Hush!" his wife whispered. "No. She seems upset and angry about it,
more than anything else; but she's rubbing herself, and she'll be all
right in time to bring in the little sandwiches. Alice! Those flowers!"

"I know, mama. But----"

"Hurry!" Mrs. Adams warned her. "Both of you hurry! I MUST let him in!"

She turned to the door, smiling cordially, even before she opened it.
"Do come right in, Mr. Russell," she said, loudly, lifting her voice
for additional warning to those above. "I'm SO glad to receive you
informally, this way, in our own little home. There's a hat-rack here
under the stairway," she continued, as Russell, murmuring some response,
came into the hall. "I'm afraid you'll think it's almost TOO informal,
my coming to the door, but unfortunately our housemaid's just had a
little accident--oh, nothing to mention! I just thought we better
not keep you waiting any longer. Will you step into our living-room,
please?"

She led the way between the two small columns, and seated herself in one
of the plush rocking-chairs, selecting it because Alice had once pointed
out that the chairs, themselves, were less noticeable when they had
people sitting in them. "Do sit down, Mr. Russell; it's so very warm
it's really quite a trial just to stand up!"

"Thank you," he said, as he took a seat. "Yes. It is quite warm." And
this seemed to be the extent of his responsiveness for the moment.
He was grave, rather pale; and Mrs. Adams's impression of him, as
she formed it then, was of "a distinguished-looking young man, really
elegant in the best sense of the word, but timid and formal when he
first meets you." She beamed upon him, and used with everything she said
a continuous accompaniment of laughter, meaningless except that it was
meant to convey cordiality. "Of course we DO have a great deal of warm
weather," she informed him. "I'm glad it's so much cooler in the house
than it is outdoors."

"Yes," he said. "It is pleasanter indoors." And, stopping with this
single untruth, he permitted himself the briefest glance about the room;
then his eyes returned to his smiling hostess.

"Most people make a great fuss about hot weather," she said. "The only
person I know who doesn't mind the heat the way other people do is
Alice. She always seems as cool as if we had a breeze blowing, no matter
how hot it is. But then she's so amiable she never minds anything. It's
just her character. She's always been that way since she was a little
child; always the same to everybody, high and low. I think character's
the most important thing in the world, after all, don't you, Mr.
Russell?"

"Yes," he said, solemnly; and touched his bedewed white forehead with a
handkerchief.

"Indeed it is," she agreed with herself, never failing to continue her
murmur of laughter. "That's what I've always told Alice; but she never
sees anything good in herself, and she just laughs at me when I praise
her. She sees good in everybody ELSE in the world, no matter how
unworthy they are, or how they behave toward HER; but she always
underestimates herself. From the time she was a little child she was
always that way. When some other little girl would behave selfishly or
meanly toward her, do you think she'd come and tell me? Never a word
to anybody! The little thing was too proud! She was the same way about
school. The teachers had to tell me when she took a prize; she'd bring
it home and keep it in her room without a word about it to her father
and mother. Now, Walter was just the other way. Walter would----" But
here Mrs. Adams checked herself, though she increased the volume of
her laughter. "How silly of me!" she exclaimed. "I expect you know how
mothers ARE, though, Mr. Russell. Give us a chance and we'll talk about
our children forever! Alice would feel terribly if she knew how I've
been going on about her to you."

In this Mrs. Adams was right, though she did not herself suspect it,
and upon an almost inaudible word or two from him she went on with her
topic. "Of course my excuse is that few mothers have a daughter like
Alice. I suppose we all think the same way about our children, but SOME
of us must be right when we feel we've got the best. Don't you think
so?"

"Yes. Yes, indeed."

"I'm sure _I_ am!" she laughed. "I'll let the others speak for
themselves." She paused reflectively. "No; I think a mother knows
when she's got a treasure in her family. If she HASN'T got one, she'll
pretend she has, maybe; but if she has, she knows it. I certainly
know _I_ have. She's always been what people call 'the joy of the
household'--always cheerful, no matter what went wrong, and always ready
to smooth things over with some bright, witty saying. You must be sure
not to TELL we've had this little chat about her--she'd just be furious
with me--but she IS such a dear child! You won't tell her, will you?"

"No," he said, and again applied the handkerchief to his forehead for an
instant. "No, I'll----" He paused, and finished lamely: "I'll--not tell
her."

Thus reassured, Mrs. Adams set before him some details of her daughter's
popularity at sixteen, dwelling upon Alice's impartiality among her
young suitors: "She never could BEAR to hurt their feelings, and always
treated all of them just alike. About half a dozen of them were just
BOUND to marry her! Naturally, her father and I considered any such idea
ridiculous; she was too young, of course."

Thus the mother went on with her biographical sketches, while the pale
young man sat facing her under the hard overhead light of a white globe,
set to the ceiling; and listened without interrupting. She was glad to
have the chance to tell him a few things about Alice he might not
have guessed for himself, and, indeed, she had planned to find such an
opportunity, if she could; but this was getting to be altogether too
much of one, she felt. As time passed, she was like an actor who must
improvise to keep the audience from perceiving that his fellow-players
have missed their cues; but her anxiety was not betrayed to the still
listener; she had a valiant soul.

Alice, meanwhile, had arranged her little roses on the table in as many
ways, probably, as there were blossoms; and she was still at it when
her father arrived in the dining-room by way of the back stairs and the
kitchen.

"It's pulled out again," he said. "But I guess there's no help for it
now; it's too late, and anyway it lets some air into me when it bulges.
I can sit so's it won't be noticed much, I expect. Isn't it time you
quit bothering about the looks of the table? Your mother's been talking
to him about half an hour now, and I had the idea he came on your
account, not hers. Hadn't you better go and----"

"Just a minute." Alice said, piteously. "Do YOU think it looks all
right?"

"The flowers? Fine! Hadn't you better leave 'em the way they are,
though?"

"Just a minute," she begged again. "Just ONE minute, papa!" And she
exchanged a rose in front of Russell's plate for one that seemed to her
a little larger.

"You better come on," Adams said, moving to the door.

"Just ONE more second, papa." She shook her head, lamenting. "Oh, I wish
we'd rented some silver!"

"Why?"

"Because so much of the plating has rubbed off a lot of it. JUST a
second, papa." And as she spoke she hastily went round the table,
gathering the knives and forks and spoons that she thought had their
plating best preserved, and exchanging them for more damaged pieces at
Russell's place. "There!" she sighed, finally.

"Now I'll come." But at the door she paused to look back dubiously, over
her shoulder.

"What's the matter now?"

"The roses. I believe after all I shouldn't have tried that vine effect;
I ought to have kept them in water, in the vase. It's so hot, they
already begin to look a little wilted, out on the dry tablecloth like
that. I believe I'll----"

"Why, look here, Alice!" he remonstrated, as she seemed disposed to turn
back. "Everything'll burn up on the stove if you keep on----"

"Oh, well," she said, "the vase was terribly ugly; I can't do any
better. We'll go in." But with her hand on the door-knob she paused.
"No, papa. We mustn't go in by this door. It might look as if----"

"As if what?"

"Never mind," she said. "Let's go the other way."

"I don't see what difference it makes," he grumbled, but nevertheless
followed her through the kitchen, and up the back stairs then through
the upper hallway. At the top of the front stairs she paused for a
moment, drawing a deep breath; and then, before her father's puzzled
eyes, a transformation came upon her.

Her shoulders, like her eyelids, had been drooping, but now she threw
her head back: the shoulders straightened, and the lashes lifted over
sparkling eyes; vivacity came to her whole body in a flash; and she
tripped down the steps, with her pretty hands rising in time to the
lilting little tune she had begun to hum.

At the foot of the stairs, one of those pretty hands extended itself at
full arm's length toward Russell, and continued to be extended until it
reached his own hand as he came to meet her. "How terrible of me!" she
exclaimed. "To be so late coming down! And papa, too--I think you know
each other."

Her father was advancing toward the young man, expecting to shake hands
with him, but Alice stood between them, and Russell, a little flushed,
bowed to him gravely over her shoulder, without looking at him;
whereupon Adams, slightly disconcerted, put his hands in his pockets and
turned to his wife.

"I guess dinner's more'n ready," he said. "We better go sit down."

But she shook her head at him fiercely, "Wait!" she whispered.

"What for? For Walter?"

"No; he can't be coming," she returned, hurriedly, and again warned him
by a shake of her head. "Be quiet!"

"Oh, well----" he muttered.

"Sit down!"

He was thoroughly mystified, but obeyed her gesture and went to the
rocking-chair in the opposite corner, where he sat down, and, with an
expression of meek inquiry, awaited events.

Meanwhile, Alice prattled on: "It's really not a fault of mine,
being tardy. The shameful truth is I was trying to hurry papa. He's
incorrigible: he stays so late at his terrible old factory--terrible new
factory, I should say. I hope you don't HATE us for making you dine with
us in such fearful weather! I'm nearly dying of the heat, myself, so you
have a fellow-sufferer, if that pleases you. Why is it we always bear
things better if we think other people have to stand them, too?" And she
added, with an excited laugh: "SILLY of us, don't you think?"

Gertrude had just made her entrance from the dining-room, bearing a
tray. She came slowly, with an air of resentment; and her skirt still
needed adjusting, while her lower jaw moved at intervals, though not
now upon any substance, but reminiscently, of habit. She halted before
Adams, facing him.

He looked plaintive. "What you want o' me?" he asked.

For response, she extended the tray toward him with a gesture of
indifference; but he still appeared to be puzzled. "What in the
world----?" he began, then caught his wife's eye, and had presence of
mind enough to take a damp and plastic sandwich from the tray. "Well,
I'll TRY one," he said, but a moment later, as he fulfilled this
promise, an expression of intense dislike came upon his features, and
he would have returned the sandwich to Gertrude. However, as she
had crossed the room to Mrs. Adams he checked the gesture, and sat
helplessly, with the sandwich in his hand. He made another effort to
get rid of it as the waitress passed him, on her way back to the
dining-room, but she appeared not to observe him, and he continued to be
troubled by it.

Alice was a loyal daughter. "These are delicious, mama," she said; and
turning to Russell, "You missed it; you should have taken one. Too
bad we couldn't have offered you what ought to go with it, of course,
but----"

She was interrupted by the second entrance of Gertrude, who announced,
"Dinner serve'," and retired from view.

"Well, well!" Adams said, rising from his chair, with relief. "That's
good! Let's go see if we can eat it." And as the little group moved
toward the open door of the dining-room he disposed of his sandwich by
dropping it in the empty fireplace.

Alice, glancing back over her shoulder, was the only one who saw him,
and she shuddered in spite of herself. Then, seeing that he looked at
her entreatingly, as if he wanted to explain that he was doing the best
he could, she smiled upon him sunnily, and began to chatter to Russell
again.



CHAPTER XXII

Alice kept her sprightly chatter going when they sat down, though the
temperature of the room and the sight of hot soup might have discouraged
a less determined gayety. Moreover, there were details as unpropitious
as the heat: the expiring roses expressed not beauty but pathos, and
what faint odour they exhaled was no rival to the lusty emanations of
the Brussels sprouts; at the head of the table, Adams, sitting low in
his chair, appeared to be unable to flatten the uprising wave of
his starched bosom; and Gertrude's manner and expression were of a
recognizable hostility during the long period of vain waiting for the
cups of soup to be emptied. Only Mrs. Adams made any progress in this
direction; the others merely feinting, now and then lifting their spoons
as if they intended to do something with them.

Alice's talk was little more than cheerful sound, but, to fill a
desolate interval, served its purpose; and her mother supported her
with ever-faithful cooings of applausive laughter. "What a funny thing
weather is!" the girl ran on. "Yesterday it was cool--angels had charge
of it--and to-day they had an engagement somewhere else, so the devil
saw his chance and started to move the equator to the North Pole; but by
the time he got half-way, he thought of something else he wanted to do,
and went off; and left the equator here, right on top of US! I wish he'd
come back and get it!"

"Why, Alice dear!" her mother cried, fondly. "What an imagination! Not
a very pious one, I'm afraid Mr. Russell might think, though!" Here she
gave Gertrude a hidden signal to remove the soup; but, as there was
no response, she had to make the signal more conspicuous. Gertrude was
leaning against the wall, her chin moving like a slow pendulum, her
streaked eyes fixed mutinously upon Russell. Mrs. Adams nodded several
times, increasing the emphasis of her gesture, while Alice talked
briskly; but the brooding waitress continued to brood. A faint snap of
the fingers failed to disturb her; nor was a covert hissing whisper of
avail, and Mrs. Adams was beginning to show signs of strain when her
daughter relieved her.

"Imagine our trying to eat anything so hot as soup on a night like
this!" Alice laughed. "What COULD have been in the cook's mind not to
give us something iced and jellied instead? Of course it's because she's
equatorial, herself, originally, and only feels at home when Mr. Satan
moves it north." She looked round at Gertrude, who stood behind her. "Do
take this dreadful soup away!"

Thus directly addressed, Gertrude yielded her attention, though
unwillingly, and as if she decided only by a hair's weight not to
revolt, instead. However, she finally set herself in slow motion; but
overlooked the supposed head of the table, seeming to be unaware of
the sweltering little man who sat there. As she disappeared toward
the kitchen with but three of the cups upon her tray he turned to look
plaintively after her, and ventured an attempt to recall her.

"Here!" he said, in a low voice. "Here, you!"

"What is it, Virgil?" his wife asked.

"What's her name?"

Mrs. Adams gave him a glance of sudden panic, and, seeing that the
guest of the evening was not looking at her, but down at the white cloth
before him, she frowned hard, and shook her head.

Unfortunately Alice was not observing her mother, and asked, innocently:
"What's whose name, papa?"

"Why, this young darky woman," he explained. "She left mine."

"Never mind," Alice laughed. "There's hope for you, papa. She hasn't
gone forever!"

"I don't know about that," he said, not content with this impulsive
assurance. "She LOOKED like she is." And his remark, considered as a
prediction, had begun to seem warranted before Gertrude's return with
china preliminary to the next stage of the banquet.

Alice proved herself equal to the long gap, and rattled on through it
with a spirit richly justifying her mother's praise of her as "always
ready to smooth things over"; for here was more than long delay to be
smoothed over. She smoothed over her father and mother for Russell; and
she smoothed over him for them, though he did not know it, and remained
unaware of what he owed her. With all this, throughout her prattlings,
the girl's bright eyes kept seeking his with an eager gayety, which but
little veiled both interrogation and entreaty--as if she asked: "Is it
too much for you? Can't you bear it? Won't you PLEASE bear it? I would
for you. Won't you give me a sign that it's all right?"

He looked at her but fleetingly, and seemed to suffer from the heat, in
spite of every manly effort not to wipe his brow too often. His colour,
after rising when he greeted Alice and her father, had departed, leaving
him again moistly pallid; a condition arising from discomfort, no doubt,
but, considered as a decoration, almost poetically becoming to him.
Not less becoming was the faint, kindly smile, which showed his wish to
express amusement and approval; and yet it was a smile rather strained
and plaintive, as if he, like Adams, could only do the best he could.

He pleased Adams, who thought him a fine young man, and decidedly
the quietest that Alice had ever shown to her family. In her father's
opinion this was no small merit; and it was to Russell's credit, too,
that he showed embarrassment upon this first intimate presentation; here
was an applicant with both reserve and modesty. "So far, he seems to be
first rate a mighty fine young man," Adams thought; and, prompted by no
wish to part from Alice but by reminiscences of apparent candidates less
pleasing, he added, "At last!"

Alice's liveliness never flagged. Her smoothing over of things was an
almost continuous performance, and had to be. Yet, while she chattered
through the hot and heavy courses, the questions she asked herself
were as continuous as the performance, and as poignant as what her eyes
seemed to be asking Russell. Why had she not prevailed over her mother's
fear of being "skimpy?" Had she been, indeed, as her mother said she
looked, "in a trance?" But above all: What was the matter with HIM? What
had happened? For she told herself with painful humour that something
even worse than this dinner must be "the matter with him."

The small room, suffocated with the odour of boiled sprouts, grew hotter
and hotter as more and more food appeared, slowly borne in, between
deathly long waits, by the resentful, loud-breathing Gertrude. And while
Alice still sought Russell's glance, and read the look upon his face
a dozen different ways, fearing all of them; and while the straggling
little flowers died upon the stained cloth, she felt her heart grow as
heavy as the food, and wondered that it did not die like the roses.

With the arrival of coffee, the host bestirred himself to make known a
hospitable regret, "By George!" he said. "I meant to buy some cigars."
He addressed himself apologetically to the guest. "I don't know what I
was thinking about, to forget to bring some home with me. I don't use
'em myself--unless somebody hands me one, you might say. I've always
been a pipe-smoker, pure and simple, but I ought to remembered for kind
of an occasion like this."

"Not at all," Russell said. "I'm not smoking at all lately; but when I
do, I'm like you, and smoke a pipe."

Alice started, remembering what she had told him when he overtook her on
her way from the tobacconist's; but, after a moment, looking at him,
she decided that he must have forgotten it. If he had remembered, she
thought, he could not have helped glancing at her. On the contrary, he
seemed more at ease, just then, than he had since they sat down, for he
was favouring her father with a thoughtful attention as Adams responded
to the introduction of a man's topic into the conversation at last.
"Well, Mr. Russell, I guess you're right, at that. I don't say but what
cigars may be all right for a man that can afford 'em, if he likes 'em
better than a pipe, but you take a good old pipe now----"

He continued, and was getting well into the eulogium customarily
provoked by this theme, when there came an interruption: the door-bell
rang, and he paused inquiringly, rather surprised.

Mrs. Adams spoke to Gertrude in an undertone:

"Just say, 'Not at home.'"

"What?"

"If it's callers, just say we're not at home."

Gertrude spoke out freely: "You mean you astin' me to 'tend you' front
do' fer you?"

She seemed both incredulous and affronted, but Mrs. Adams persisted,
though somewhat apprehensively. "Yes. Hurry--uh--please. Just say we're
not at home if you please."

Again Gertrude obviously hesitated between compliance and revolt, and
again the meeker course fortunately prevailed with her. She gave Mrs.
Adams a stare, grimly derisive, then departed. When she came back she
said:

"He say he wait."

"But I told you to tell anybody we were not at home," Mrs Adams
returned. "Who is it?"

"Say he name Mr. Law."

"We don't know any Mr. Law."

"Yes'm; he know you. Say he anxious to speak Mr. Adams. Say he wait."

"Tell him Mr. Adams is engaged."

"Hold on a minute," Adams intervened. "Law? No. I don't know any Mr.
Law. You sure you got the name right?"

"Say he name Law," Gertrude replied, looking at the ceiling to express
her fatigue. "Law. 'S all he tell me; 's all I know."

Adams frowned. "Law," he said. "Wasn't it maybe 'Lohr?'"

"Law," Gertrude repeated. "'S all he tell me; 's all I know."

"What's he look like?"

"He ain't much," she said. "'Bout you' age; got brustly white moustache,
nice eye-glasses."

"It's Charley Lohr!" Adams exclaimed. "I'll go see what he wants."

"But, Virgil," his wife remonstrated, "do finish your coffee; he might
stay all evening. Maybe he's come to call."

Adams laughed. "He isn't much of a caller, I expect. Don't worry: I'll
take him up to my room." And turning toward Russell, "Ah--if you'll just
excuse me," he said; and went out to his visitor.

When he had gone, Mrs. Adams finished her coffee, and, having glanced
intelligently from her guest to her daughter, she rose. "I think perhaps
I ought to go and shake hands with Mr. Lohr, myself," she said, adding
in explanation to Russell, as she reached the door, "He's an old friend
of my husband's and it's a very long time since he's been here."

Alice nodded and smiled to her brightly, but upon the closing of the
door, the smile vanished; all her liveliness disappeared; and with this
change of expression her complexion itself appeared to change, so that
her rouge became obvious, for she was pale beneath it. However, Russell
did not see the alteration, for he did not look at her; and it was but
a momentary lapse the vacation of a tired girl, who for ten seconds lets
herself look as she feels. Then she shot her vivacity back into place as
by some powerful spring.

"Penny for your thoughts!" she cried, and tossed one of the wilted
roses at him, across the table. "I'll bid more than a penny; I'll bid
tuppence--no, a poor little dead rose a rose for your thoughts, Mr.
Arthur Russell! What are they?"

He shook his head. "I'm afraid I haven't any."

"No, of course not," she said. "Who could have thoughts in weather like
this? Will you EVER forgive us?"

"What for?"

"Making you eat such a heavy dinner--I mean LOOK at such a heavy dinner,
because you certainly didn't do more than look at it--on such a night!
But the crime draws to a close, and you can begin to cheer up!" She
laughed gaily, and, rising, moved to the door. "Let's go in the other
room; your fearful duty is almost done, and you can run home as soon as
you want to. That's what you're dying to do."

"Not at all," he said in a voice so feeble that she laughed aloud.

"Good gracious!" she cried. "I hadn't realized it was THAT bad!"

For this, though he contrived to laugh, he seemed to have no verbal
retort whatever; but followed her into the "living-room," where she
stopped and turned, facing him.

"Has it really been so frightful?" she asked.

"Why, of course not. Not at all."

"Of course yes, though, you mean!"

"Not at all. It's been most kind of your mother and father and you."

"Do you know," she said, "you've never once looked at me for more than a
second at a time the whole evening? And it seemed to me I looked rather
nice to-night, too!"

"You always do," he murmured.

"I don't see how you know," she returned; and then stepping closer
to him, spoke with gentle solicitude: "Tell me: you're really feeling
wretchedly, aren't you? I know you've got a fearful headache, or
something. Tell me!"

"Not at all."

"You are ill--I'm sure of it."

"Not at all."

"On your word?"

"I'm really quite all right."

"But if you are----" she began; and then, looking at him with a
desperate sweetness, as if this were her last resource to rouse him,
"What's the matter, little boy?" she said with lisping tenderness. "Tell
auntie!"

It was a mistake, for he seemed to flinch, and to lean backward,
however, slightly. She turned away instantly, with a flippant lift and
drop of both hands. "Oh, my dear!" she laughed. "I won't eat you!"

And as the discomfited young man watched her, seeming able to lift
his eyes, now that her back was turned, she went to the front door and
pushed open the screen. "Let's go out on the porch," she said. "Where we
belong!"

Then, when he had followed her out, and they were seated, "Isn't this
better?" she asked. "Don't you feel more like yourself out here?"

He began a murmur: "Not at----"

But she cut him off sharply: "Please don't say 'Not at all' again!"

"I'm sorry."

"You do seem sorry about something," she said. "What is it? Isn't it
time you were telling me what's the matter?"

"Nothing. Indeed nothing's the matter. Of course one IS rather affected
by such weather as this. It may make one a little quieter than usual, of
course."

She sighed, and let the tired muscles of her face rest. Under the hard
lights, indoors, they had served her until they ached, and it was a
luxury to feel that in the darkness no grimacings need call upon them.

"Of course, if you won't tell me----" she said.

"I can only assure you there's nothing to tell."

"I know what an ugly little house it is," she said. "Maybe it was the
furniture--or mama's vases that upset you. Or was it mama herself--or
papa?"

"Nothing 'upset' me."

At that she uttered a monosyllable of doubting laughter. "I wonder why
you say that."

"Because it's so."

"No. It's because you're too kind, or too conscientious, or too
embarrassed--anyhow too something--to tell me." She leaned forward,
elbows on knees and chin in hands, in the reflective attitude she knew
how to make graceful. "I have a feeling that you're not going to tell
me," she said, slowly. "Yes--even that you're never going to tell me. I
wonder--I wonder----"

"Yes? What do you wonder?"

"I was just thinking--I wonder if they haven't done it, after all."

"I don't understand."

"I wonder," she went on, still slowly, and in a voice of reflection, "I
wonder who HAS been talking about me to you, after all? Isn't that it?"

"Not at----" he began, but checked himself and substituted another form
of denial. "Nothing is 'it.'"

"Are you sure?"

"Why, yes."

"How curious!" she said.

"Why?"

"Because all evening you've been so utterly different."

"But in this weather----"

"No. That wouldn't make you afraid to look at me all evening!"

"But I did look at you. Often."

"No. Not really a LOOK."

"But I'm looking at you now."

"Yes--in the dark!" she said. "No--the weather might make you even
quieter than usual, but it wouldn't strike you so nearly dumb. No--and
it wouldn't make you seem to be under such a strain--as if you thought
only of escape!"

"But I haven't----"

"You shouldn't," she interrupted, gently. "There's nothing you have to
escape from, you know. You aren't committed to--to this friendship."

"I'm sorry you think----" he began, but did not complete the fragment.

She took it up. "You're sorry I think you're so different, you mean to
say, don't you? Never mind: that's what you did mean to say, but you
couldn't finish it because you're not good at deceiving."

"Oh, no," he protested, feebly. "I'm not deceiving. I'm----"

"Never mind," she said again. "You're sorry I think you're so
different--and all in one day--since last night. Yes, your voice SOUNDS
sorry, too. It sounds sorrier than it would just because of my thinking
something you could change my mind about in a minute so it means you're
sorry you ARE different."

"No--I----"

But disregarding the faint denial, "Never mind," she said. "Do you
remember one night when you told me that nothing anybody else could do
would ever keep you from coming here? That if you--if you left me it
would be because I drove you away myself?"

"Yes," he said, huskily. "It was true."

"Are you sure?"

"Indeed I am," he answered in a low voice, but with conviction.

"Then----" She paused. "Well--but I haven't driven you away."

"No."

"And yet you've gone," she said, quietly.

"Do I seem so stupid as all that?"

"You know what I mean." She leaned back in her chair again, and her
hands, inactive for once, lay motionless in her lap. When she spoke it
was in a rueful whisper:

"I wonder if I HAVE driven you away?"

"You've done nothing--nothing at all," he said.

"I wonder----" she said once more, but she stopped. In her mind she was
going back over their time together since the first meeting--fragments
of talk, moments of silence, little things of no importance, little
things that might be important; moonshine, sunshine, starlight; and her
thoughts zigzagged among the jumbling memories; but, as if she made for
herself a picture of all these fragments, throwing them upon the canvas
haphazard, she saw them all just touched with the one tainting quality
that gave them coherence, the faint, false haze she had put over this
friendship by her own pretendings. And, if this terrible dinner, or
anything, or everything, had shown that saffron tint in its true colour
to the man at her side, last night almost a lover, then she had indeed
of herself driven him away, and might well feel that she was lost.

"Do you know?" she said, suddenly, in a clear, loud voice. "I have the
strangest feeling. I feel as if I were going to be with you only about
five minutes more in all the rest of my life!"

"Why, no," he said. "Of course I'm coming to see you--often. I----"

"No," she interrupted. "I've never had a feeling like this before.
It's--it's just SO; that's all! You're GOING--why, you're never coming
here again!" She stood up, abruptly, beginning to tremble all over.
"Why, it's FINISHED, isn't it?" she said, and her trembling was manifest
now in her voice. "Why, it's all OVER, isn't it? Why, yes!"

He had risen as she did. "I'm afraid you're awfully tired and nervous,"
he said. "I really ought to be going."

"Yes, of COURSE you ought," she cried, despairingly. "There's nothing
else for you to do. When anything's spoiled, people CAN'T do anything
but run away from it. So good-bye!"

"At least," he returned, huskily, "we'll only--only say good-night."

Then, as moving to go, he stumbled upon the veranda steps, "Your HAT!"
she cried. "I'd like to keep it for a souvenir, but I'm afraid you need
it!"

She ran into the hall and brought his straw hat from the chair where he
had left it. "You poor thing!" she said, with quavering laughter. "Don't
you know you can't go without your hat?"

Then, as they faced each other for the short moment which both of them
knew would be the last of all their veranda moments, Alice's broken
laughter grew louder. "What a thing to say!" she cried. "What a romantic
parting--talking about HATS!"

Her laughter continued as he turned away, but other sounds came from
within the house, clearly audible with the opening of a door upstairs--a
long and wailing cry of lamentation in the voice of Mrs. Adams. Russell
paused at the steps, uncertain, but Alice waved to him to go on.

"Oh, don't bother," she said. "We have lots of that in this funny little
old house! Good-bye!"

And as he went down the steps, she ran back into the house and closed
the door heavily behind her.



CHAPTER XXIII

Her mother's wailing could still be heard from overhead, though more
faintly; and old Charley Lohr was coming down the stairs alone.

He looked at Alice compassionately. "I was just comin' to suggest maybe
you'd excuse yourself from your company," he said. "Your mother was
bound not to disturb you, and tried her best to keep you from hearin'
how she's takin' on, but I thought probably you better see to her."

"Yes, I'll come. What's the matter?"

"Well," he said, "_I_ only stepped over to offer my sympathy and
services, as it were. _I_ thought of course you folks knew all about it.
Fact is, it was in the evening paper--just a little bit of an item on
the back page, of course."

"What is it?"

He coughed. "Well, it ain't anything so terrible," he said. "Fact is,
your brother Walter's got in a little trouble--well, I suppose you might
call it quite a good deal of trouble. Fact is, he's quite considerable
short in his accounts down at Lamb and Company."

Alice ran up the stairs and into her father's room, where Mrs. Adams
threw herself into her daughter's arms. "Is he gone?" she sobbed. "He
didn't hear me, did he? I tried so hard----"

Alice patted the heaving shoulders her arms enclosed. "No, no," she
said. "He didn't hear you--it wouldn't have mattered--he doesn't matter
anyway."

"Oh, POOR Walter!" The mother cried. "Oh, the POOR boy! Poor, poor
Walter! Poor, poor, poor, POOR----"

"Hush, dear, hush!" Alice tried to soothe her, but the lament could
not be abated, and from the other side of the room a repetition in
a different spirit was as continuous. Adams paced furiously there,
pounding his fist into his left palm as he strode. "The dang boy!" he
said. "Dang little fool! Dang idiot! Dang fool! Whyn't he TELL me, the
dang little fool?"

"He DID!" Mrs. Adams sobbed. "He DID tell you, and you wouldn't GIVE it
to him."

"He DID, did he?" Adams shouted at her. "What he begged me for was money
to run away with! He never dreamed of putting back what he took. What
the dangnation you talking about--accusing me!"

"He NEEDED it," she said. "He needed it to run away with! How could he
expect to LIVE, after he got away, if he didn't have a little money? Oh,
poor, poor, POOR Walter! Poor, poor, poor----"

She went back to this repetition; and Adams went back to his own, then
paused, seeing his old friend standing in the hallway outside the open
door.

"Ah--I'll just be goin', I guess, Virgil," Lohr said. "I don't see as
there's any use my tryin' to say any more. I'll do anything you want me
to, you understand."

"Wait a minute," Adams said, and, groaning, came and went down the
stairs with him. "You say you didn't see the old man at all?"

"No, I don't know a thing about what he's going to do," Lohr said, as
they reached the lower floor. "Not a thing. But look here, Virgil,
I don't see as this calls for you and your wife to take on so hard
about--anyhow not as hard as the way you've started."

"No," Adams gulped. "It always seems that way to the other party that's
only looking on!"

"Oh, well, I know that, of course," old Charley returned, soothingly.
"But look here, Virgil: they may not catch the boy; they didn't even
seem to be sure what train he made, and if they do get him, why, the ole
man might decide not to prosecute if----"

"HIM?" Adams cried, interrupting. "Him not prosecute? Why, that's what
he's been waiting for, all along! He thinks my boy and me both cheated
him! Why, he was just letting Walter walk into a trap! Didn't you say
they'd been suspecting him for some time back? Didn't you say they'd
been watching him and were just about fixing to arrest him?"

"Yes, I know," said Lohr; "but you can't tell, especially if you raise
the money and pay it back."

"Every cent!" Adams vociferated. "Every last penny! I can raise it--I
GOT to raise it! I'm going to put a loan on my factory to-morrow. Oh,
I'll get it for him, you tell him! Every last penny!"

"Well, ole feller, you just try and get quieted down some now." Charley
held out his hand in parting. "You and your wife just quiet down some.
You AIN'T the healthiest man in the world, you know, and you already
been under quite some strain before this happened. You want to take
care of yourself for the sake of your wife and that sweet little girl
upstairs, you know. Now, good-night," he finished, stepping out upon the
veranda. "You send for me if there's anything I can do."

"Do?" Adams echoed. "There ain't anything ANYBODY can do!" And then, as
his old friend went down the path to the sidewalk, he called after him,
"You tell him I'll pay him every last cent! Every last, dang, dirty
PENNY!"

He slammed the door and went rapidly up the stairs, talking loudly to
himself. "Every dang, last, dirty penny! Thinks EVERYBODY in this family
wants to steal from him, does he? Thinks we're ALL yellow, does he?
I'll show him!" And he came into his own room vociferating, "Every last,
dang, dirty penny!"

Mrs. Adams had collapsed, and Alice had put her upon his bed, where she
lay tossing convulsively and sobbing, "Oh, POOR Walter!" over and
over, but after a time she varied the sorry tune. "Oh, poor Alice!" she
moaned, clinging to her daughter's hand. "Oh, poor, POOR Alice to have
THIS come on the night of your dinner--just when everything seemed to be
going so well--at last--oh, poor, poor, POOR----"

"Hush!" Alice said, sharply. "Don't say 'poor Alice!' I'm all right."

"You MUST be!" her mother cried, clutching her. "You've just GOT to be!
ONE of us has got to be all right--surely God wouldn't mind just ONE of
us being all right--that wouldn't hurt Him----"

"Hush, hush, mother! Hush!"

But Mrs. Adams only clutched her the more tightly. "He seemed SUCH a
nice young man, dearie! He may not see this in the paper--Mr. Lohr said
it was just a little bit of an item--he MAY not see it, dearie----"

Then her anguish went back to Walter again; and to his needs as a
fugitive--she had meant to repair his underwear, but had postponed doing
so, and her neglect now appeared to be a detail as lamentable as the
calamity itself. She could neither be stilled upon it, nor herself
exhaust its urgings to self-reproach, though she finally took up another
theme temporarily. Upon an unusually violent outbreak of her husband's,
in denunciation of the runaway, she cried out faintly that he was cruel;
and further wearied her broken voice with details of Walter's beauty as
a baby, and of his bedtime pieties throughout his infancy.

So the hot night wore on. Three had struck before Mrs. Adams was got to
bed; and Alice, returning to her own room, could hear her father's bare
feet thudding back and forth after that. "Poor papa!" she whispered in
helpless imitation of her mother. "Poor papa! Poor mama! Poor Walter!
Poor all of us!"

She fell asleep, after a time, while from across the hall the bare
feet still thudded over their changeless route; and she woke at seven,
hearing Adams pass her door, shod. In her wrapper she ran out into the
hallway and found him descending the stairs.

"Papa!"

"Hush," he said, and looked up at her with reddened eyes. "Don't wake
your mother."

"I won't," she whispered. "How about you? You haven't slept any at all!"

"Yes, I did. I got some sleep. I'm going over to the works now. I got
to throw some figures together to show the bank. Don't worry: I'll get
things fixed up. You go back to bed. Good-bye."

"Wait!" she bade him sharply.

"What for?"

"You've got to have some breakfast."

"Don't want 'ny."

"You wait!" she said, imperiously, and disappeared to return almost at
once. "I can cook in my bedroom slippers," she explained, "but I don't
believe I could in my bare feet!"

Descending softly, she made him wait in the dining-room until she
brought him toast and eggs and coffee. "Eat!" she said. "And I'm going
to telephone for a taxicab to take you, if you think you've really got
to go."

"No, I'm going to walk--I WANT to walk."

She shook her head anxiously. "You don't look able. You've walked all
night."

"No, I didn't," he returned. "I tell you I got some sleep. I got all I
wanted anyhow."

"But, papa----"

"Here!" he interrupted, looking up at her suddenly and setting down his
cup of coffee. "Look here! What about this Mr. Russell? I forgot all
about him. What about him?"

Her lip trembled a little, but she controlled it before she spoke.
"Well, what about him, papa?" she asked, calmly enough.

"Well, we could hardly----" Adams paused, frowning heavily. "We could
hardly expect he wouldn't hear something about all this."

"Yes; of course he'll hear it, papa."

"Well?"

"Well, what?" she asked, gently.

"You don't think he'd be the--the cheap kind it'd make a difference
with, of course."

"Oh, no; he isn't cheap. It won't make any difference with him."

Adams suffered a profound sigh to escape him. "Well--I'm glad of that,
anyway."

"The difference," she explained--"the difference was made without his
hearing anything about Walter. He doesn't know about THAT yet."

"Well, what does he know about?"

"Only," she said, "about me."

"What you mean by that, Alice?" he asked, helplessly.

"Never mind," she said. "It's nothing beside the real trouble we're
in--I'll tell you some time. You eat your eggs and toast; you can't keep
going on just coffee."

"I can't eat any eggs and toast," he objected, rising. "I can't."

"Then wait till I can bring you something else."

"No," he said, irritably. "I won't do it! I don't want any dang food!
And look here"--he spoke sharply to stop her, as she went toward the
telephone--"I don't want any dang taxi, either! You look after your
mother when she wakes up. I got to be at WORK!"

And though she followed him to the front door, entreating, he could not
be stayed or hindered. He went through the quiet morning streets at
a rickety, rapid gait, swinging his old straw hat in his hands, and
whispering angrily to himself as he went. His grizzled hair, not trimmed
for a month, blew back from his damp forehead in the warm breeze; his
reddened eyes stared hard at nothing from under blinking lids; and one
side of his face twitched startlingly from time to time;--children might
have run from him, or mocked him.

When he had come into that fallen quarter his industry had partly
revived and wholly made odorous, a negro woman, leaning upon her
whitewashed gate, gazed after him and chuckled for the benefit of a
gossiping friend in the next tiny yard. "Oh, good Satan! Wha'ssa matter
that ole glue man?"

"Who? Him?" the neighbour inquired. "What he do now?"

"Talkin' to his ole se'f!" the first explained, joyously. "Look like
gone distracted--ole glue man!"

Adams's legs had grown more uncertain with his hard walk, and he
stumbled heavily as he crossed the baked mud of his broad lot, but cared
little for that, was almost unaware of it, in fact. Thus his eyes saw
as little as his body felt, and so he failed to observe something that
would have given him additional light upon an old phrase that already
meant quite enough for him.

There are in the wide world people who have never learned its meaning;
but most are either young or beautifully unobservant who remain
wholly unaware of the inner poignancies the words convey: "a rain of
misfortunes." It is a boiling rain, seemingly whimsical in its choice of
spots whereon to fall; and, so far as mortal eye can tell, neither the
just nor the unjust may hope to avoid it, or need worry themselves by
expecting it. It had selected the Adams family for its scaldings; no
question.

The glue-works foreman, standing in the doorway of the brick shed,
observed his employer's eccentric approach, and doubtfully stroked a
whiskered chin.

"Well, they ain't no putticular use gettin' so upset over it," he said,
as Adams came up. "When a thing happens, why, it happens, and that's all
there is to it. When a thing's so, why, it's so. All you can do about it
is think if there's anything you CAN do; and that's what you better be
doin' with this case."

Adams halted, and seemed to gape at him. "What--case?" he said, with
difficulty. "Was it in the morning papers, too?"

"No, it ain't in no morning papers. My land! It don't need to be in no
papers; look at the SIZE of it!"

"The size of what?"

"Why, great God!" the foreman exclaimed. "He ain't even seen it. Look!
Look yonder!"

Adams stared vaguely at the man's outstretched hand and pointing
forefinger, then turned and saw a great sign upon the facade of the big
factory building across the street. The letters were large enough to be
read two blocks away.

     "AFTER THE FIFTEENTH OF NEXT MONTH
     THIS BUILDING WILL BE OCCUPIED BY
     THE J. A. LAMB LIQUID GLUE CO.  INC."


A gray touring-car had just come to rest before the principal entrance
of the building, and J. A. Lamb himself descended from it. He glanced
over toward the humble rival of his projected great industry, saw his
old clerk, and immediately walked across the street and the lot to speak
to him.

"Well, Adams," he said, in his husky, cheerful voice, "how's your
glue-works?"

Adams uttered an inarticulate sound, and lifted the hand that held his
hat as if to make a protective gesture, but failed to carry it out; and
his arm sank limp at his side. The foreman, however, seemed to feel that
something ought to be said.

"Our glue-works, hell!" he remarked. "I guess we won't HAVE no
glue-works over here not very long, if we got to compete with the sized
thing you got over there!"

Lamb chuckled. "I kind of had some such notion," he said. "You see,
Virgil, I couldn't exactly let you walk off with it like swallering a
pat o' butter, now, could I? It didn't look exactly reasonable to expect
me to let go like that, now, did it?"

Adams found a half-choked voice somewhere in his throat. "Do you--would
you step into my office a minute, Mr. Lamb?"

"Why, certainly I'm willing to have a little talk with you," the old
gentleman said, as he followed his former employee indoors, and he
added, "I feel a lot more like it than I did before I got THAT up, over
yonder, Virgil!"

Adams threw open the door of the rough room he called his office, having
as justification for this title little more than the fact that he had a
telephone there and a deal table that served as a desk. "Just step into
the office, please," he said.

Lamb glanced at the desk, at the kitchen chair before it, at the
telephone, and at the partition walls built of old boards, some covered
with ancient paint and some merely weatherbeaten, the salvage of a
house-wrecker; and he smiled broadly. "So these are your offices, are
they?" he asked. "You expect to do quite a business here, I guess, don't
you, Virgil?"

Adams turned upon him a stricken and tortured face. "Have you seen
Charley Lohr since last night, Mr. Lamb?"

"No; I haven't seen Charley."

"Well, I told him to tell you," Adams began;--"I told him I'd pay
you----"

"Pay me what you expect to make out o' glue, you mean, Virgil?"

"No," Adams said, swallowing. "I mean what my boy owes you. That's what
I told Charley to tell you. I told him to tell you I'd pay you every
last----"

"Well, well!" the old gentleman interrupted, testily. "I don't know
anything about that."

"I'm expecting to pay you," Adams went on, swallowing again, painfully.
"I was expecting to do it out of a loan I thought I could get on my
glue-works."

The old gentleman lifted his frosted eyebrows. "Oh, out o' the
GLUE-works? You expected to raise money on the glue-works, did you?"

At that, Adams's agitation increased prodigiously. "How'd you THINK I
expected to pay you?" he said. "Did you think I expected to get money on
my own old bones?" He slapped himself harshly upon the chest and legs.
"Do you think a bank'll lend money on a man's ribs and his broken-down
old knee-bones? They won't do it! You got to have some BUSINESS
prospects to show 'em, if you haven't got any property nor securities;
and what business prospects have I got now, with that sign of yours up
over yonder? Why, you don't need to make an OUNCE o' glue; your sign's
fixed ME without your doing another lick! THAT'S all you had to do; just
put your sign up! You needn't to----"

"Just let me tell you something, Virgil Adams," the old man interrupted,
harshly. "I got just one right important thing to tell you before we
talk any further business; and that's this: there's some few men in this
town made their money in off-colour ways, but there aren't many; and
those there are have had to be a darn sight slicker than you know how to
be, or ever WILL know how to be! Yes, sir, and they none of them had the
little gumption to try to make it out of a man that had the spirit not
to let 'em, and the STRENGTH not to let 'em! I know what you thought.
'Here,' you said to yourself, 'here's this ole fool J. A. Lamb; he's
kind of worn out and in his second childhood like; I can put it over on
him, without his ever----'"

"I did not!" Adams shouted. "A great deal YOU know about my feelings
and all what I said to myself! There's one thing I want to tell YOU,
and that's what I'm saying to myself NOW, and what my feelings are this
MINUTE!"

He struck the table a great blow with his thin fist, and shook the
damaged knuckles in the air. "I just want to tell you, whatever I did
feel, I don't feel MEAN any more; not to-day, I don't. There's a meaner
man in this world than _I_ am, Mr. Lamb!"

"Oh, so you feel better about yourself to-day, do you, Virgil?"

"You bet I do! You worked till you got me where you want me; and
I wouldn't do that to another man, no matter what he did to me! I
wouldn't----"

"What you talkin' about! How've I 'got you where I want you?'"

"Ain't it plain enough?" Adams cried. "You even got me where I can't
raise the money to pay back what my boy owes you! Do you suppose
anybody's fool enough to let me have a cent on this business after one
look at what you got over there across the road?"

"No, I don't."

"No, you don't," Adams echoed, hoarsely. "What's more, you knew my house
was mortgaged, and my----"

"I did not," Lamb interrupted, angrily. "What do _I_ care about your
house?"

"What's the use your talking like that?" Adams cried. "You got me where
I can't even raise the money to pay what my boy owes the company, so't
I can't show any reason to stop the prosecution and keep him out the
penitentiary. That's where you worked till you got ME!"

"What!" Lamb shouted. "You accuse me of----"

"'Accuse you?' What am I telling you? Do you think I got no EYES?" And
Adams hammered the table again. "Why, you knew the boy was weak----"

"I did not!"

"Listen: you kept him there after you got mad at my leaving the way
I did. You kept him there after you suspected him; and you had him
watched; you let him go on; just waited to catch him and ruin him!"

"You're crazy!" the old man bellowed. "I didn't know there was anything
against the boy till last night. You're CRAZY, I say!"

Adams looked it. With his hair disordered over his haggard forehead and
bloodshot eyes; with his bruised hands pounding the table and flying in
a hundred wild and absurd gestures, while his feet shuffled constantly
to preserve his balance upon staggering legs, he was the picture of a
man with a mind gone to rags.

"Maybe I AM crazy!" he cried, his voice breaking and quavering. "Maybe
I am, but I wouldn't stand there and taunt a man with it if I'd done to
him what you've done to me! Just look at me: I worked all my life for
you, and what I did when I quit never harmed you--it didn't make two
cents' worth o' difference in your life and it looked like it'd mean all
the difference in the world to my family--and now look what you've DONE
to me for it! I tell you, Mr. Lamb, there never was a man looked up to
another man the way I looked up to you the whole o' my life, but I don't
look up to you any more! You think you got a fine day of it now, riding
up in your automobile to look at that sign--and then over here at my
poor little works that you've ruined. But listen to me just this
one last time!" The cracking voice broke into falsetto, and the
gesticulating hands fluttered uncontrollably. "Just you listen!" he
panted. "You think I did you a bad turn, and now you got me ruined for
it, and you got my works ruined, and my family ruined; and if anybody'd
'a' told me this time last year I'd ever say such a thing to you I'd
called him a dang liar, but I DO say it: I say you've acted toward me
like--like a--a doggone mean--man!"

His voice, exhausted, like his body, was just able to do him this final
service; then he sank, crumpled, into the chair by the table, his chin
down hard upon his chest.

"I tell you, you're crazy!" Lamb said again. "I never in the world----"
But he checked himself, staring in sudden perplexity at his accuser.
"Look here!" he said. "What's the matter of you? Have you got another of
those----?" He put his hand upon Adams's shoulder, which jerked feebly
under the touch.

The old man went to the door and called to the foreman.

"Here!" he said. "Run and tell my chauffeur to bring my car over here.
Tell him to drive right up over the sidewalk and across the lot. Tell
him to hurry!"

So, it happened, the great J. A. Lamb a second time brought his former
clerk home, stricken and almost inanimate.



CHAPTER XXIV

About five o'clock that afternoon, the old gentleman came back to
Adams's house; and when Alice opened the door, he nodded, walked
into the "living-room" without speaking; then stood frowning as if he
hesitated to decide some perplexing question.

"Well, how is he now?" he asked, finally.

"The doctor was here again a little while ago; he thinks papa's coming
through it. He's pretty sure he will."

"Something like the way it was last spring?"

"Yes."

"Not a bit of sense to it!" Lamb said, gruffly. "When he was getting
well the other time the doctor told me it wasn't a regular stroke, so to
speak--this 'cerebral effusion' thing. Said there wasn't any particular
reason for your father to expect he'd ever have another attack, if he'd
take a little care of himself. Said he could consider himself well as
anybody else long as he did that."

"Yes. But he didn't do it!"

Lamb nodded, sighed aloud, and crossed the room to a chair. "I
guess not," he said, as he sat down. "Bustin' his health up over his
glue-works, I expect."

"Yes."

"I guess so; I guess so." Then he looked up at her with a glimmer of
anxiety in his eyes. "Has he came to yet?"

"Yes. He's talked a little. His mind's clear; he spoke to mama and me
and to Miss Perry." Alice laughed sadly. "We were lucky enough to get
her back, but papa didn't seem to think it was lucky. When he recognized
her he said, 'Oh, my goodness, 'tisn't YOU, is it!'"

"Well, that's a good sign, if he's getting a little cross. Did he--did
he happen to say anything--for instance, about me?"

This question, awkwardly delivered, had the effect of removing the
girl's pallor; rosy tints came quickly upon her cheeks. "He--yes, he
did," she said. "Naturally, he's troubled about--about----" She stopped.

"About your brother, maybe?"

"Yes, about making up the----"

"Here, now," Lamb said, uncomfortably, as she stopped again. "Listen,
young lady; let's don't talk about that just yet. I want to ask you: you
understand all about this glue business, I expect, don't you?"

"I'm not sure. I only know----"

"Let me tell you," he interrupted, impatiently. "I'll tell you all about
it in two words. The process belonged to me, and your father up and
walked off with it; there's no getting around THAT much, anyhow."

"Isn't there?" Alice stared at him. "I think you're mistaken, Mr. Lamb.
Didn't papa improve it so that it virtually belonged to him?"

There was a spark in the old blue eyes at this. "What?" he cried. "Is
that the way he got around it? Why, in all my life I never heard of such
a----" But he left the sentence unfinished; the testiness went out of
his husky voice and the anger out of his eyes. "Well, I expect maybe
that was the way of it," he said. "Anyhow, it's right for you to stand
up for your father; and if you think he had a right to it----"

"But he did!" she cried.

"I expect so," the old man returned, pacifically. "I expect so,
probably. Anyhow, it's a question that's neither here nor there, right
now. What I was thinking of saying--well, did your father happen to let
out that he and I had words this morning?"

"No."

"Well, we did." He sighed and shook his head. "Your father--well, he
used some pretty hard expressions toward me, young lady. They weren't
SO, I'm glad to say, but he used 'em to me, and the worst of it was he
believed 'em. Well, I been thinking it over, and I thought I'd just have
a kind of little talk with you to set matters straight, so to speak."

"Yes, Mr. Lamb."

"For instance," he said, "it's like this. Now, I hope you won't think I
mean any indelicacy, but you take your brother's case, since we got to
mention it, why, your father had the whole thing worked out in his mind
about as wrong as anybody ever got anything. If I'd acted the way your
father thought I did about that, why, somebody just ought to take me out
and shoot me! Do YOU know what that man thought?"

"I'm not sure."

He frowned at her, and asked, "Well, what do you think about it?"

"I don't know," she said. "I don't believe I think anything at all about
anything to-day."

"Well, well," he returned; "I expect not; I expect not. You kind of look
to me as if you ought to be in bed yourself, young lady."

"Oh, no."

"I guess you mean 'Oh, yes'; and I won't keep you long, but there's
something we got to get fixed up, and I'd rather talk to you than I
would to your mother, because you're a smart girl and always friendly;
and I want to be sure I'm understood. Now, listen."

"I will," Alice promised, smiling faintly.

"I never even hardly noticed your brother was still working for me," he
explained, earnestly. "I never thought anything about it. My sons sort
of tried to tease me about the way your father--about his taking up this
glue business, so to speak--and one day Albert, Junior, asked me if I
felt all right about your brother's staying there after that, and I told
him--well, I just asked him to shut up. If the boy wanted to stay there,
I didn't consider it my business to send him away on account of
any feeling I had toward his father; not as long as he did his work
right--and the report showed he did. Well, as it happens, it looks now
as if he stayed because he HAD to; he couldn't quit because he'd 'a'
been found out if he did. Well, he'd been covering up his shortage for a
considerable time--and do you know what your father practically charged
me with about that?"

"No, Mr. Lamb."

In his resentment, the old gentleman's ruddy face became ruddier and his
husky voice huskier. "Thinks I kept the boy there because I suspected
him! Thinks I did it to get even with HIM! Do I look to YOU like a man
that'd do such a thing?"

"No," she said, gently. "I don't think you would."

"No!" he exclaimed. "Nor HE wouldn't think so if he was himself; he's
known me too long. But he must been sort of brooding over this whole
business--I mean before Walter's trouble he must been taking it to heart
pretty hard for some time back. He thought I didn't think much of
him any more--and I expect he maybe wondered some what I was going
to DO--and there's nothing worse'n that state of mind to make a man
suspicious of all kinds of meanness. Well, he practically stood up there
and accused me to my face of fixing things so't he couldn't ever raise
the money to settle for Walter and ask us not to prosecute. That's the
state of mind your father's brooding got him into, young lady--charging
me with a trick like that!"

"I'm sorry," she said. "I know you'd never----"

The old man slapped his sturdy knee, angrily. "Why, that dang fool of a
Virgil Adams!" he exclaimed. "He wouldn't even give me a chance to talk;
and he got me so mad I couldn't hardly talk, anyway! He might 'a' known
from the first I wasn't going to let him walk in and beat me out of my
own--that is, he might 'a' known I wouldn't let him get ahead of me in
a business matter--not with my boys twitting me about it every few
minutes! But to talk to me the way he did this morning--well, he was out
of his head; that's all! Now, wait just a minute," he interposed, as she
seemed about to speak. "In the first place, we aren't going to push this
case against your brother. I believe in the law, all right, and
business men got to protect themselves; but in a case like this, where
restitution's made by the family, why, I expect it's just as well
sometimes to use a little influence and let matters drop. Of course your
brother'll have to keep out o' this state; that's all."

"But--you said----" she faltered.

"Yes. What'd I say?"

"You said, 'where restitution's made by the family.' That's what seemed
to trouble papa so terribly, because--because restitution couldn't----"

"Why, yes, it could. That's what I'm here to talk to you about."

"I don't see----"

"I'm going to TELL you, ain't I?" he said, gruffly. "Just hold your
horses a minute, please." He coughed, rose from his chair, walked up and
down the room, then halted before her. "It's like this," he said. "After
I brought your father home, this morning, there was one of the things he
told me, when he was going for me, over yonder--it kind of stuck in
my craw. It was something about all this glue controversy not meaning
anything to me in particular, and meaning a whole heap to him and his
family. Well, he was wrong about that two ways. The first one was,
it did mean a good deal to me to have him go back on me after so many
years. I don't need to say any more about it, except just to tell you it
meant quite a little more to me than you'd think, maybe. The other way
he was wrong is, that how much a thing means to one man and how little
it means to another ain't the right way to look at a business matter."

"I suppose it isn't, Mr. Lamb."

"No," he said. "It isn't. It's not the right way to look at anything.
Yes, and your father knows it as well as I do, when he's in his right
mind; and I expect that's one of the reasons he got so mad at me--but
anyhow, I couldn't help thinking about how much all this thing HAD maybe
meant to him;--as I say, it kind of stuck in my craw. I want you to tell
him something from me, and I want you to go and tell him right off, if
he's able and willing to listen. You tell him I got kind of a notion
he was pushed into this thing by circumstances, and tell him I've lived
long enough to know that circumstances can beat the best of us--you tell
him I said 'the BEST of us.' Tell him I haven't got a bit of feeling
against him--not any more--and tell him I came here to ask him not to
have any against me."

"Yes, Mr. Lamb."

"Tell him I said----" The old man paused abruptly and Alice was
surprised, in a dull and tired way, when she saw that his lips had begun
to twitch and his eyelids to blink; but he recovered himself almost
at once, and continued: "I want him to remember, 'Forgive us our
transgressions, as we forgive those that transgress against us'; and if
he and I been transgressing against each other, why, tell him I think
it's time we QUIT such foolishness!"

He coughed again, smiled heartily upon her, and walked toward the door;
then turned back to her with an exclamation: "Well, if I ain't an old
fool!"

"What is it?" she asked.

"Why, I forgot what we were just talking about! Your father wants to
settle for Walter's deficit. Tell him we'll be glad to accept it; but
of course we don't expect him to clean the matter up until he's able to
talk business again."

Alice stared at him blankly enough for him to perceive that further
explanations were necessary. "It's like this," he said. "You see, if
your father decided to keep his works going over yonder, I don't say but
he might give us some little competition for a time, 'specially as he's
got the start on us and about ready for the market. Then I was figuring
we could use his plant--it's small, but it'd be to our benefit to have
the use of it--and he's got a lease on that big lot; it may come in
handy for us if we want to expand some. Well, I'd prefer to make a deal
with him as quietly as possible---no good in every Tom, Dick and Harry
hearing about things like this--but I figured he could sell out to me
for a little something more'n enough to cover the mortgage he put on
this house, and Walter's deficit, too--THAT don't amount to much
in dollars and cents. The way I figure it, I could offer him about
ninety-three hundred dollars as a total--or say ninety-three hundred and
fifty--and if he feels like accepting, why, I'll send a confidential man
up here with the papers soon's your father's able to look 'em over. You
tell him, will you, and ask him if he sees his way to accepting that
figure?"

"Yes," Alice said; and now her own lips twitched, while her eyes filled
so that she saw but a blurred image of the old man, who held out his
hand in parting. "I'll tell him. Thank you."

He shook her hand hastily. "Well, let's just keep it kind of quiet,"
he said, at the door. "No good in every Tom, Dick and Harry knowing all
what goes on in town! You telephone me when your papa's ready to go over
the papers--and call me up at my house to-night, will you? Let me hear
how he's feeling?"

"I will," she said, and through her grateful tears gave him a smile
almost radiant. "He'll be better, Mr. Lamb. We all will."



CHAPTER XXV

One morning, that autumn, Mrs. Adams came into Alice's room, and found
her completing a sober toilet for the street; moreover, the expression
revealed in her mirror was harmonious with the business-like severity
of her attire. "What makes you look so cross, dearie?" the mother asked.
"Couldn't you find anything nicer to wear than that plain old dark
dress?"

"I don't believe I'm cross," the girl said, absently. "I believe I'm
just thinking. Isn't it about time?"

"Time for what?"

"Time for thinking--for me, I mean?"

Disregarding this, Mrs. Adams looked her over thoughtfully. "I can't see
why you don't wear more colour," she said. "At your age it's becoming
and proper, too. Anyhow, when you're going on the street, I think you
ought to look just as gay and lively as you can manage. You want to show
'em you've got some spunk!"

"How do you mean, mama?"

"I mean about Walter's running away and the mess your father made of his
business. It would help to show 'em you're holding up your head just the
same."

"Show whom!"

"All these other girls that----"

"Not I!" Alice laughed shortly, shaking her head. "I've quit dressing at
them, and if they saw me they wouldn't think what you want 'em to. It's
funny; but we don't often make people think what we want 'em to, mama.
You do thus and so; and you tell yourself, 'Now, seeing me do thus and
so, people will naturally think this and that'; but they don't. They
think something else--usually just what you DON'T want 'em to. I suppose
about the only good in pretending is the fun we get out of fooling
ourselves that we fool somebody."

"Well, but it wouldn't be pretending. You ought to let people see you're
still holding your head up because you ARE. You wouldn't want that
Mildred Palmer to think you're cast down about--well, you know you
wouldn't want HER not to think you're holding your head up, would you?"

"She wouldn't know whether I am or not, mama." Alice bit her lip, then
smiled faintly as she said:

"Anyhow, I'm not thinking about my head in that way--not this morning,
I'm not."

Mrs. Adams dropped the subject casually. "Are you going down-town?" she
inquired.

"Yes."

"What for?"

"Just something I want to see about. I'll tell you when I come back.
Anything you want me to do?"

"No; I guess not to-day. I thought you might look for a rug, but I'd
rather go with you to select it. We'll have to get a new rug for your
father's room, I expect."

"I'm glad you think so, mama. I don't suppose he's ever even noticed it,
but that old rug of his--well, really!"

"I didn't mean for him," her mother explained, thoughtfully. "No; he
don't mind it, and he'd likely make a fuss if we changed it on his
account. No; what I meant--we'll have to put your father in Walter's
room. He won't mind, I don't expect--not much."

"No, I suppose not," Alice agreed, rather sadly. "I heard the bell
awhile ago. Was it somebody about that?"

"Yes; just before I came upstairs. Mrs. Lohr gave him a note to me, and
he was really a very pleasant-looking young man. A VERY pleasant-looking
young man," Mrs. Adams repeated with increased animation and a
thoughtful glance at her daughter. "He's a Mr. Will Dickson; he has a
first-rate position with the gas works, Mrs. Lohr says, and he's fully
able to afford a nice room. So if you and I double up in here, then
with that young married couple in my room, and this Mr. Dickson in your
father's, we'll just about have things settled. I thought maybe I could
make one more place at table, too, so that with the other people from
outside we'd be serving eleven altogether. You see if I have to pay this
cook twelve dollars a week--it can't be helped, I guess--well, one more
would certainly help toward a profit. Of course it's a terribly worrying
thing to see how we WILL come out. Don't you suppose we could squeeze in
one more?"

"I suppose it COULD be managed; yes."

Mrs. Adams brightened. "I'm sure it'll be pleasant having that young
married couple in the house and especially this Mr. Will Dickson. He
seemed very much of a gentleman, and anxious to get settled in good
surroundings. I was very favourably impressed with him in every way; and
he explained to me about his name; it seems it isn't William, it's just
'Will'; his parents had him christened that way. It's curious." She
paused, and then, with an effort to seem casual, which veiled nothing
from her daughter: "It's QUITE curious," she said again. "But it's
rather attractive and different, don't you think?"

"Poor mama!" Alice laughed compassionately. "Poor mama!"

"He is, though," Mrs. Adams maintained. "He's very much of a gentleman,
unless I'm no judge of appearances; and it'll really be nice to have him
in the house."

"No doubt," Alice said, as she opened her door to depart. "I don't
suppose we'll mind having any of 'em as much as we thought we would.
Good-bye."

But her mother detained her, catching her by the arm. "Alice, you do
hate it, don't you!"

"No," the girl said, quickly. "There wasn't anything else to do."

Mrs. Adams became emotional at once: her face cried tragedy, and her
voice misfortune. "There MIGHT have been something else to do! Oh,
Alice, you gave your father bad advice when you upheld him in taking a
miserable little ninety-three hundred and fifty from that old wretch! If
your father'd just had the gumption to hold out, they'd have had to pay
him anything he asked. If he'd just had the gumption and a little manly
COURAGE----"

"Hush!" Alice whispered, for her mother's voice grew louder. "Hush!
He'll hear you, mama."

"Could he hear me too often?" the embittered lady asked. "If he'd
listened to me at the right time, would we have to be taking in boarders
and sinking DOWN in the scale at the end of our lives, instead of going
UP? You were both wrong; we didn't need to be so panicky--that was just
what that old man wanted: to scare us and buy us out for nothing! If
your father'd just listened to me then, or if for once in his life he'd
just been half a MAN----"

Alice put her hand over her mother's mouth. "You mustn't! He WILL hear
you!"

But from the other side of Adams's closed door his voice came
querulously. "Oh, I HEAR her, all right!"

"You see, mama?" Alice said, and, as Mrs. Adams turned away, weeping,
the daughter sighed; then went in to speak to her father.

He was in his old chair by the table, with a pillow behind his head,
but the crocheted scarf and Mrs. Adams's wrapper swathed him no more;
he wore a dressing-gown his wife had bought for him, and was smoking his
pipe. "The old story, is it?" he said, as Alice came in. "The same, same
old story! Well, well! Has she gone?"

"Yes, papa."

"Got your hat on," he said. "Where you going?"

"I'm going down-town on an errand of my own. Is there anything you want,
papa?"

"Yes, there is." He smiled at her. "I wish you'd sit down a while and
talk to me unless your errand----"

"No," she said, taking a chair near him. "I was just going down to see
about some arrangements I was making for myself. There's no hurry."

"What arrangements for yourself, dearie?"

"I'll tell you afterwards--after I find out something about 'em myself."

"All right," he said, indulgently. "Keep your secrets; keep your
secrets." He paused, drew musingly upon his pipe, and shook his head.
"Funny--the way your mother looks at things! For the matter o' that,
everything's pretty funny, I expect, if you stop to think about it. For
instance, let her say all she likes, but we were pushed right spang to
the wall, if J. A. Lamb hadn't taken it into his head to make that
offer for the works; and there's one of the things I been thinking about
lately, Alice: thinking about how funny they work out."

"What did you think about it, papa!"

"Well, I've seen it happen in other people's lives, time and time again;
and now it's happened in ours. You think you're going to be pushed right
up against the wall; you can't see any way out, or any hope at all; you
think you're GONE--and then something you never counted on turns up;
and, while maybe you never do get back to where you used to be, yet
somehow you kind of squirm out of being right SPANG against the wall.
You keep on going--maybe you can't go much, but you do go a little. See
what I mean?"

"Yes. I understand, dear."

"Yes, I'm afraid you do," he said. "Too bad! You oughtn't to understand
it at your age. It seems to me a good deal as if the Lord really meant
for the young people to have the good times, and for the old to have
the troubles; and when anybody as young as you has trouble there's a big
mistake somewhere."

"Oh, no!" she protested.

But he persisted whimsically in this view of divine error: "Yes, it
does look a good deal that way. But of course we can't tell; we're never
certain about anything--not about anything at all. Sometimes I look at
it another way, though. Sometimes it looks to me as if a body's troubles
came on him mainly because he hadn't had sense enough to know how not to
have any--as if his troubles were kind of like a boy's getting kept in
after school by the teacher, to give him discipline, or something or
other. But, my, my! We don't learn easy!" He chuckled mournfully. "Not
to learn how to live till we're about ready to die, it certainly seems
to me dang tough!"

"Then I wouldn't brood on such a notion, papa," she said.

"'Brood?' No!" he returned. "I just kind o' mull it over." He chuckled
again, sighed, and then, not looking at her, he said, "That Mr.
Russell--your mother tells me he hasn't been here again--not since----"

"No," she said, quietly, as Adams paused. "He never came again."

"Well, but maybe----"

"No," she said. "There isn't any 'maybe.' I told him good-bye that
night, papa. It was before he knew about Walter--I told you."

"Well, well," Adams said. "Young people are entitled to their own
privacy; I don't want to pry." He emptied his pipe into a chipped saucer
on the table beside him, laid the pipe aside, and reverted to a former
topic. "Speaking of dying----"

"Well, but we weren't!" Alice protested.

"Yes, about not knowing how to live till you're through living--and THEN
maybe not!" he said, chuckling at his own determined pessimism. "I see
I'm pretty old because I talk this way--I remember my grandmother saying
things a good deal like all what I'm saying now; I used to hear her
at it when I was a young fellow--she was a right gloomy old lady, I
remember. Well, anyhow, it reminds me: I want to get on my feet again as
soon as I can; I got to look around and find something to go into."

Alice shook her head gently. "But, papa, he told you----"

"Never mind throwing that dang doctor up at me!" Adams interrupted,
peevishly. "He said I'd be good for SOME kind of light job--if I could
find just the right thing. 'Where there wouldn't be either any physical
or mental strain,' he said. Well, I got to find something like that.
Anyway, I'll feel better if I can just get out LOOKING for it."

"But, papa, I'm afraid you won't find it, and you'll be disappointed."

"Well, I want to hunt around and SEE, anyhow."

Alice patted his hand. "You must just be contented, papa. Everything's
going to be all right, and you mustn't get to worrying about doing
anything. We own this house; it's all clear--and you've taken care of
mama and me all our lives; now it's our turn."

"No, sir!" he said, querulously. "I don't like the idea of being the
landlady's husband around a boarding-house; it goes against my gizzard.
_I_ know: makes out the bills for his wife Sunday mornings--works with
a screw-driver on somebody's bureau drawer sometimes--'tends the furnace
maybe--one the boarders gives him a cigar now and then. That's a FINE
life to look forward to! No, sir; I don't want to finish as a landlady's
husband!"

Alice looked grave; for she knew the sketch was but too accurately
prophetic in every probability. "But, papa," she said, to console him,
"don't you think maybe there isn't such a thing as a 'finish,' after
all! You say perhaps we don't learn to live till we die but maybe that's
how it is AFTER we die, too--just learning some more, the way we do
here, and maybe through trouble again, even after that."

"Oh, it might be," he sighed. "I expect so."

"Well, then," she said, "what's the use of talking about a 'finish?' We
do keep looking ahead to things as if they'd finish something, but when
we get TO them, they don't finish anything. They're just part of going
on. I'll tell you--I looked ahead all summer to something I was afraid
of, and I said to myself, 'Well, if that happens, I'm finished!' But it
wasn't so, papa. It did happen, and nothing's finished; I'm going on,
just the same only----" She stopped and blushed.

"Only what?" he asked.

"Well----" She blushed more deeply, then jumped up, and, standing before
him, caught both his hands in hers. "Well, don't you think, since we do
have to go on, we ought at least to have learned some sense about how to
do it?"

He looked up at her adoringly.

"What _I_ think," he said, and his voice trembled;--"I think you're
the smartest girl in the world! I wouldn't trade you for the whole
kit-and-boodle of 'em!"

But as this folly of his threatened to make her tearful, she kissed him
hastily, and went forth upon her errand.

Since the night of the tragic-comic dinner she had not seen Russell, nor
caught even the remotest chance glimpse of him; and it was curious that
she should encounter him as she went upon such an errand as now engaged
her. At a corner, not far from that tobacconist's shop she had just left
when he overtook her and walked with her for the first time, she met him
to-day. He turned the corner, coming toward her, and they were face to
face; whereupon that engaging face of Russell's was instantly reddened,
but Alice's remained serene.

She stopped short, though; and so did he; then she smiled brightly as
she put out her hand.

"Why, Mr. Russell!"

"I'm so--I'm so glad to have this--this chance," he stammered. "I've
wanted to tell you--it's just that going into a new undertaking--this
business life--one doesn't get to do a great many things he'd like to. I
hope you'll let me call again some time, if I can."

"Yes, do!" she said, cordially, and then, with a quick nod, went briskly
on.

She breathed more rapidly, but knew that he could not have detected it,
and she took some pride in herself for the way she had met this little
crisis. But to have met it with such easy courage meant to her something
more reassuring than a momentary pride in the serenity she had shown.
For she found that what she had resolved in her inmost heart was now
really true: she was "through with all that!"

She walked on, but more slowly, for the tobacconist's shop was not far
from her now--and, beyond it, that portal of doom, Frincke's Business
College. Already Alice could read the begrimed gilt letters of the
sign; and although they had spelled destiny never with a more painful
imminence than just then, an old habit of dramatizing herself still
prevailed with her.

There came into her mind a whimsical comparison of her fate with that
of the heroine in a French romance she had read long ago and remembered
well, for she had cried over it. The story ended with the heroine's
taking the veil after a death blow to love; and the final scene again
became vivid to Alice, for a moment. Again, as when she had read
and wept, she seemed herself to stand among the great shadows in the
cathedral nave; smelled the smoky incense on the enclosed air, and heard
the solemn pulses of the organ. She remembered how the novice's father
knelt, trembling, beside a pillar of gray stone; how the faithless lover
watched and shivered behind the statue of a saint; how stifled sobs and
outcries were heard when the novice came to the altar; and how a shaft
of light struck through the rose-window, enveloping her in an amber
glow.

It was the vision of a moment only, and for no longer than a moment did
Alice tell herself that the romance provided a prettier way of taking
the veil than she had chosen, and that a faithless lover, shaking with
remorse behind a saint's statue, was a greater solace than one left on a
street corner protesting that he'd like to call some time--if he could!
Her pity for herself vanished more reluctantly; but she shook it off and
tried to smile at it, and at her romantic recollections--at all of them.
She had something important to think of.

She passed the tobacconist's, and before her was that dark entrance to
the wooden stairway leading up to Frincke's Business College--the very
doorway she had always looked upon as the end of youth and the end of
hope.

How often she had gone by here, hating the dreary obscurity of that
stairway; how often she had thought of this obscurity as something lying
in wait to obliterate the footsteps of any girl who should ascend into
the smoky darkness above! Never had she passed without those ominous
imaginings of hers: pretty girls turning into old maids "taking
dictation"--old maids of a dozen different types, yet all looking a
little like herself.

Well, she was here at last! She looked up and down the street quickly,
and then, with a little heave of the shoulders, she went bravely in,
under the sign, and began to climb the wooden steps. Half-way up the
shadows were heaviest, but after that the place began to seem brighter.
There was an open window overhead somewhere, she found; and the steps at
the top were gay with sunshine.

========================================
========================================

HIS OWN PEOPLE

by Booth Tarkington





I. A Change of Lodging

The glass-domed "palm-room" of the Grand Continental Hotel Magnifique in
Rome is of vasty heights and distances, filled with a mellow green light
which filters down languidly through the upper foliage of tall palms,
so that the two hundred people who may be refreshing or displaying
themselves there at the tea-hour have something the look of under-water
creatures playing upon the sea-bed. They appear, however, to be unaware
of their condition; even the ladies, most like anemones of that
gay assembly, do not seem to know it; and when the Hungarian band
(crustacean-like in costume, and therefore well within the picture)
has sheathed its flying tentacles and withdrawn by dim processes, the
tea-drinkers all float out through the doors, instead of bubbling up
and away through the filmy roof. In truth, some such exit as that was
imagined for them by a young man who remained in the aquarium after they
had all gone, late one afternoon of last winter. They had been marvelous
enough, and to him could have seemed little more so had they made such a
departure. He could almost have gone that way himself, so charged was
he with the uplift of his belief that, in spite of the brilliant
strangeness of the hour just past, he had been no fish out of water.

While the waiters were clearing the little tables, he leaned back in his
chair in a content so rich it was nearer ecstasy. He could not bear to
disturb the possession joy had taken of him, and, like a half-awake boy
clinging to a dream that his hitherto unkind sweetheart has kissed him,
lingered on in the enchanted atmosphere, his eyes still full of all they
had beheld with such delight, detaining and smiling upon each revelation
of this fresh memory--the flashingly lovely faces, the dreamily lovely
faces, the pearls and laces of the anemone ladies, the color and
romantic fashion of the uniforms, and the old princes who had been
pointed out to him: splendid old men wearing white mustaches and single
eye-glasses, as he had so long hoped and dreamed they did.

"Mine own people!" he whispered. "I have come unto mine own at last.
Mine own people!" After long waiting (he told himself), he had seen
them--the people he had wanted to see, wanted to know, wanted to
be _of!_ Ever since he had begun to read of the "beau monde" in his
schooldays, he had yearned to know some such sumptuous reality as that
which had come true to-day, when, at last, in Rome he had seen--as he
wrote home that night--"the finest essence of Old-World society mingling
in Cosmopolis."

Artificial odors (too heavy to keep up with the crowd that had
worn them) still hung about him; he breathed them deeply, his eyes
half-closed and his lips noiselessly formed themselves to a quotation
from one of his own poems:

       While trails of scent, like cobweb's films
         Slender and faint and rare,
       Of roses, and rich, fair fabrics,
         Cling on the stirless air,
       The sibilance of voices,
         At a wave of Milady's glove,
       Is stilled--

He stopped short, interrupting himself with a half-cough of laughter as
he remembered the inspiration of these verses. He had written them three
months ago, at home in Cranston, Ohio, the evening after Anna McCord's
"coming-out tea." "Milady" meant Mrs. McCord; she had "stilled" the
conversation of her guests when Mary Kramer (whom the poem called a
"sweet, pale singer") rose to sing Mavourneen; and the stanza closed
with the right word to rhyme with "glove." He felt a contemptuous pity
for his little, untraveled, provincial self of three months ago, if,
indeed, it could have been himself who wrote verses about Anna McCord's
"coming-out tea" and referred to poor, good old Mrs. McCord as "Milady"!

The second stanza had intimated a conviction of a kind which only poets
may reveal:

       She sang to that great assembly,
         They thought, as they praised her tone;
       But she and my heart knew better:
         Her song was for me alone.

He had told the truth when he wrote of Mary Kramer as pale and sweet,
and she was paler, but no less sweet, when he came to say good-by to
her before he sailed. Her face, as it was at the final moment of the
protracted farewell, shone before him very clearly now for a moment:
young, plaintive, white, too lamentably honest to conceal how much her
"God-speed" to him cost her. He came very near telling her how fond of
her he had always been; came near giving up his great trip to remain
with her always.

"Ah!" He shivered as one shivers at the thought of disaster narrowly
averted. "The fates were good that I only came near it!"

He took from his breast-pocket an engraved card, without having to
search for it, because during the few days the card had been in his
possession the action had become a habit.

"Comtesse de Vaurigard," was the name engraved, and below was written in
pencil: "To remember Monsieur Robert Russ Mellin he promise to come to
tea Hotel Magnifique, Roma, at five o'clock Thursday."


There had been disappointment in the first stages of his journey, and
that had gone hard with Mellin. Europe had been his goal so long, and
his hopes of pleasure grew so high when (after his years of saving and
putting by, bit by bit, out of his salary in a real-estate office)
he drew actually near the shining horizon. But London, his first
stopping-place, had given him some dreadful days. He knew nobody, and
had not understood how heavily sheer loneliness--which was something he
had never felt until then--would weigh upon his spirits. In Cranston,
where the young people "grew up together," and where he met a dozen
friends on the street in a half-hour's walk, he often said that he
"liked to be alone with himself." London, after his first excitement in
merely being there, taught him his mistake, chilled him with weeks of
forbidding weather, puzzled and troubled him.

He was on his way to Paris when (as he recorded in his journal) a light
came into his life. This illumination first shone for him by means of
one Cooley, son and inheritor of all that had belonged to the late great
Cooley, of Cooley Mills, Connecticut. Young Cooley, a person of
cheery manners and bright waistcoats, was one of Mellin's few
sea-acquaintances; they had played shuffleboard together on the steamer
during odd half-hours when Mr. Cooley found it possible to absent
himself from poker in the smoking-room; and they encountered each other
again on the channel boat crossing to Calais.

_"Hey!"_ was Mr. Cooley's lively greeting. "I'm meetin' lots of people
I know to-day. You runnin' over to Paris, too? Come up to the boat-deck
and meet the Countess de Vaurigard."

"Who?" said Mellin, red with pleasure, yet fearing that he did not hear
aright.

"The Countess de Vaurigard. Queen! met her in London. Sneyd introduced
me to her. You remember Sneyd on the steamer? Baldish Englishman--red
nose--doesn't talk much--younger brother of Lord Rugden, so he says.
Played poker some. Well, _yes!_"

"I saw him. I didn't meet him."

"You didn't miss a whole lot. Fact is, before we landed I almost had him
sized up for queer, but when he introduced me to the Countess I saw my
mistake. He must be the real thing. _She_ certainly is! You come along
up and see."

So Mellin followed, to make his bow before a thin, dark, charmingly
pretty young woman, who smiled up at him from her deck-chair through
an enhancing mystery of veils; and presently he found himself sitting
beside her. He could not help trembling slightly at first, but he would
have giving a great deal if, by some miraculous vision, Mary Kramer and
other friends of his in Cranston could have seen him engaged in what he
thought of as "conversational badinage" with the Comtesse de Vaurigard.

Both the lady and her name thrilled him. He thought he remembered the
latter in Froissart: it conjured up "baronial halls" and "donjon keeps,"
rang resonantly in his mind like "Let the portcullis fall!" At home he
had been wont to speak of the "oldest families in Cranston," complaining
of the invasions of "new people" into the social territory of the
McCords and Mellins and Kramers--a pleasant conception which the
presence of a De Vaurigard revealed to him as a petty and shameful
fiction; and yet his humility, like his little fit of trembling, was
of short duration, for gay geniality of Madame de Vaurigard put him
amazingly at ease.

At Calais young Cooley (with a matter-of-course air, and not seeming to
feel the need of asking permission) accompanied her to a compartment,
and Mellin walked with them to the steps of the coach, where he paused,
murmuring some words of farewell.

Madame de Vaurigard turned to him with a prettily assumed dismay.

"What! You stay at Calais?" she cried, pausing with one foot on the step
to ascend. "Oh! I am sorry for you. Calais is ter-rible!"

"No. I am going on to Paris."

"So? You have frien's in another coach which you wish to be wiz?"

"No, no, indeed," he stammered hastily.

"Well, my frien'," she laughed gayly, "w'y don' you come wiz us?"

Blushing, he followed Cooley into the coach, to spend five happy hours,
utterly oblivious of the bright French landscape whirling by outside the
window.

There ensued a month of conscientious sightseeing in Paris, and that
unfriendly city afforded him only one glimpse of the Countess. She
whizzed by him in a big touring-car one afternoon as he stood on an
"isle of safety" at the foot of the Champs Elysees. Cooley was driving
the car. The raffish, elderly Englishman (whose name, Mellin knew,
was Sneyd) sat with him, and beside Madame de Vaurigard in the tonneau
lolled a gross-looking man--unmistakably an American--with a jovial,
red, smooth-shaven face and several chins. Brief as the glimpse was,
Mellin had time to receive a distinctly disagreeable impression of this
person, and to wonder how Heaven could vouchsafe the society of Madame
de Vaurigard to so coarse a creature.

All the party were dressed as for the road, gray with dust, and to all
appearances in a merry mood. Mellin's heart gave a leap when he saw that
the Countess recognized him. Her eyes, shining under a white veil, met
his for just the instant before she was quite by, and when the machine
had passed a little handkerchief waved for a moment from the side of the
tonneau where she sat.

With that he drew the full breath of Romance.

He had always liked to believe that _"grandes dames"_ leaned back in
the luxurious upholstery of their victorias, landaulettes, daumonts or
automobiles with an air of inexpressible though languid hauteur. The
Newport letter in the Cranston Telegraph often referred to it. But
the gayety of that greeting from the Countess' little handkerchief
was infinitely refreshing, and Mellin decided that animation was more
becoming than hauteur--even to a _"grande dame."_

That night he wrote (almost without effort) the verses published in the
Cranston Telegraph two weeks later. They began:

       _Marquise, ma belle_, with your kerchief of
         lace
       Awave from your flying car,
       And your slender hand--

The hand to which he referred was the same which had arrested his
gondola and his heart simultaneously, five days ago, in Venice. He was
on his way to the station when Madame de Vaurigard's gondola shot out
into the Grand Canal from a narrow channel, and at her signal both boats
paused.

"Ah! but you fly away!" she cried, lifting her eyebrows mournfully,
as she saw the steamer-trunk in his gondola. "You are goin' return to
America?"

"No. I'm just leaving for Rome."

"Well, in three day' _I_ am goin' to Rome!" She clapped her hands
lightly and laughed. "You know this is three time' we meet jus' by
chance, though that second time it was so quick--_pff_! like that--we
didn't talk much togezzer! Monsieur Mellin," she laughed again, "I think
we mus' be frien's. Three time'--an' we are both goin' to Rome! Monsieur
Mellin, you believe in _Fate_?"

With a beating heart he did.

Thence came the invitation to meet her at the Magnifique for tea, and
the card she scribbled for him with a silver pencil. She gave it with
the prettiest gesture, leaning from her gondola to his as they parted.
She turned again, as the water between them widened, and with her "_Au
revoir_" offered him a faintly wistful smile to remember.

All the way to Rome the noises of the train beat out the measure of his
Parisian verses:

       _Marquise, ma belle_, with your kerchief of
         lace
       Awave from your flying car--

He came out of his reverie with a start. A dozen men and women, dressed
for dinner, with a gold-fish officer or two among them, swam leisurely
through the aquarium on their way to the hotel restaurant. They were the
same kind of people who had sat at the little tables for tea--people of
the great world, thought Mellin: no vulgar tourists or "trippers" among
them; and he shuddered at the remembrance of his pension (whither it was
time to return) and its conscientious students of Baedeker, its dingy
halls and permanent smell of cold food. Suddenly a high resolve lit his
face: he got his coat and hat from the brass-and-blue custodian in the
lobby, and without hesitation entered the "bureau."

"I 'm not quite satisfied where I am staying--where I'm stopping, that
is," he said to the clerk. "I think I'll take a room here."

"Very well, sir. Where shall I send for your luggage?"

"I shall bring it myself," replied Mellin coldly, "in my cab."

He did not think it necessary to reveal the fact that he was staying at
one of the cheaper pensions; and it may be mentioned that this reticence
(as well as the somewhat chilling, yet careless, manner of a gentleman
of the "great world" which he assumed when he returned with his trunk
and bag) very substantially increased the rate put upon the room he
selected at the Magnifique. However, it was with great satisfaction
that he found himself installed in the hotel, and he was too recklessly
exhilarated, by doing what he called the "right thing," to waste any
time wondering what the "right thing" would do to the diminishing pad of
express checks he carried in the inside pocket of his waistcoat.

"Better live a fortnight like a gentleman," he said, as he tossed his
shoes into a buhl cabinet, "than vegetate like a tourist for a year."

He had made his entrance into the "great world" and he meant to hold his
place in it as one "to the manor born." Its people should not find
him lacking: he would wear their manner and speak their language--no
gaucherie should betray him, no homely phrase escape his lips.

This was the chance he had always hoped for, and when he fell asleep
in his gorgeous, canopied bed, his soul was uplifted with happy
expectations.





II. Music on the Pincio

The following afternoon found him still in that enviable condition as
he stood listening to the music on the Pincian Hill. He had it of rumor
that the Fashion of Rome usually took a turn there before it went to
tea, and he had it from the lady herself that Madame de Vaurigard would
be there. Presently she came, reclining in a victoria, the harness of
her horses flashing with gold in the sunshine. She wore a long ermine
stole; her hat was ermine; she carried a muff of the same fur, and
Mellin thought it a perfect finish to the picture that a dark gentleman
of an appearance most distinguished should be sitting beside her. An
Italian noble, surely!

He saw the American at once, nodded to him and waved her hand. The
victoria went on a little way beyond the turn of the drive, drew out of
the line of carriages, and stopped.

"Ah, Monsieur Mellin," she cried, as he came up, "I am glad! I was so
foolish yesterday I didn' give you the address of my little apartment
an' I forgot to ask you what is your hotel. I tol' you I would come here
for my drive, but still I might have lost you for ever. See what many
people! It is jus' that Fate again."

She laughed, and looked to the Italian for sympathy in her kindly
merriment. He smiled cordially upon her, then lifted his hat and smiled
as cordially upon Mellin.

"I am so happy to fin' myself in Rome that I forget"--Madame de
Vaurigard went on--"_ever'sing!_ But now I mus' make sure not to lose
you. What is your hotel?"

"Oh, the Magnifique," Mellin answered carelessly. "I suppose everybody
that one knows stops there. One does stop there, when one is in Rome,
doesn't one?"

"Everybody go' there for tea, and to eat, sometime, but to _stay_--ah,
that is for the American!" she laughed. "That is for you who are all so
abomin-_ab_-ly rich!" She smiled to the Italian again, and both of them
smiled beamingly on Mellin.

"But that isn't always our fault, is it?" said Mellin easily.

"Aha! You mean you are of the new generation, of the yo'ng American' who
come over an' try to spen' these immense fortune'--those _'pile'_--your
father or your gran-father make! I know quite well. Ah?"

"Well," he hesitated, smiling. "I suppose it does look a little by way
of being like that."

"Wicked fellow!" She leaned forward and tapped his shoulder chidingly
with two fingers. "I know what you wish the mos' in the worl'--you
wish to get into mischief. That is it! No, sir, I will jus' take you in
han'!"

"When will you take me?" he asked boldly.

At this, the pleasant murmur of laughter--half actual and half
suggested--with which she underlined the conversation, became loud and
clear, as she allowed her vivacious glance to strike straight into his
upturned eyes, and answered:

"As long as a little turn roun' the hill, _now_. Cavaliere Corni--"

To Mellin's surprise and delight the Italian immediately descended from
the victoria without the slightest appearance of irritation; on
the contrary, he was urbane to a fine degree, and, upon Madame de
Vaurigard's formally introducing him to Mellin, saluted the latter with
grave politeness, expressing in good English a hope that they might meet
often. When the American was installed at the Countess' side she spoke
to the driver in Italian, and they began to move slowly along the ilex
avenue, the coachman reining his horses to a walk.

"You speak Italian?" she inquired.

"Oh, not a great deal more than a smattering," he replied airily--a
truthful answer, inasmuch as a vocabulary consisting simply of _"quanty
costy"_ and _"troppo"_ cannot be seriously considered much more than a
smattering. Fortunately she made no test of his linguistic attainment,
but returned to her former subject.

"Ah, yes, all the worl' to-day know' the new class of American," she
said--"_your_ class. Many year' ago we have another class which Europe
didn' like. That was when the American was ter-ri-ble! He was the--what
is that you call?--oh, yes; he 'make himself,' you say: that is it. My
frien', he was abominable! He brag'; he talk' through the nose; yes,
and he was niggardly, rich as he was! But you, you yo'ng men of the new
generation, you are gentlemen of the idleness; you are aristocrats, with
polish an' with culture. An' yet you throw your money away--yes, you
throw it to poor Europe as if to a beggar!"

"No, no," he protested with an indulgent laugh which confessed that the
truth was really "Yes, yes."

"Your smile betray' you!" she cried triumphantly. "More than jus' bein'
guilty of that fault, I am goin' to tell you of others. You are not the
ole-time--what is it you say?--Ah, yes, the 'goody-goody.' I have
heard my great American frien', Honor-able Chanlair Pedlow, call it the
Sonday-school. Is it not? Yes, you are not the Sonday-school yo'ng men,
you an' your class!"

"No," he said, bestowing a long glance upon a stout nurse who
was sitting on a bench near the drive and attending to twins in a
perambulator. "No, we're not exactly dissenting parsons."

"Ah, no!" She shook her head at him prettily. "You are wicked! You are
up into all the mischief! Have I not hear what wild sums you risk at
your game, that poker? You are famous for it."

"Oh, we play," he admitted with a reckless laugh, "and I suppose we do
play rather high."

"High!" she echoed. "_Souzands!_ But that is not all. Ha, ha, ha,
naughty one! Have I not observe' you lookin' at these pretty creature',
the little contadina-girl, an' the poor ladies who have hire' their
carriages for two lire to drive up and down the Pincio in their bes'
dress an' be admire' by the yo'ng American while the music play'? Which
one I wonder, is it on whose wrist you would mos' like to fasten a
bracelet of diamon's? Wicked, I have watch' you look at them--"

"No, no," he interrupted earnestly. "I have not once looked away from
you, I _could n't_." Their eyes met, but instantly hers were lowered;
the bright smile with which she had been rallying him faded and there
was a pause during which he felt that she had become very grave. When
she spoke, it was with a little quaver, and the controlled pathos of
her voice was so intense that it evoked a sympathetic catch in his own
throat.

"But, my frien', if it should be that I cannot wish you to look so at
me, or to speak so to me?"

"I beg your pardon!" he exclaimed, almost incoherently. "I didn't mean
to hurt your feelings. I wouldn't do anything you'd think ungentlemanly
for the world!"

Her eyes lifted again to his with what he had no difficulty in
recognizing as a look of perfect trust; but, behind that, he perceived a
darkling sadness.

"I know it is true," she murmured--"I know. But you see there are time'
when a woman has sorrow--sorrow of one kind--when she mus' be sure that
there is only--only rispec' in the hearts of her frien's."

With that, the intended revelation was complete, and the young man
understood, as clearly as if she had told him in so many words, that she
was not a widow and that her husband was the cause of her sorrow. His
quickened instinct marvelously divined (or else it was conveyed to him
by some intangible method of hers) that the Count de Vaurigard was a
very bad case, but that she would not divorce him.

"I know," he answered, profoundly touched. "I understand."

In silent gratitude she laid her hand for a second upon his sleeve. Then
her face brightened, and she said gayly:

"But we shall not talk of _me!_ Let us see how we can keep you out of
mischief at leas' for a little while. I know very well what you will do
to-night: you will go to Salone Margherita an' sit in a box like all the
wicked Americans--"

"No, indeed, I shall not!"

"Ah, yes, you will!" she laughed. "But until dinner let me keep you from
wickedness. Come to tea jus' wiz me, not at the hotel, but at the little
apartment I have taken, where it is quiet. The music is finish', an' all
those pretty girl' are goin' away, you see. I am not selfish if I take
you from the Pincio now. You will come?"





III. Glamour

It was some fair dream that would be gone too soon, he told himself, as
they drove rapidly through the twilight streets, down from the Pincio
and up the long slope of the Quirinal. They came to a stop in the gray
courtyard of a palazzo, and ascended in a sleepy elevator to the fifth
floor. Emerging, they encountered a tall man who was turning away
from the Countess' door, which he had just closed. The landing was not
lighted, and for a moment he failed to see the American following Madame
de Vaurigard.

"Eow, it's you, is it," he said informally. "Waitin' a devil of a long
time for you. I've gawt a message for you. _He's_ comin'. He writes that
Cooley--"

_"Attention!"_ she interrupted under her breath, and, stepping forward
quickly, touched the bell. "I have brought a frien' of our dear, droll
Cooley with me to tea. Monsieur Mellin, you mus' make acquaintance with
Monsieur Sneyd. He is English, but we shall forgive him because he is a
such ole frien' of mine."

"Ah, yes," said Mellin. "Remember seeing you on the boat, running across
the pond."

"Yes, ev coss," responded Mr. Sneyd cordially. "I wawsn't so fawchnit
as to meet you, but dyuh eold Cooley's talked ev you often. Heop I sh'll
see maw of you hyuh."

A very trim, very intelligent-looking maid opened the door, and the
two men followed Madame de Vaurigard into a square hall, hung with
tapestries and lit by two candles of a Brobdingnagian species Mellin had
heretofore seen only in cathedrals. Here Mr. Sneyd paused.


"I weon't be bawthring you," he said. "Just a wad with you, Cantess, and
I'm off."

The intelligent-looking maid drew back some heavy curtains leading to a
salon beyond the hall, and her mistress smiled brightly at Mellin.

"I shall keep him to jus' his one word," she said, as the young man
passed between the curtains.

It was a nobly proportioned room that he entered, so large that, in
spite of the amount of old furniture it contained, the first impression
it gave was one of spaciousness. Panels of carved and blackened wood
lined the walls higher than his head; above them, Spanish leather
gleamed here and there with flickerings of red and gilt, reflecting
dimly a small but brisk wood fire which crackled in a carved stone
fireplace. His feet slipped on the floor of polished tiles and wandered
from silky rugs to lose themselves in great black bear skins as in
unmown sward. He went from the portrait of a "cinquecento" cardinal to
a splendid tryptich set over a Gothic chest, from a cabinet sheltering
a collection of old glass to an Annunciation by an unknown Primitive.
He told himself that this was a "room in a book," and became dreamily
assured that he was a man in a book. Finally he stumbled upon something
almost grotesquely out of place: a large, new, perfectly-appointed
card-table with a sliding top, a smooth, thick, green cover and patent
compartments.

He halted before this incongruity, regarding it with astonishment.
Then a light laugh rippled behind him, and he turned to find Madame de
Vaurigard seated in a big red Venetian chair by the fire.

She wore a black lace dress, almost severe in fashion, which gracefully
emphasized her slenderness; and she sat with her knees crossed, the
firelight twinkling on the beads of her slipper, on her silken instep,
and flashing again from the rings upon the slender fingers she had
clasped about her knee.

She had lit a thin, long Russian cigarette.

"You see?" she laughed. "I mus' keep up with the time. I mus' do
somesing to hold my frien's about me. Even the ladies like to play
now--that breedge w'ich is so tiresome--they play, play, play! And
you--you Americans, you refuse to endure us if we do not let you play.
So for my frien's when they come to my house--if they wish it, there
is that foolish little table. I fear"--she concluded with a bewitching
affectation of sadness--"they prefer that to talkin' wiz me."

"You know that couldn't be so, _Comtesse_," he said. "I would rather
talk to you than--than--"

"Ah, yes, you say so, Monsieur!" She looked at him gravely; a little
sigh seemed to breathe upon her lips; she leaned forward nearer the
fire, her face wistful in the thin, rosy light, and it seemed to him he
had never seen anything so beautiful in his life.

He came across to her and sat upon a stool at her feet. "On my soul," he
began huskily, "I swear--"

She laid her finger on her lips, shaking her head gently; and he was
silent, while the intelligent maid--at that moment entering--arranged a
tea-table and departed.

"American an' Russian, they are the worse," said the Countess
thoughtfully, as she served him with a generous cup, laced with rum,
"but the American he is the bes' to play _wiz_." Mellin found her
irresistible when she said "wiz."

"Why is that?"

"Oh, the Russian play high, yes--but the American"--she laughed
delightedly and stretched her arms wide--"he make' it all a joke! He is
beeg like his beeg country. If he win or lose, he don' care! Ah, I mus'
tell you of my great American frien', that Honor-able Chanlair Pedlow,
who is comin' to Rome. You have heard of Honor-able Chanlair Pedlow in
America?"

"I remember hearing that name."

"Ah, I shall make you know him. He is a man of distinction; he did sit
in your Chamber of Deputies--what you call it?--yes, your Con-gress. He
is funny, eccentric--always he roar like a lion--Boum!--but so simple,
so good, a man of such fine heart--so lovable!"

"I'll be glad to meet him," said Mellin coldly.

"An', oh, yes, I almos' forget to tell you," she went on, "your frien',
that dear Cooley, he is on his way from Monte Carlo in his automobile. I
have a note from him to-day."

"Good sort of fellow, little Cooley, in his way," remarked her companion
graciously. "Not especially intellectual or that, you know. His father
was a manufacturer chap, I believe, or something of the sort. I suppose
you saw a lot of him in Paris?"

"Eh, I thought he is dead!" cried Madame de Vaurigard.

"The father is. I mean, little Cooley."

"Oh, yes," she laughed softly. "We had some gay times, a little party
of us. We shall be happy here, too; you will see. I mus' make a little
dinner very soon, but not unless you will come. You will?"

"Do you want me very much?"

He placed his empty cup on the table and leaned closer to her, smiling.
She did not smile in response; instead, her eyes fell and there was the
faintest, pathetic quiver of her lower lip.

"Already you know that," she said in a low voice.

She rose quickly, turned away from him and walked across the room to the
curtains which opened upon the hall. One of these she drew back.

"My frien', you mus' go now," she said in the same low voice. "To-morrow
I will see you again. Come at four an' you shall drive with me--but
not--not more--_now_. Please!"

She stood waiting, not looking at him, but with head bent and eyes
veiled. As he came near she put out a limp hand. He held it for a few
seconds of distinctly emotional silence, then strode swiftly into the
hall.

She immediately let the curtain fall behind him, and as he got his
hat and coat he heard her catch her breath sharply with a sound like a
little sob.

Dazed with glory, he returned to the hotel. In the lobby he approached
the glittering concierge and said firmly:

"What is the Salone Margherita? Cam you get me a box there to-night?"





IV. Good Fellowship

He confessed his wickedness to Madame de Vaurigard the next afternoon
as they drove out the Appian Way. "A fellow must have just a bit of
a fling, you know," he said; "and, really, Salone Margherita isn't so
tremendously wicked."

She shook her head at him in friendly raillery. "Ah, that may be;
but how many of those little dancing-girl' have you invite to supper
afterward?"

This was a delicious accusation, and though he shook his head in
virtuous denial he was before long almost convinced that he _had_ given
a rather dashing supper after the vaudeville and had _not_ gone quietly
back to the hotel, only stopping by the way to purchase an orange and a
pocketful of horse-chestnuts to eat in his room.

It was a happy drive for Robert Russ Mellin, though not happier than
that of the next day. Three afternoons they spent driving over the
Campagna, then back to Madame de Vaurigard's apartment for tea by the
firelight, till the enraptured American began to feel that the dream in
which he had come to live must of happy necessity last forever.

On the fourth afternoon, as he stepped out of the hotel elevator into
the corridor, he encountered Mr. Sneyd.

"Just stottin', eh?" said the Englishman, taking an envelope from his
pocket. "Lucky I caught you. This is for you. I just saw the Cantess
and she teold me to give it you. Herry and read it and kem on t' the
Amairikin Baw. Chap I want you to meet. Eold Cooley's thyah too. Gawt in
with his tourin'-caw at noon."

     "You will forgive, dear friend," wrote Madame de Vaurigard,
     "if I ask you that we renounce our drive to-day.  You see, I
     wish to have that little dinner to-night and must make
     preparation. Honorable Chandler Pedlow arrived this morning
     from Paris and that droll Mr. Cooley I have learn is
     coincidentally arrived also.  You see I think it would be
     very pleasant to have the dinner to welcome these friends on
     their arrival.  You will come surely--or I shall be so truly
     miserable.  You know it perhaps too well!  We shall have a
     happy evening if you come to console us for renouncing our
     drive.  A thousand of my prettiest wishes for you.

     "Helene."


The signature alone consoled him. To have that note from her, to own it,
was like having one of her gloves or her fan. He would keep it forever,
he thought; indeed, he more than half expressed a sentiment to that
effect in the response which he wrote in the aquarium, while Sneyd
waited for him at a table near by. The Englishman drew certain
conclusions in regard to this reply, since it permitted a waiting
friend to consume three long tumblers of brandy-and-soda before it was
finished. However, Mr. Sneyd kept his reflections to himself, and, when
the epistle had been dispatched by a messenger, took the American's
arm and led him to the "American Bar" of the hotel, a region hitherto
unexplored by Mellin.

Leaning against the bar were Cooley and the man whom Mellin had seen
lolling beside Madame de Vaurigard in Cooley's automobile in Paris,
the same gross person for whom he had instantly conceived a strong
repugnance, a feeling not at once altered by a closer view.

Cooley greeted Mellin uproariously and Mr. Sneyd introduced the fat man.
"Mr. Mellin, the Honorable Chandler Pedlow," he said; nor was the shock
to the first-named gentleman lessened by young Cooley's adding, "Best
feller in the world!"

Mr. Pedlow's eyes were sheltered so deeply beneath florid rolls of flesh
that all one saw of them was an inscrutable gleam of blue; but, small
though they were, they were not shifty, for they met Mellin's with a
squareness that was almost brutal. He offered a fat paw, wet by a full
glass which he set down too suddenly on the bar.

"Shake," he said, in a loud and husky voice, "and be friends! Tommy," he
added to the attendant, "another round of Martinis."

"Not for me," said Mellin hastily. "I don't often--"

"_What!_" Mr. Pedlow roared suddenly. "Why, the first words Countess de
Vaurigard says to me this afternoon was, 'I want you to meet my young
friend Mellin,' she says; 'the gamest little Indian that ever come down
the pike! He's game,' she says--'he'll see you _all_ under the table!'
That's what the smartest little woman in the world, the Countess de
Vaurigard, says about you."

This did not seem very closely to echo Madame de Vaurigard's habit of
phrasing, but Mellin perceived that it might be only the fat man's way
of putting things.

"You ain't goin' back on _her_, are you?" continued Mr. Pedlow. "You
ain't goin' to make her out a liar? I tell you, when the Countess de
Vaurigard says a man 's game, he is game!" He laid his big paw cordially
on Mellin's shoulder and smiled, lowering his voice to a friendly
whisper. "And I'll bet ten thousand dollars right out of my pants pocket
you _are_ game, too!"

He pressed a glass into the other's hand. Smiling feebly, the
embarrassed Mellin accepted it.

"Make it four more, Tommy," said Pedlow. "And here," continued
this thoughtful man, "I don't go bandying no ladies' names around a
bar-room--that ain't my style--but I do want to propose a toast. I won't
name her, but you all know who I mean."

"Sure we do," interjected Cooley warmly. "Queen! That's what she is."

"Here's _to_ her," continued Mr. Pedlow. "Here's to her--brightest and
best--and no heel-taps! And now let's set down over in the corner and
take it easy. It ain't hardly five o'clock yet, and we can set here
comfortable, gittin' ready for dinner, until half-past six, anyway."

Whereupon the four seated themselves about a tabouret in the corner,
and, a waiter immediately bringing them four fresh glasses from the bar,
Mellin began to understand what Mr. Pedlow meant by "gittin' ready for
dinner." The burden of the conversation was carried almost entirely
by the Honorable Chandler, though Cooley, whose boyish face was deeply
flushed, now and then managed to interrupt by talking louder than the
fat man. Mr. Sneyd sat silent.

"Good ole Sneyd," said Pedlow. "_He_ never talks, jest saws wood. Only
Britisher I ever liked. Plays cards like a goat."

"He played a mighty good game on the steamer," said Cooley warmly.

"I don't care what he did on the steamer, he played like a goat the
only time _I_ ever played with him. You know he did. I reckon you was
_there!_"

"Should say I _was_ there! He played mighty well--"

"Like a goat," reiterated the fat man firmly.

"Nothing of the sort. You had a run of hands, that was all. Nobody can
go against the kind of luck you had that night; and you took it away
from Sneyd and me in rolls. But we'll land you pretty soon, won't we,
ole Sneydie?"

"We sh'll have a shawt at him, at least," said the Englishman.

"Perhaps he won't want us to try," young Cooley pursued derisively.
"Perhaps he thinks I play like a goat, too!"

Mr. Pedlow threw back his head and roared. "Give me somep'n easy! You
don't know no more how to play a hand of cards than a giraffe does. I'll
throw in all of my Blue Gulch gold-stock--and it's worth eight hundred
thousand dollars if it's worth a cent--I'll put it up against that tin
automobile of yours, divide chips even and play you freeze-out for it.
You play cards? Go learn hop-scotch!"

"You wait!" exclaimed the other indignantly. "Next time we play we'll
make you look so small you'll think you're back in Congress!"

At this Mr. Pedlow again threw back his head and roared, his vast body
so shaken with mirth that the glass he held in his hand dropped to the
floor.

"There," said Cooley, "that's the second Martini you've spilled. You're
two behind the rest of us."

"What of it?" bellowed the fat man. "There's plenty comin', ain't there?
Four more, Tommy, and bring cigars. Don't take a cent from none of these
Indians. Gentlemen, your money ain't good here. I own this bar, and this
is my night."

Mellin had begun to feel at ease, and after a time--as they continued to
sit--he realized that his repugnance to Mr. Pedlow was wearing off; he
felt that there must be good in any one whom Madame de Vaurigard liked.
She had spoken of Pedlow often on their drives; he was an "eccentric,"
she said, an "original." Why not accept her verdict? Besides, Pedlow
was a man of distinction and force; he had been in Congress; he was a
millionaire; and, as became evident in the course of a long recital of
the principal events of his career, most of the great men of the time
were his friends and proteges.

"'Well, Mack,' says I one day when we were in the House together"--(thus
Mr. Pedlow, alluding to the late President McKinley)--"'Mack,' says I,
'if you'd drop that double standard business'--he was waverin' toward
silver along then--'I don't know but I might git the boys to nominate
you fer President.' 'I'll think it over,' he says--'I'll think it over.'
You remember me tellin' you about that at the time, don't you, Sneyd,
when you was in the British Legation at Washin'ton?"

"Pahfictly," said Mr. Sneyd, lighting a cigar with great calmness.

"'Yes,' I says, 'Mack,' I says, 'if you'll drop it, I'll turn in and git
you the nomination.'"

"Did he drop it?" asked Mellin innocently.

Mr. Pedlow leaned forward and struck the young man's knee a resounding
blow with the palm of his hand.

"He was _nominated_, wasn't he?"

"Time to dress," announced Mr. Sneyd, looking at his watch.

"One more round first," insisted Cooley with prompt vehemence. "Let's
finish with our first toast again. Can't drink that too often."

This proposition was received with warmest approval, and they drank
standing. "Brightest and best!" shouted Mr. Pedlow.

"Queen! What she is!" exclaimed Cooley.

_"Ma belle Marquise!"_ whispered Mellin tenderly, as the rim touched his
lips.

A small, keen-faced man, whose steady gray eyes were shielded by
tortoise-rimmed spectacles, had come into the room and now stood quietly
at the bar, sipping a glass of Vichy. He was sharply observant of the
party as it broke up, Pedlow and Sneyd preceding the younger men to
the corridor, and, as the latter turned to follow, the stranger stepped
quickly forward, speaking Cooley's name.

"What's the matter?"

"Perhaps you don't remember me. My name's Cornish. I'm a newspaper man,
a correspondent." (He named a New York paper.) "I'm down here to get
a Vatican story. I knew your father for a number of years before his
death, and I think I may claim that he was a friend of mine."

"That's good," said the youth cordially. "If I hadn't a fine start
already, and wasn't in a hurry to dress, we'd have another."

"You were pointed out to me in Paris," continued Cornish. "I found
where you were staying and called on you the next day, but you had just
started for the Riviera." He hesitated, glancing at Mellin. "Can you
give me half a dozen words with you in private?"

"You'll have to excuse me, I'm afraid. I've only got about ten minutes
to dress. See you to-morrow."

"I should like it to be as soon as possible," the journalist said
seriously. "It isn't on my own account, and I--"

"All right. You come to my room at ten t'morrow morning?"

"Well, if you can't possibly make it to-night," said Cornish
reluctantly. "I wish--"

"Can't possibly."

And Cooley, taking Mellin by the arm, walked rapidly down the corridor.
"Funny ole correspondent," he murmured. "What do _I_ know about the
Vatican?"




V. Lady Mount Rhyswicke

The four friends of Madame de Vaurigard were borne to her apartment from
the Magnifique in Cooley's big car. They sailed triumphantly down and up
the hills in a cool and bracing air, under a moon that shone as brightly
for them as it had for Caesar, and Mellin's soul was buoyant within him.
He thought of Cranston and laughed aloud. What would Cranston say if it
could see him in a sixty-horse touring-car, with two millionaires and an
English diplomat, brother of an earl, and all on the way to dine with a
countess? If Mary Kramer could see him!... Poor Mary Kramer! Poor little
Mary Kramer!

A man-servant took their coats in Madame de Vaurigard's hall, where
they could hear through the curtains the sound of one or two voices in
cheerful conversation.

Sneyd held up his hand.

"Listen," he said. "Shawly, that isn't Lady Mount-Rhyswicke's voice! She
couldn't be in Reom--always a Rhyswicke Caws'l for Decembah. By Jev, it
is!"

"Nothin' of the kind," said Pedlow. "I know Lady Mount-Rhyswicke as well
as I know you. I started her father in business when he was clerkin'
behind a counter in Liverpool. I give him the money to begin on. 'Make
good,' says I, 'that's all. Make good!' And he done it, too. Educated
his daughter fit fer a princess, married her to Mount-Rhyswicke, and
when he died left her ten million dollars if he left her a cent! I know
Madge Mount-Rhyswicke and that ain't her voice."

A peal of silvery laughter rang from the other side of the curtain.

"They've heard you," said Cooley.

"An' who could help it?" Madame de Vaurigard herself threw back the
curtains. "Who could help hear our great, dear, ole lion? How he roar'!"

She wore a white velvet "princesse" gown of a fashion which was a shade
less than what is called "daring," with a rope of pearls falling from
her neck and a diamond star in her dark hair. Standing with one arm
uplifted to the curtains, and with the mellow glow of candles and
firelight behind her, she was so lovely that both Mellin and Cooley
stood breathlessly still until she changed her attitude. This she did
only to move toward them, extending a hand to each, letting Cooley seize
the right and Mellin the left.

Each of them was pleased with what he got, particularly Mellin. "The
left is nearer the heart," he thought.

She led them through the curtains, not withdrawing her hands until they
entered the salon. She might have led them out of her fifth-story window
in that fashion, had she chosen.

"My two wicked boys!" she laughed tenderly. This also pleased both of
them, though each would have preferred to be her only wicked boy--a
preference which, perhaps, had something to do with the later events of
the evening.

"Aha! I know you both; before twenty minute' you will be makin' love to
Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. Behol' those two already! An' they are only ole
frien's."

She pointed to Pedlow and Sneyd. The fat man was shouting at a woman in
pink satin, who lounged, half-reclining, among a pile of cushions upon a
divan near the fire; Sneyd gallantly bending over her to kiss her hand.

"It is a very little dinner, you see," continued the hostess, "only
seven, but we shall be seven time' happier."

The seventh person proved to be the Italian, Corni, who had surrendered
his seat in Madame de Vaurigard's victoria to Mellin on the Pincio. He
presently made his appearance followed by a waiter bearing a tray of
glasses filled with a pink liquid, while the Countess led her two wicked
boys across the room to present them to Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. Already
Mellin was forming sentences for his next letter to the Cranston
Telegraph: "Lady Mount-Rhyswicke said to me the other evening,
while discussing the foreign policy of Great Britain, in Comtesse de
Vaurigard's salon..." "An English peeress of pronounced literary acumen
has been giving me rather confidentially her opinion of our American
poets..."

The inspiration of these promising fragments was a large, weary-looking
person, with no lack of powdered shoulder above her pink bodice and a
profusion of "undulated" hair of so decided a blond that it might have
been suspected that the decision had lain with the lady herself.

"Howjdo," she said languidly, when Mellin's name was pronounced to her.
"There's a man behind you tryin' to give you something to drink."

"Who was it said these were Martinis?" snorted Pedlow. "They've got
perfumery in 'em."

"Ah, what a bad lion it is!" Madame de Vaurigard lifted both hands in
mock horror. "Roar, lion, roar!" she cried. "An' think of the emotion of
our good Cavaliere Corni, who have come an hour early jus' to make them
for us! I ask Monsieur Mellin if it is not good."

"And I'll leave it to Cooley," said Pedlow. "If he can drink all of his
I'll eat crow!"

Thus challenged, the two young men smilingly accepted glasses from the
waiter, and lifted them on high.

"Same toast," said Cooley. "Queen!"

_"A la belle Marquise!"_

Gallantly they drained the glasses at a gulp, and Madame de Vaurigard
clapped her hands.

"Bravo!" she cried. "You see? Corni and I, we win."

"Look at their faces!" said Mr. Pedlow, tactlessly drawing attention to
what was, for the moment, an undeniably painful sight. "Don't tell me an
Italian knows how to make a good Martini!"

Mellin profoundly agreed, but, as he joined the small procession to the
Countess' dinner-table, he was certain that an Italian at least knew how
to make a strong one.

The light in the dining-room was provided by six heavily-shaded candles
on the table; the latter decorated with delicate lines of orchids. The
chairs were large and comfortable, covered with tapestry; the glass was
old Venetian, and the servants, moving like useful ghosts in the shadow
outside the circle of mellow light, were particularly efficient in the
matter of keeping the wine-glasses full. Madame de Vaurigard had put
Pedlow on her right, Cooley on her left, with Mellin directly opposite
her, next to Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. Mellin was pleased, because he
thought he would have the Countess's face toward him. Anything would
have pleased him just then.

"This is the kind of table _everybody_ ought to have," he observed to
the party in general, as he finished his first glass of champagne. "I'm
going to have it like this at my place in the States--if I ever decide
to go back. I'll have six separate candlesticks like this, not a
candelabrum, and that will be the only light in the room. And I'll never
have anything but orchids on my table--"

"For my part," Lady Mount-Rhyswicke interrupted in the loud, tired
monotone which seemed to be her only manner of speaking, "I like more
light. I like all the light that's goin'."

"If Lady Mount-Rhyswicke sat at _my_ table," returned Mellin dashingly,
"I should wish all the light in the world to shine upon so happy an
event."

"Hear the man!" she drawled. "He's proposing to me. Thinks I'm a widow."

There was a chorus of laughter, over which rose the bellow of Mr.
Pedlow.

"'He's game!' she says--and _ain't_ he?"

Across the table Madame de Vaurigard's eyes met Mellin's with a mocking
intelligence so complete that he caught her message without need of the
words she noiselessly formed with her lips: "I tol' you you would be
making love to her!"

He laughed joyously in answer. Why shouldn't he flirt with Lady
Mount-Rhyswicke? He was thoroughly happy; his Helene, his _belle
Marquise_, sat across the table from him sending messages to him with
her eyes. He adored her, but he liked Lady Mount-Rhyswicke--he liked
everybody and everything in the world. He liked Pedlow particularly, and
it no longer troubled him that the fat man should be a friend of Madame
de Vaurigard. Pedlow was a "character" and a wit as well. Mellin laughed
heartily at everything the Honorable Chandler Pedlow said.

"This is life," remarked the young man to his fair neighbor.

"What is? Sittin' round a table, eatin' and drinkin'?"

"Ah, lovely skeptic!" She looked at him strangely, but he continued with
growing enthusiasm: "I mean to sit at such a table as this, with such
a chef, with such wines--to know one crowded hour like this is to live!
Not a thing is missing; all this swagger furniture, the rich atmosphere
of smartness about the whole place; best of all, the company. It's a
great thing to have the _real_ people around you, the right sort, you
know, socially; people you'd ask to your own table at home. There are
only seven, but every one _distingue_, every one--"

She leaned both elbows on the table with her hands palm to palm, and,
resting her cheek against the back of her left hand, looked at him
steadily.

"And you--are you distinguished, too?"

"Oh, I wouldn't be much known over _here_," he said modestly.

"Do you write poetry?"

"Oh, not professionally, though it is published. I suppose"--he sipped
his champagne with his head a little to one side as though judging its
quality--"I suppose I 've been more or less a dilettante. I've knocked
about the world a good bit."

"Helene says you're one of these leisure American billionaires like Mr.
Cooley there," she said in her tired voice.

"Oh, none of us are really quite billionaires." He laughed
deprecatingly.

"No, I suppose not--not really. Go on and tell me some more about life
and this distinguished company."

"Hey, folks!" Mr. Pedlow's roar broke in upon this dialogue. "You two
are gittin' mighty thick over there. We're drinking a toast, and you'll
have to break away long enough to join in."

"Queen! That's what she is!" shouted Cooley.

Mellin lifted his glass with the others and drank to Madame de
Vaurigard, but the woman at his side did not change her attitude and
continued to sit with her elbows on the table, her cheek on the back of
her hand, watching him thoughtfully.





VI. Rake's Progress

Many toasts were uproariously honored, the health of each member of the
party in turn, then the country of each: France and England first,
out of courtesy to the ladies, Italy next, since this beautiful and
extraordinary meeting of distinguished people (as Mellin remarked in a
short speech he felt called upon to make) took place in that wonderful
land, then the United States. This last toast the gentlemen felt it
necessary to honor by standing in their chairs.

[_Song: The Star-Spangled Banner--without words--by Mr. Cooley and
chorus._]

When the cigars were brought, the ladies graciously remained, adding
tiny spirals of smoke from their cigarettes to the layers of blue haze
which soon overhung the table. Through this haze, in the gentle light
(which seemed to grow softer and softer) Mellin saw the face of Helene
de Vaurigard, luminous as an angel's. She _was_ an angel--and the others
were gods. What could be more appropriate in Rome? Lady Mount-Rhyswicke
was Juno, but more beautiful. For himself, he felt like a god too,
Olympic in serenity.

He longed for mysterious dangers. How debonair he would stroll among
them! He wished to explore the unknown; felt the need of a splendid
adventure, and had a happy premonition that one was coming nearer and
nearer. He favored himself with a hopeful vision of the apartment on
fire, Robert Russ Mellin smiling negligently among the flames and Madame
de Vaurigard kneeling before him in adoration. Immersed in delight, he
puffed his cigar and let his eyes rest dreamily upon the face of Helene.
He was quite undisturbed by an argument, more a commotion than a debate,
between Mr. Pedlow and young Cooley. It ended by their rising, the
latter overturning a chair in his haste.

"I don't know the rudiments, don't I!" cried the boy. "You wait! Ole
Sneydie and I'll trim you down! Corni says he'll play, too. Come on,
Mellin."

"I won't go unless Helene goes," said Mellin. "What are you going to do
when you get there?"

"Alas, my frien'!" exclaimed Madame de Vaurigard, rising, "is it not
what I tol' you? Always you are never content wizout your play. You come
to dinner an' when it is finish' you play, play, play!"

"_Play_?" He sprang to his feet. "Bravo! That's the very thing I've been
wanting to do. I knew there was something I wanted to do, but I couldn't
think what it was."

Lady Mount-Rhyswicke followed the others into the salon, but Madame de
Vaurigard waited just inside the doorway for Mellin.

"_High_ play!" he cried. "We must play high! I won't play any other
way.--I want to play _high_!"

"Ah, wicked one! What did I tell you?"

He caught her hand. "And you must play too, Helene."

"No, no," she laughed breathlessly.

"Then you'll watch. Promise you'll watch me. I won't let you go till you
promise to watch me."

"I shall adore it, my frien'!"

"Mellin," called Cooley from the other room. "You comin' or not?"

"Can't you see me?" answered Mellin hilariously, entering with Madame de
Vaurigard, who was rosy with laughter. "Peculiar thing to look at a man
and not see him."

Candles were lit in many sconces on the walls, and the card-table had
been pushed to the centre of the room, little towers of blue, white
and scarlet counters arranged upon it in orderly rows like miniature
castles.

"Now, then," demanded Cooley, "are the ladies goin' to play?"

"Never!" cried Madame de Vaurigard.

"All right," said the youth cheerfully; "you can look on. Come and sit
by me for a mascot."

"You'll need a mascot, my boy!" shouted Pedlow. "That's right, though;
take her."

He pushed a chair close to that in which Cooley had already seated
himself, and Madame de Vaurigard dropped into it, laughing. "Mellin,
you set there," he continued, pushing the young man into a seat opposite
Cooley. "We'll give both you young fellers a mascot." He turned to Lady
Mount-Rhyswicke, who had gone to the settee by the fire. "Madge, you
come and set by Mellin," he commanded jovially. "Maybe he'll forget you
ain't a widow again."

"I don't believe I care much about bein' anybody's mascot to-night," she
answered. There was a hint of anger in her tired monotone.

"What?" He turned from the table and walked over to the fireplace. "I
reckon I didn't understand you," he said quietly, almost gently. "You
better come, hadn't you?"

She met his inscrutable little eyes steadily. A faint redness slowly
revealed itself on her powdered cheeks; then she followed him back to
the table and took the place he had assigned to her at Mellin's elbow.

"I'll bank," said Pedlow, taking a chair between Cooley and the Italian,
"unless somebody wants to take it off my hands. Now, what are we
playing?"

"Pokah," responded Sneyd with mild sarcasm.

"Bravo!" cried Mellin. "That's _my_ game. Ber-_ravo!_"

This was so far true: it was the only game upon which he had ever
ventured money; he had played several times when the wagers were allowed
to reach a limit of twenty-five cents.

"You know what I mean, I reckon," said Pedlow. "I mean what we are
playin' _fer_?"

"Twenty-five franc limit," responded Cooley authoritatively. "Double for
jacks. Play two hours and settle when we quit."

Mellin leaned back in his chair. "You call that high?" he asked, with a
sniff of contempt. "Why not double it?"

The fat man hammered the table with his fist delightedly. "'He's game,'
she says. 'He's the gamest little Indian ever come down the big road!'
she says. Was she right? What? Maybe she wasn't! We'll double it before
very long, my boy; this'll do to start on. There." He distributed
some of the small towers of ivory counters and made a memorandum in a
notebook. "There's four hundred apiece."

"That all?" inquired Mellin, whereupon Mr. Pedlow uproariously repeated
Madame de Vaurigard's alleged tribute.

As the game began, the intelligent-looking maid appeared from the
dining-room, bearing bottles of whisky and soda, and these she deposited
upon small tables at the convenience of the players, so that at the
conclusion of the first encounter in the gentle tournament there was
material for a toast to the gallant who had won it.

"Here's to the gamest Indian of us all," proposed the fat man. "Did you
notice him call me with a pair of tens? And me queen-high!"

Mellin drained a deep glass in honor of himself. "On my soul, Chan'
Pedlow, I think you're the bes' fellow in the whole world," he said
gratefully. "Only trouble with you--you don't want to play high enough."

He won again and again, adding other towers of counters to his original
allotment, so that he had the semblance of a tiny castle. When the cards
had been dealt for the fifth time he felt the light contact of a slipper
touching his foot under the table.

That slipper, he decided (from the nature of things) could belong to
none other than his Helene, and even as he came to this conclusion the
slight pressure against his foot was gently but distinctly increased
thrice. He pressed the slipper in return with his shoe, at the same time
giving Madame de Vaurigard a look of grateful surprise and tenderness,
which threw her into a confusion so evidently genuine that for an
unworthy moment he had a jealous suspicion she had meant the little
caress for some other.

It was a disagreeable thought, and, in the hope of banishing it, he
refilled his glass; but his mood had begun to change. It seemed to him
that Helene was watching Cooley a great deal too devotedly. Why had she
consented to sit by Cooley, when she had promised to watch Robert Russ
Mellin? He observed the pair stealthily.

Cooley consulted her in laughing whispers upon every discard, upon every
bet. Now and then, in their whisperings, Cooley's hair touched hers;
sometimes she laid her hand on his the more conveniently to look at his
cards. Mellin began to be enraged. Did she think that puling milksop
had as much as a shadow of the daring, the devilry, the carelessness of
consequences which lay within Robert Russ Mellin? "Consequences?" What
were they? There were no such things! She would not look at him--well,
he would make her! Thenceforward he raised every bet by another to the
extent of the limit agreed upon.

Mr. Cooley was thoroughly happy. He did not resemble Ulysses; he would
never have had himself bound to the mast; and there were already sounds
of unearthly sweetness in his ears. His conferences with his lovely
hostess easily consoled him for his losses. In addition, he was
triumphing over the boaster, for Mr. Pedlow, with a very ill grace
and swearing (not under his breath), was losing too. The Countess,
reiterating for the hundredth time that Cooley was a "wicked one,"
sweetly constituted herself his cup-bearer; kept his glass full and
brought him fresh cigars.

Mellin dealt her furious glances, and filled his own glass, for Lady
Mount-Rhyswicke plainly had no conception of herself in the role of a
Hebe. The hospitable Pedlow, observing this neglect, was moved to chide
her.

"Look at them two cooing doves over there," he said reproachfully, a
jerk of his bulbous thumb indicating Madame de Vaurigard and her young
protege. "Madge, can't you do nothin' fer our friend the Indian? Can't
you even help him to sody?"

"Oh, perhaps," she answered with the slightest flash from her tired
eyes. Then she nonchalantly lifted Mellin's replenished glass from the
table and drained it. This amused Cooley.

"I like that!" he chuckled. "That's one way of helpin' a feller! Helene,
can you do any better than that?"

"Ah, this dear, droll Cooley!"

The tantalizing witch lifted the youth's glass to his lips and let
him drink, as a mother helps a thirsty child. "_Bebe!_" she laughed
endearingly.

As the lovely Helene pronounced that word, Lady Mount-Rhyswicke was
leaning forward to replace Mellin's empty glass upon the table.

"I don't care whether you're a widow or not!" he shouted furiously. And
he resoundingly kissed her massive shoulder.

There was a wild shout of laughter; even the imperturbable Sneyd (who
had continued to win steadily) wiped tears from his eyes, and Madame
de Vaurigard gave way to intermittent hysteria throughout the ensuing
half-hour.

For a time Mellin sat grimly observing this inexplicable merriment with
a cold smile.

"Laugh on!" he commanded with bitter satire, some ten minutes after play
had been resumed--and was instantly obeyed.

Whereupon his mood underwent another change, and he became convinced
that the world was a warm and kindly place, where it was good to live.
He forgot that he was jealous of Cooley and angry with the Countess; he
liked everybody again, especially Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. "Won't you
sit farther forward?" he begged her earnestly; "so that I can see your
beautiful golden hair?"

He heard but dimly the spasmodic uproar that followed. "Laugh on!" he
repeated with a swoop of his arm. "I don't care! Don't you care either,
Mrs. Mount-Rhyswicke. Please sit where I can see your beautiful golden
hair. Don't be afraid I'll kiss you again. I wouldn't do it for the
whole world. You're one of the noblest women I ever knew. I feel that's
true. I don't know how I know it, but I know it. Let 'em laugh!"

After this everything grew more and more hazy to him. For a time there
was, in the centre of the haze, a nimbus of light which revealed his
cards to him and the towers of chips which he constantly called for and
which as constantly disappeared--like the towers of a castle in Spain.
Then the haze thickened, and the one thing clear to him was a phrase
from an old-time novel he had read long ago:

"Debt of honor."

The three words appeared to be written in flames against a background of
dense fog. A debt of honor was as promissory note which had to be
paid on Monday, and the appeal to the obdurate grandfather--a peer of
England, the Earl of Mount-Rhyswicke, in fact--was made at midnight,
Sunday. The fog grew still denser, lifted for a moment while he wrote
his name many times on slips of blue paper; closed down once more, and
again lifted--out-of-doors this time--to show him a lunatic ballet of
moons dancing streakily upon the horizon.

He heard himself say quite clearly, "All right, old man, thank you;
but don't bother about me," to a pallid but humorous Cooley in evening
clothes; the fog thickened; oblivion closed upon him for a seeming
second....




VII. The Next Morning

Suddenly he sat up in bed in his room at the Magnifique, gazing upon a
disconsolate Cooley in gray tweeds who sat heaped in a chair at the foot
of the bed with his head in his hands.

Mellin's first sensation was of utter mystification; his second was more
corporeal: the consciousness of physical misery, of consuming fever, of
aches that ran over his whole body, converging to a dreadful climax in
his head, of a throat so immoderately partched it seemed to crackle, and
a thirst so avid it was a passion. His eye fell upon a carafe of water
on a chair at his bedside; he seized upon it with a shaking hand and
drank half its contents before he set it down. The action attracted
his companion's attention and he looked up, showing a pale and haggard
countenance.

"How do you feel?" inquired Cooley with a wan smile.

Mellin's head dropped back upon the pillow and he made one or two
painful efforts to speak before he succeeded in finding a ghastly
semblance of his voice.

"I thought I was at Madame de Vaurigard's."

"You were," said the other, adding grimly: "We both were."

"But that was only a minute ago."

"It was six hours ago. It's goin' on ten o'clock in the morning."

"I don't understand how that can be. How did I get here?"

"I brought you. I was pretty bad, but you--I never saw anything like
you! From the time you kissed Lady Mount-Rhyswicke--"

Mellin sat bolt upright in bed, staring wildly. He began to tremble
violently.

"Don't you remember that?" asked Cooley.

Suddenly he did. The memory of it came with inexorable clarity, he
crossed forearms over his horror-stricken face and fell back upon his
pillow.

"Oh," he gasped. "Un-speakable! Un-speakable!"

"Lord! Don't worry about that! I don't think she minded."

"It's the thought of Madame de Vaurigard--it kills me! The horror of
it--that I should do such a thing in her house! She'll never speak to
me again, she oughtn't to; she ought to send her groom to beat me! You
can't think what I've lost--"

"Can't I!" Mr. Cooley rose from his chair and began to pace up and down
the chamber. "I can guess to within a thousand francs of what _I_'ve
lost! I had to get the hotel to cash a check on New York for me this
morning. I've a habit of carrying all my money in bills, and a fool
trick, too. Well, I'm cured of it!"

"Oh, if it were only a little _money_ and nothing else that I'd lost!
The money means nothing." Mellin choked.

"I suppose you're pretty well fixed. Well, so am I," Cooley shook his
head, "but money certainly means something to me!"

"It wouldn't if you'd thrown away the most precious friendship of your
life."

"See here," said Cooley, halting at the foot of the bed and looking at
his stricken companion from beneath frowning brows, "I guess I can see
how it is with you, and I'll tell you frankly it's been the same with
me. I never met such a fascinating woman in my life: she throws a
reg'ler ole-fashioned _spell_ over you! Now I hate to say it, but I
can't help it, because it plain hits me in the face every time I think
of it; the truth is--well, sir, I'm afraid you and me have had little
red soldier-coats and caps put on us and strings tied to our belts while
we turned somersets for the children."

"I don't understand. I don't know what you're talking about."

"No? It seems to get more and more simple to me. I've been thinking it
all over and over again. I can't _help_ it! See here: I met Sneyd on the
steamer, without any introduction. He sort of warmed into the game in
the smoking-room, and he won straight along the trip. He called on me in
London and took me to meet the Countess at her hotel. We three went
to the theatre and lunch and so forth a few times; and when I left for
Paris she turned up on the way: that's when you met her. Couple of days
later, Sneyd came over, and he and the Countess introduced me to dear
ole friend Pedlow. So you see, I don't rightly even know who any of 'em
really _are_: just took 'em for granted, as it were. We had lots of fun,
I admit that, honkin' about in my car. We only played cards once, and
that was in her apartment the last night before I left Paris, but that
one time Pedlow won fifteen thousand francs from me. When I told them my
plans, how I was goin' to motor down to Rome, she said _she_ would be in
Rome--and, I tell you, I was happy as a poodle-pup about it. Sneyd said
he might be in Rome along about then, and open-hearted ole Pedlow said
not to be surprised if _he_ turned up, too. Well, he did, almost to the
minute, and in the meantime she'd got _you_ hooked on, fine and tight."

"I don't understand you," Mellin lifted himself painfully on an elbow.
"I don't know what you're getting at, but it seems to me that you're
speaking disrespectfully of an angel that I've insulted, and I--"

"Now see here, Mellin, I'll tell you something." The boy's white face
showed sudden color and there was a catch in his voice. "I was--I've
been mighty near in _love_ with that woman! But I've had a kind of a
shock; I've got my common-sense back, and I'm _not_, any more. I don't
know exactly how much money I had, but it was between thirty-five and
thirty-eight thousand francs, and Sneyd won it all after we took off the
limit--over seven thousand dollars--at her table last night. Putting two
and two together, honestly it looks bad. It looks _mighty_ bad! Now, I'm
pretty well fixed, and yesterday I didn't care whether school kept or
not, but seven thousand dollars is real money to anybody! My old man
worked pretty hard for his first seven thousand, I guess, and"--he
gulped--"he'd think a lot of me for lettin' go of it the way I did last
night, _wouldn't_ he? You never _see_ things like this till the next
morning! And you remember that other woman sat where she could see every
hand _you_ drew, and the Countess--"

"Stop!" Mellin flung one arm up violently, striking the headboard with
his knuckles. "I won't hear a syllable against Madame de Vaurigard!"
Young Cooley regarded him steadily for a moment. "Have you remembered
yet," he said slowly, "how much _you_ lost last night?"

"I only remember that I behaved like an unspeakable boor in the presence
of the divinest creature that ever--"

Cooley disregarded the outburst, and said:

"When we settled, you had a pad of express company checks worth six
hundred dollars. You signed all of 'em and turned 'em over to Sneyd with
three one-hundred-lire bills, which was all the cash you had with you.
Then you gave him your note for twelve thousand francs to be paid within
three days. You made a great deal of fuss about its being a 'debt of
honor.'" He paused. "You hadn't remembered that, had you?"

Mellin had closed his eyes. He lay quite still and made no answer.

"No, I'll bet you hadn't," said Cooley, correctly deducing the fact.
"You're well off, or you wouldn't be at this hotel, and, for all I know,
you may be fixed so you won't mind your loss as much as I do mine; but
it ought to make you kind of charitable toward my suspicions of Madame
de Vaurigard's friends."

The six hundred dollars in express company checks and the three
hundred-lire bills were all the money the unhappy Mellin had in the
world, and until he could return to Cranston and go back to work in the
real-estate office again, he had no prospect of any more. He had not
even his steamer ticket. In the shock of horror and despair he whispered
brokenly:

"I don't care if they 're the worst people in the world, they're better
than I am!"

The other's gloom cleared a little at this. "Well, you _have_ got it!"
he exclaimed briskly. "You don't know how different you'll feel after a
long walk in the open air." He looked at his watch. "I've got to go and
see what that newspaper-man, Cornish, wants; it's ten o'clock. I'll be
back after a while; I want to reason this out with you. I don't deny but
it's possible I'm wrong; anyway, you think it over while I'm gone. You
take a good hard think, will you?"

As he closed the door, Mellin slowly drew the coverlet over his head. It
was as if he covered the face of some one who had just died.




VIII. What Cornish Knew


Two hours passed before young Cooley returned. He knocked twice without
a reply; then he came in.

The coverlet was still over Mellin's head.

"Asleep?" asked Cooley.

"No."

The coverlet was removed by a shaking hand.

"Murder!" exclaimed Cooley sympathetically, at sight of the other's
face. "A night off certainly does things to you! Better let me get you
some--"

"No. I'll be all right--after while."

"Then I'll go right ahead with our little troubles. I've decided to
leave for Paris by the one-thirty and haven't got a whole lot of time.
Cornish is here with me in the hall: he's got something to say that's
important for you to hear, and I'm goin' to bring him right in." He
waved his hand toward the door, which he had left open. "Come along,
Cornish. Poor ole Mellin'll play Du Barry with us and give us a morning
leevy while he listens in a bed with a palanquin to it. Now let's draw
up chairs and be sociable."

The journalist came in, smoking a long cigar, and took the chair the
youth pushed toward him; but, after a twinkling glance through his big
spectacles at the face on the pillow, he rose and threw the cigar out of
the window.

"Go ahead," said Cooley. "I want you to tell him just what you told me,
and when you're through I want to see if he doesn't think I'm Sherlock
Holmes' little brother."

"If Mr. Mellin does not feel too ill," said Cornish dryly; "I know how
painful such cases sometimes--"

"No." Mellin moistened his parched lips and made a pitiful effort to
smile. "I'll be all right very soon."

"I am very sorry," began the journalist, "that I wasn't able to get a
few words with Mr. Cooley yesterday evening. Perhaps you noticed that I
tried as hard as I could, without using actual force"--he laughed--"to
detain him."

"You did your best," agreed Cooley ruefully, "and I did my worst. Nobody
ever listens till the next day!"

"Well, I'm glad no vital damage was done, anyway," said Cornish. "It
would have been pretty hard lines if you two young fellows had been
poor men, but as it is you're probably none the worse for a lesson like
this."

"You seem to think seven thousand dollars is a joke," remarked Cooley.

Cornish laughed again. "You see, it flatters me to think my time was
so valuable that a ten minutes' talk with me would have saved so much
money."

"I doubt it," said Cooley. "Ten to one we'd neither of us have believed
you--last night!"

"I doubt it, too." Cornish turned to Mellin. "I hear that you, Mr.
Mellin, are still of the opinion that you were dealing with straight
people?"

Mellin managed to whisper "Yes."

"Then," said Cornish, "I'd better tell you just what I know about it,
and you can form your own opinion as to whether I do know or not. I have
been in the newspaper business on this side for fifteen years, and my
headquarters are in Paris, where these people are very well known. The
man who calls himself 'Chandler Pedlow' was a faro-dealer for Tom Stout
in Chicago when Stout's place was broken up, a good many years ago.
There was a real Chandler Pedlow in Congress from a California district
in the early nineties, but he is dead. This man's name is Ben Welch:
he's a professional swindler; and the Englishman, Sneyd, is another; a
quiet man, not so well known as Welch, and not nearly so clever, but a
good 'feeder' for him. The very attractive Frenchwoman who calls herself
'Comtesse de Vaurigard' is generally believed to be Sneyd's wife, though
I could not take the stand on that myself. Welch is the brains of the
organization: you mightn't think it, but he's a very brilliant
man--he might have made a great reputation in business if he'd been
straight--and, with this woman's help, he's carried out some really
astonishing schemes. His manner is clumsy; _he_ knows that, bless you,
but it's the only manner he can manage, and she is so adroit she can
sugar-coat even such a pill as that and coax people to swallow it. I
don't know anything about the Italian who is working with them down
here. But a gang of the Welch-Vaurigard-Sneyd type has tentacles all
over the Continent; such people are in touch with sharpers everywhere,
you see."

"Yes," Cooley interpolated, "and with woolly little lambkins, too."

"Well," chuckled Cornish, "that's the way they make their living, you
know."

"Go on and tell him the rest of it," urged Cooley.

"About Lady Mount-Rhyswicke," said Cornish, "it seems strange enough,
but she has a perfect right to her name. She is a good deal older than
she looks, and I've heard she used to be remarkably beautiful. Her third
husband was Lord George Mount-Rhyswicke, a man who'd been dropped from
his clubs, and he deserted her in 1903, but she has not divorced him. It
is said that he is somewhere in South America; however, as to that I do
not know."

Mr. Cornish put the very slightest possible emphasis on the word "know,"
and proceeded:

"I've heard that she is sincerely attached to him and sends him money
from time to time, when she has it--though that, too, is third-hand
information. She has been _declasse_ ever since her first divorce. That
was a 'celebrated case,' and she's dropped down pretty far in the world,
though I judge she's a good deal the best of this crowd. Exactly what
her relations to the others are I don't know, but I imagine that she's
pretty thick with 'em."

"Just a little!" exclaimed Cooley. "She sits behind one of the lambkins
and Helene behind the other while they get their woolly wool clipped. I
suppose the two of 'em signaled what was in every hand we held, though
I'm sure they needn't have gone to the trouble! Fact is, I don't see why
they bothered about goin' through the form of playin' cards with us
at all. They could have taken it away without that! Whee!" Mr. Cooley
whistled loud and long. "And there's loads of wise young men on the
ocean now, hurryin' over to take our places in the pens. Well, they can
have _mine_! Funny, Mellin: nobody would come up to you or me in the
Grand Central in New York and try to sell us greenbacks just as good
as real. But we come over to Europe with our pockets full o' money and
start in to see the Big City with Jesse James in a false mustache on one
arm, and Lucresha Borgy, under an assumed name, on the other!"

"I am afraid I agree with you," said Cornish; "though I must say that,
from all I hear, Madame de Vaurigard might put an atmosphere about a
thing which would deceive almost any one who wasn't on his guard. When a
Parisienne of her sort is clever at all she's irresistible."

"I believe you," Cooley sighed deeply.

"Yesterday evening, Mr. Mellin," continued the journalist, "when I saw
the son of my old friend in company with Welch and Sneyd, of course I
tried to warn him. I've often seen them in Paris, though I believe they
have no knowledge of me. As I've said, they are notorious, especially
Welch, yet they have managed, so far, to avoid any difficulty with the
Paris police, and, I'm sorry to say, it might be hard to actually prove
anything against them. You couldn't _prove_ that anything was crooked
last night, for instance. For that matter, I don't suppose you want to.
Mr. Cooley wishes to accept his loss and bear it, and I take it that
that will be your attitude, too. In regard to the note you gave Sneyd,
I hope you will refuse to pay; I don't think that they would dare press
the matter."

"Neither do I," Mr. Cooley agreed. "I left a silver cigarette-case at
the apartment last night, and after talkin' to Cornish a while ago, I
sent my man for it with a note to her that'll make 'em all sit up and
take some notice. The gang's all there together, you can be sure. I
asked for Sneyd and Pedlow in the office and found they'd gone out early
this morning leavin' word they wouldn't be back till midnight. And, see
here; I know I'm easy, but somehow I believe you're even a softer piece
o' meat than I am. I want you to promise me that whatever happens you
won't pay that I O U."

Mellin moistened his lips in vain. He could not answer.

"I want you to promise me not to pay it," repeated Cooley earnestly.

"I promise," gasped Mellin.

"You won't pay it no matter what they do?"

"No."

This seemed to reassure Mr. Cooley.

"Well," he said, "I've got to hustle to get my car shipped and make the
train. Cornish has finished his job down here and he's goin' with me. I
want to get out. The whole thing's left a mighty bad taste in my mouth,
and I'd go crazy if I didn't get away from it. Why don't you jump into
your clothes and come along, too?"

"I can't."

"Well," said the young man with a sympathetic shake of the head, "you
certainly look sick. It may be better if you stay in bed till evening:
a train's a mighty mean place for the day after. But I wouldn't hang
around here too long. If you want money, all you have to do is to ask
the hotel to cash a check on your home bank; they're always glad to
do that for Americans." He turned to the door. "Mr. Cornish, if you're
goin' to help me about shipping the car, I'm ready."

"So am I. Good-by, Mr. Mellin."

"Good-by," Mellin said feebly--"and thank you."

Young Cooley came back to the bedside and shook the other's feverish
hand. "Good-by, ole man. I'm awful sorry it's all happened, but I'm glad
it didn't cost you quite as much money as it did me. Otherwise I expect
it's hit us about equally hard. I wish--I wish I could find a _nice
one_"--the youth gulped over something not unlike a sob--"as fascinatin'
as her!"

Most people have had dreams of approaching dangers in the path of which
their bodies remained inert; when, in spite of the frantic wish to fly,
it was impossible to move, while all the time the horror crept closer
and closer. This was Mellin's state as he saw the young man going. It
was absolutely necessary to ask Cooley for help, to beg him for a loan.
But he could not.

He saw Cooley's hand on the doorknob; saw the door swing open.

"Good-by, again," Cooley said; "and good luck to you!"

Mellin's will strove desperately with the shame that held him silent.

The door was closing.

"Oh, Cooley," called Mellin hoarsely.

"Yes. What?"

"J-j-just good-by," said Mellin.

And with that young Cooley was gone.





IX. Expiation

A multitudinous clangor of bells and a dozen neighboring chimes rang
noon; then the rectangular oblongs of hot sunlight that fell from the
windows upon the carpet of Mellin's room began imperceptibly to shift
their angles and move eastward. From the stone pavement of the street
below came the sound of horses pawing and the voices of waiting cabmen;
then bells again, and more bells; clamoring the slow and cruel afternoon
into the past. But all was silent in Mellin's room, save when, from time
to time, a long, shuddering sigh came from the bed.

The unhappy young man had again drawn the coverlet over his head, but
not to sleep: it was more like a forlorn and desperate effort to hide,
as if he crept into a hole, seeking darkness to cover the shame and fear
that racked his soul. For though his shame had been too great to let him
confess to young Cooley and ask for help, his fear was as great as
his shame; and it increased as the hours passed. In truth his case was
desperate. Except the people who had stripped him, Cooley was the
only person in all of Europe with whom he had more than a very casual
acquaintance. At home, in Cranston, he had no friends susceptible
to such an appeal as it was vitally necessary for him to make. His
relatives were not numerous: there were two aunts, the widows of his
father's brothers, and a number of old-maid cousins; and he had an uncle
in Iowa, a country minister whom he had not seen for years. But he could
not cable to any of these for money; nor could he quite conjure his
imagination into picturing any of them sending it if he did. And even to
cable he would have to pawn his watch, which was an old-fashioned one of
silver and might not bring enough to pay the charges.

He began to be haunted by fragmentary, prophetic visions--confused but
realistic in detail, and horridly probable--of his ejectment from the
hotel, perhaps arrest and trial. He wondered what they did in Italy to
people who "beat" hotels; and, remembering what some one had told him
of the dreadfulness of Italian jails, convulsive shudderings seized upon
him.

The ruddy oblongs of sunlight crawled nearer to the east wall of the
room, stretching themselves thinner and thinner, until finally they
were not there at all, and the room was left in deepening grayness.
Carriages, one after the other, in unintermittent succession, rumbled
up to the hotel-entrance beneath the window, bringing goldfish for
the Pincio and the fountains of Villa Borghese. Wild strains from the
Hungarian orchestra, rhapsodical twankings of violins, and the runaway
arpeggios of a zither crazed with speed-mania, skipped along the
corridors and lightly through Mellin's door. In his mind's eye he saw
the gay crowd in the watery light, the little tables where only
five days ago he had sat with the loveliest of all the anemone-like
ladies....

The beautifully-dressed tea-drinkers were there now, under the green
glass dome, prattling and smiling, those people he had called his own.
And as the music sounded louder, faster, wilder and wilder with the
gipsy madness--then in that darkening bedchamber his soul became
articulate in a cry of humiliation--

"God in His mercy forgive me, how raw I was!"


A vision came before his closed eyes; the maple-bordered street in
Cranston, the long, straight, wide street where Mary Kramer lived; a
summer twilight; Mary in her white muslin dress on the veranda steps,
and a wistaria vine climbing the post beside her, half-embowering her.
How cool and sweet and good she looked! How dear--and how _kind_!--she
had always been to him.


Dusk stole through the windows: the music ceased and the tea-hour was
over. The carriages were departing, bearing the gay people who went
away laughing, calling last words to one another, and, naturally, quite
unaware that a young man, who, five days before, had adopted them and
called them "his own," was lying in a darkened room above them, and
crying like a child upon his pillow.





X. The Cab at the Corner

A ten o'clock, a page bearing a card upon a silver tray knocked upon the
door, and stared with wide-eyed astonishment at the disordered gentleman
who opened it.

The card was Lady Mount-Rhyswicke's. Underneath the name was written:

If you are there will you give me a few minutes? I am waiting in a cab
at the next corner by the fountain.

Mellin's hand shook as he read. He did not doubt that she came as an
emissary; probably they meant to hound him for payment of the note
he had given Sneyd, and at that thought he could have shrieked with
hysterical laughter.

"Do you speak English?" he asked.

"Spik little. Yes."

"Who gave you this card?"

"Coachman," said the boy. "He wait risposta."

"Tell him to say that I shall be there in five minutes."

"Fi' minute. Yes. Good-by."

Mellin was partly dressed--he had risen half an hour earlier and
had been distractedly pacing the floor when the page knocked--and he
completed his toilet quickly. He passed down the corridors, descended by
the stairway (feeling that to use the elevator would be another abuse of
the confidence of the hotel company) and slunk across the lobby with the
look and the sensations of a tramp who knows that he will be kicked into
the street if anybody catches sight of him.

A closed cab stood near the fountain at the next corner. There was a
trunk on the box by the driver, and the roof was piled with bags and
rugs. He approached uncertainly.

"Is--is this--is it Lady Mount-Rhyswicke?" he stammered pitifully.

She opened the door.

"Yes. Will you get in? We'll just drive round the block if you don't
mind. I'll bring you back here in ten minutes." And when he had
tremulously complied, "_Avanti, cocchiere_," she called to the driver,
and the tired little cab-horse began to draw them slowly along the
deserted street.

Lady Mount-Rhyswicke maintained silence for a time, while her companion
waited, his heart pounding with dreadful apprehensions. Finally she gave
a short, hard laugh and said:

"I saw your face by the corner light. Been havin' a hard day of it?"

The fear of breaking down kept him from answering. He gulped painfully
once or twice, and turned his face away from her. Light enough from a
streetlamp shone in for her to see.

"I was rather afraid you'd refuse," she said seriously. "Really, I
wonder you were willin' to come!"

"I was--I was afraid not to." He choked out the confession with the
recklessness of final despair.

"So?" she said, with another short laugh. Then she resumed her even,
tired monotone: "Your little friend Cooley's note this morning gave us
all a rather fair notion as to what you must be thinkin' of us. He seems
to have found a sort of walkin' 'Who's-Who-on-the-Continent' since last
night. Pity for some people he didn't find it before! I don't think I'm
sympathetic with your little Cooley. I 'guess,' as you Yankees say, 'he
can stand it.' But"--her voice suddenly became louder--"I'm not in the
business of robbin' babies and orphans, no, my dear friends, nor of
helpin' anybody else to rob them either!--Here you are!"

She thrust into his hand a small packet, securely wrapped in paper and
fastened with rubber bands. "There's your block of express checks for
six hundred dollars and your I O U to Sneyd with it. Take better care of
it next time."

He had been tremulous enough, but at that his whole body began to shake
violently.

"_What_!" he quavered.

"I say, take better care of it next time," she said, dropping again into
her monotone. "I didn't have such an easy time gettin' it back from them
as you might think. I've got rather a sore wrist, in fact."

She paused at an inarticulate sound from him.

"Oh, that's soon mended," she laughed drearily. "The truth is, it's been
a good thing for me--your turning up. They're gettin' in too deep water
for me, Helene and her friends, and I've broken with the lot, or they've
broken with me, whichever it is. We couldn't hang together after the
fightin' we've done to-day. I had to do a lot of threatenin' and things.
Welch was ugly, so I had to be ugly too. Never mind"--she checked an
uncertain effort of his to speak--"I saw what you were like, soon as
we sat down at the table last night--how new you were and all that. It
needed only a glance to see that Helene had made a mistake about you.
She'd got a notion you were a millionaire like the little Cooley, but
I knew better from your talk. She's clever, but she's French, and she
can't get it out of her head that you could be an American and not a
millionaire. Of course, they _all_ knew better when you brought out
your express checks and talked like somebody in one of the old-time
story-books about 'debts of honor.' Even Helene understood then that
the express checks were all you had." She laughed. "I didn't have any
trouble gettin' the _note_ back!"

She paused again for a moment, then resumed: "There isn't much use our
goin' over it all, but I want you to know one thing. Your little friend
Cooley made it rather clear that he accused Helene and me of signalin'.
Well, I didn't. Perhaps that's the reason you didn't lose as much as he
did; I can't say. And one thing more: all this isn't goin' to do you any
harm. I'm not very keen about philosophy and religion and that, but I
believe if you're let in for a lot of trouble, and it only _half_ kills
you, you can get some good of it."

"Do you think," he stammered--"do you think I'm worth saving?"

She smiled faintly and said:

"You've probably got a sweetheart in the States somewhere--a nice girl,
a pretty young thing who goes to church and thinks you're a great man,
perhaps? Is it so?"

"I am not worthy," he began, choked suddenly, then finished--"to breathe
the same air!"

"That's quite right," Lady Mount-Rhyswicke assured him. "Think what
you'd think of her if she'd got herself into the same sort of scrape by
doin' the things you've been doin'! And remember _that_ if you ever feel
impatient with her, or have any temptations to superiority in times to
come. And yet"--for the moment she spoke earnestly--"you go back to your
little girl, but don't you tell her a word of this. You couldn't
even tell her that meetin' you has helped me, because she wouldn't
understand."

"Nor do I. I can't."

"Oh, it's simple. I saw that if I was gettin' down to where I was
robbin' babies and orphans...." The cab halted. "Here's your corner. I
told him only to go round the block and come back. Good-by. I'm off for
Amalfi. It's a good place to rest."

He got out dazedly, and the driver cracked his whip over the little
horse; but Mellin lifted a detaining hand.

"_A spet_," called Lady Mount-Rhyswicke to the driver. "What is it, Mr.
Mellin?"

"I can't--I can't look you in the face," he stammered, his attitude
perfectly corroborative of his words. "I would--oh, I would kneel in the
dust here before you--"

"Some of the poetry you told me you write?"

"I've never written any poetry," he said, not looking up. "Perhaps I
can--now. What I want to say is--I'm so ashamed of it--I don't know how
to get the words out, but I must. I may never see you again, and I must.
I 'm sorry--please try to forgive me--I wasn't myself when I did it--"

"Blurt it out; that's the best way."

"I'm sorry," he floundered--"I'm sorry I kissed you."

She laughed her tired laugh and said in her tired voice the last words
he was ever destined to hear from her:

"Oh, I don't mind, if you don't. It was so innocent, it was what decided
me."

One of the hundreds of good saints that belong to Rome must have
overheard her and pitied the young man, for it is ascribable only to
some such special act of mercy that Mellin understood (and he did)
exactly what she meant.

========================================
========================================

MONSIEUR BEAUCAIRE


by Booth Tarkington




Chapter One


The young Frenchman did very well what he had planned to do. His guess
that the Duke would cheat proved good. As the unshod half-dozen figures
that had been standing noiselessly in the entryway stole softly into the
shadows of the chamber, he leaned across the table and smilingly plucked
a card out of the big Englishman's sleeve.

"Merci, M. le Duc!" he laughed, rising and stepping back from the table.

The Englishman cried out, "It means the dirty work of silencing you with
my bare hands!" and came at him.

"Do not move," said M. Beaucaire, so sharply that the other paused.
"Observe behind you."

The Englishman turned, and saw what trap he had blundered into; then
stood transfixed, impotent, alternately scarlet with rage and white
with the vital shame of discovery. M. Beaucaire remarked, indicating the
silent figures by a polite wave of the hand, "Is it not a compliment
to monsieur that I procure six large men to subdue him? They are quite
devote' to me, and monsieur is alone. Could it be that he did not wish
even his lackeys to know he play with the yo'ng Frenchman who Meestaire
Nash does not like in the pomp-room? Monsieur is unfortunate to have
come on foot and alone to my apartment."

The Duke's mouth foamed over with chaotic revilement. His captor
smiled brightly, and made a slight gesture, as one who brushes aside
a boisterous insect. With the same motion he quelled to stony quiet a
resentful impetus of his servants toward the Englishman.

"It's murder, is it, you carrion!" finished the Duke.

M. Beaucaire lifted his shoulders in a mock shiver. "What words! No, no,
no! No killing! A such word to a such host! No, no, not mur-r-der; only
disgrace!" He laughed a clear, light laugh with a rising inflection,
seeming to launch himself upon an adventurous quest for sympathy.

"You little devilish scullion!" spat out the Duke.

"Tut, tut! But I forget. Monsieur has pursue' his studies of deportment
amongs' his fellow-countrymen.

"Do you dream a soul in Bath will take your word that I--that I--"

"That M. le Duc de Winterset had a card up his sleeve?"

"You pitiful stroller, you stableboy, born in a stable--"

"Is it not an honor to be born where monsieur must have been bred?"

"You scurvy foot-boy, you greasy barber, you cutthroat groom--"

"Overwhelm'!" The young man bowed with imperturbable elation. "M. le Duc
appoint' me to all the office' of his househol'."

"You mustachioed fool, there are not five people of quality in Bath will
speak to you--"

"No, monsieur, not on the parade; but how many come to play with me
here? Because I will play always, night or day, for what one will, for
any long, and always fair, monsieur."

"You outrageous varlet! Every one knows you came to England as the
French Ambassador's barber. What man of fashion will listen to you? Who
will believe you?"

"All people, monsieur. Do you think I have not calculate', that I shall
make a failure of my little enterprise?"

"Bah!"

"Will monsieur not reseat himself?" M. Beaucaire made a low bow. "So. We
must not be too tire' for Lady Malbourne's rout. Ha, ha! And you,
Jean, Victor, and you others, retire; go in the hallway. Attend at the
entrance, Francois. So; now we shall talk. Monsieur, I wish you to think
very cool. Then listen; I will be briefly. It is that I am well known to
be all, entire' hones'. Gamblist? Ah, yes; true and mos profitable;
but fair, always fair; every one say that. Is it not so? Think of it.
And--is there never a w'isper come to M. le Duc that not all people
belief him to play always hones'? Ha, ha! Did it almos' be said to
him las' year, after when he play' with Milor' Tappin'ford at the
chocolate-house--"

"You dirty scandal-monger!" the Duke burst out. "I'll--"

"Monsieur, monsieur!" said the Frenchman. "It is a poor valor to insult
a helpless captor. Can he retort upon his own victim? But it is for you
to think of what I say. True, I am not reco'nize on the parade; that my
frien's who come here do not present me to their ladies; that Meestaire
Nash has reboff' me in the pomp-room; still, am I not known for being
hones' and fair in my play, and will I not be belief, even I, when I
lif' my voice and charge you aloud with what is already w'isper'? Think
of it! You are a noble, and there will be some hang-dogs who might not
fall away from you. Only such would be lef' to you. Do you want it tol'?
And you can keep out of France, monsieur? I have lef' his service, but
I have still the ear of M. de Mirepoix, and he know' I never lie. Not a
gentleman will play you when you come to Paris."

The Englishman's white lip showed a row of scarlet dots upon it. "How
much do you want?" he said.

The room rang with the gay laughter of Beaucaire. "I hol' your note' for
seven-hunder' pound'. You can have them, monsieur. Why does a such great
man come to play M. Beaucaire? Because no one else willin' to play M.
le Duc--he cannot pay. Ha, ha! So he come' to good Monsieur Beaucaire.
Money, ha, ha! What I want with money?"

His Grace of Winterset's features were set awry to a sinister pattern.
He sat glaring at his companion in a snarling silence.

"Money? Pouf!" snapped the little gambler. "No, no, no! It is that M.
le Duc, impoverish', somewhat in a bad odor as he is, yet command the
entree any-where--onless I--Ha, ha! Eh, monsieur?"

"Ha! You dare think to force me--"

M. Beaucaire twirled the tip of his slender mustache around the end
of his white forefinger. Then he said: "Monsieur and me goin' to Lady
Malbourne's ball to-night--M. le Duc and me!"

The Englishman roared, "Curse your impudence!"

"Sit quiet. Oh, yes, that's all; we goin' together."

"No!"

"Certain. I make all my little plan'. 'Tis all arrange'." He paused, and
then said gravely, "You goin' present me to Lady Mary Carlisle."

The other laughed in utter scorn. "Lady Mary Carlisle, of all women
alive, would be the first to prefer the devil to a man of no birth,
barber."

"'Tis all arrange'; have no fear; nobody question monsieur's You goin'
take me to-night--"

"No!"

"Yes. And after--then I have the entree. Is it much I ask? This one
little favor, and I never w'isper, never breathe that--it is to say, I
am always forever silent of monsieur's misfortune."

"You have the entree!" sneered the other. "Go to a lackeys' rout and
dance with the kitchen maids. If I would, I could not present you to
Bath society. I should have cartels from the fathers, brothers, and
lovers of every wench and madam in the place, even I. You would be
thrust from Lady Malbourne's door five minutes after you entered it."

"No, no, no!"

"Half the gentlemen in Bath have been here to play. They would know
you, wouldn't they, fool? You've had thousands out of Bantison, Rakell,
Guilford, and Townbrake. They would have you lashed by the grooms as
your ugly deserts are. You to speak to Lady Mary Carlisle! 'Od's blood!
You! Also, dolt, she would know you if you escaped the others. She stood
within a yard of you when Nash expelled you the pump-room."

M. Beaucaire flushed slightly. "You think I did not see?" he asked.

"Do you dream that' because Winterset introduces a low fellow he will be
tolerated--that Bath will receive a barber?"

"I have the distinction to call monsieur's attention," replied the young
man gayly, "I have renounce that profession."

"Fool!"

"I am now a man of honor!"

"Faugh!"

"A man of the parts," continued the the young Frenchman, "and of
deportment; is it not so? Have you seen me of a fluster, or gross ever,
or, what sall I say--bourgeois? Shall you be shame' for your guest'
manner? No, no! And my appearance, is it of the people? Clearly, no. Do
I not compare in taste of apparel with your yo'ng Englishman? Ha, ha! To
be hope'. Ha, ha! So I am goin' talk with Lady Mary Carlisle."

"Bah!" The Duke made a savage burlesque. "'Lady Mary Carlisle, may I
assume the honor of presenting the barber of the Marquis de Mirepoix?'
So, is it?"

"No, monsieur," smiled the young man. "Quite not so. You shall have
nothing to worry you, nothing in the worl'. I am goin' to assassinate my
poor mustachio--also remove this horrible black peruke, and emerge in my
own hair. Behol'!" He swept the heavy curled, mass from his head as he
spoke, and his hair, coiled under the great wig, fell to his shoulders,
and sparkled yellow in the candle-light. He tossed his head to shake the
hair back from his cheeks. "When it is dress', I am transform nobody can
know me; you shall observe. See how little I ask of you, how very little
bit. No one shall reco'nize 'M. Beaucaire' or 'Victor.' Ha, ha! 'Tis all
arrange'; you have nothing to fear."

"Curse you," said the Duke, "do you think I'm going to be saddled with
you wherever I go as long as you choose?"

"A mistake. No. All I requi--All I beg--is this one evening. 'Tis all
shall be necessary. After, I shall not need monsieur.

"Take heed to yourself--after!" vouchsafed the Englishman between his
teeth.

"Conquered!" cried M. Beaucaire, and clapped his hands gleefully.
"Conquered for the night! Aha, it ts riz'nable! I shall meet what
you send--after. One cannot hope too much of your patience. It is but
natural you should attemp' a little avengement for the rascal trap I
was such a wicked fellow as to set for you. I shall meet some strange
frien's of yours after to-night; not so? I must try to be not too much
frighten'." He looked at the Duke curiously. "You want to know why I
create this tragedy, why I am so unkind as to entrap monsieur?"

His Grace of Winterset replied with a chill glance; a pulse in the
nobleman's cheek beat less relentlessly; his eye raged not so bitterly;
the steady purple of his own color was returning; his voice was less
hoarse; he was regaining his habit. "'Tis ever the manner of the
vulgar," he observed, "to wish to be seen with people of fashion."

"Oh, no, no, no!" The Frenchman laughed. "'Tis not that. Am I not
already one of these 'men of fashion'? I lack only the reputation of
birth. Monsieur is goin' supply that. Ha, ha! I shall be noble from
to-night. 'Victor,' the artis', is condemn' to death; his throat shall
be cut with his own razor. 'M. Beaucaire--'" Here the young man sprang
to his feet, caught up the black wig, clapped into it a dice-box
from the table, and hurled it violently through the open door. "'M.
Beaucaire' shall be choke' with his own dice-box. Who is the Phoenix to
remain? What advantage have I not over other men of rank who are merely
born to it? I may choose my own. No! Choose for me, monsieur. Shall I
be chevalier, comte, vicomte, marquis, what? None. Out of compliment to
monsieur can I wish to be anything he is not? No, no! I shall be M.
le Duc, M. le Duc de--de Chateaurien. Ha, ha! You see? You are my
confrere."

M. Beaucaire trod a dainty step or two, waving his hand politely to the
Duke, as though in invitation to join the celebration of his rank.
The Englishman watched, his eye still and harsh, already gathering in
craftiness. Beaucaire stopped suddenly. "But how I forget my age! I am
twenty-three," he said, with a sigh. "I rejoice too much to be of the
quality. It has been too great for me, and I had always belief' myself
free of such ambition. I thought it was enough to behol' the opera
without wishing to sing; but no, England have teach' me I have those
vulgar desire'. Monsieur, I am goin' tell you a secret: the ladies of
your country are very diff'runt than ours. One may adore the demoiselle,
one must worship the lady of England. Our ladies have the--it is the
beauty of youth; yours remain comely at thirty. Ours are flowers, yours
are stars! See, I betray myself, I am so poor a patriot. And there is
one among these stars--ah, yes, there is one--the poor Frenchman has
observe' from his humble distance; even there he could bask in the
glowing!" M. Beaucaire turned to the window, and looked out into the
dark. He did not see the lights of the town. When he turned again, he
had half forgotten his prisoner; other pictures were before him.

"Ah, what radiance!" he cried. "Those people up over the sky, they want
to show they wish the earth to be happy, so they smile, and make this
lady. Gold-haired, an angel of heaven, and yet a Diana of the chase! I
see her fly by me on her great horse one day; she touch' his mane with
her fingers. I buy that clipping from the groom. I have it here with my
dear brother's picture. Ah, you! Oh, yes, you laugh! What do you know!
'Twas all I could get. But I have heard of the endeavor of M. le Duc to
recoup his fortunes. This alliance shall fail. It is not the way--that
heritage shall be safe' from him! It is you and me, monsieur! You can
laugh! The war is open', and by me! There is one great step taken: until
to-night there was nothing for you to ruin, to-morrow you have got a
noble of France--your own protege--to besiege and sack. And you are
to lose, because you think such ruin easy, and because you understand
nothing--far less--of divinity. How could you know? You have not the
fiber; the heart of a lady is a blank to you; you know nothing of the
vibration. There are some words that were made only to tell of Lady
Mary, for her alone--bellissima, divine, glorieuse! Ah, how I have
watch' her! It is sad to me when I see her surround' by your yo'ng
captains, your nobles, your rattles, your beaux--ha, ha!--and I mus'
hol' far aloof. It is sad for me--but oh, jus' to watch her and to
wonder! Strange it is, but I have almos' cry out with rapture at a look
I have see' her give another man, so beautiful it was, so tender, so
dazzling of the eyes and so mirthful of the lips. Ah, divine coquetry! A
look for another, ah-i-me! for many others; and even to you, one day,
a rose, while I--I, monsieur, could not even be so blessed as to be
the groun' beneath her little shoe! But to-night, monsieur--ha,
ha!--to-night, monsieur, you and me, two princes, M. le Duc de
Winterset and M. le Duc de Chateaurien--ha, ha! you see?--we are goin'
arm-in-arm to that ball, and I am goin' have one of those looks, I! And
a rose! I! It is time. But ten minute', monsieur. I make my apology to
keep you waitin' so long while I go in the nex' room and execute my poor
mustachio--that will be my only murder for jus' this one evening--and
inves' myself in white satin. Ha, ha! I shall be very gran', monsieur.
Francois, send Louis to me; Victor, to order two chairs for monsieur and
me; we are goin' out in the worl' to-right!"


Chapter Two


The chairmen swarmed in the street at Lady Malbourne's door, where the
joyous vulgar fought with muddied footmen and tipsy link-boys for places
of vantage whence to catch a glimpse of quality and of raiment at its
utmost. Dawn was in the east, and the guests were departing. Singly or
in pairs, glittering in finery, they came mincing down the steps, the
ghost of the night's smirk fading to jadedness as they sought the dark
recesses of their chairs. From within sounded the twang of fiddles still
swinging manfully at it, and the windows were bright with the light of
many candles. When the door was flung open to call the chair of Lady
Mary Carlisle, there was an eager pressure of the throng to see.

A small, fair gentleman in white satin came out upon the steps, turned
and bowed before a lady who appeared in the doorway, a lady whose royal
loveliness was given to view for a moment in that glowing frame. The
crowd sent up a hearty English cheer for the Beauty of Bath.

The gentleman smiled upon them delightedly. "What enchanting people!" he
cried. "Why did I not know, so I might have shout' with them?" The
lady noticed the people not at all; whereat, being pleased, the people
cheered again. The gentleman offered her his hand; she made a slow
courtesy; placed the tips of her fingers upon his own. "I am honored, M.
de Chateaurien," she said.

"No, no!" he cried earnestly. "Behol' a poor Frenchman whom emperors
should envy." Then reverently and with the pride of his gallant office
vibrant in every line of his slight figure, invested in white satin and
very grand, as he had prophesied, M. le Duc de Chateaurien handed Lady
Mary Carlisle down the steps, an achievement which had figured in the
ambitions of seven other gentlemen during the evening.

"Am I to be lef'in such onhappiness?" he said in a low voice. "That rose
I have beg' for so long--"


"Never!" said Lady Mary.

"Ah, I do not deserve it, I know so well! But--"

"Never!"

"It is the greatness of my onworthiness that alone can claim your
charity; let your kin' heart give this little red rose, this great alms,
to the poor beggar."

"Never!"

She was seated in the chair. "Ah, give the rose," he whispered. Her
beauty shone dazzlingly on him out of the dimness.

"Never!" she flashed defiantly as she was closed in. "Never!"

"Never!"

The rose fell at his feet.


"A rose lasts till morning," said a voice behind him.

Turning, M. de Chateaurien looked beamingly upon the face of the Duke of
Winterset.

"'Tis already the daylight," he replied, pointing to the east.
"Monsieur, was it not enough honor for you to han' out madame, the aunt
of Lady Mary? Lady Rellerton retain much trace of beauty. 'Tis strange
you did not appear more happy."

"The rose is of an unlucky color, I think," observed the Duke.

"The color of a blush, my brother."

"Unlucky, I still maintain," said the other calmly.

"The color of the veins of a Frenchman. Ha, ha!" cried the young man.
"What price would be too high? A rose is a rose! A good-night, my
brother, a good-night. I wish you dreams of roses, red roses, only
beautiful red, red roses!"

"Stay! Did you see the look she gave these street folk when they shouted
for her? And how are you higher than they, when she knows? As high as
yonder horse-boy!"

"Red roses, my brother, only roses. I wish you dreams of red, red
roses!"


Chapter Three


It was well agreed by the fashion of Bath that M. le Duc de Chateaurien
was a person of sensibility and haut ton; that his retinue and equipage
surpassed in elegance; that his person was exquisite, his manner
engaging. In the company of gentlemen his ease was slightly tinged with
graciousness (his single equal in Bath being his Grace of Winterset);
but it was remarked that when he bowed over a lady's hand, his air
bespoke only a gay and tender reverence.

He was the idol of the dowagers within a week after his appearance;
matrons warmed to him; young belles looked sweetly on him, while the
gentlemen were won to admiration or envy. He was of prodigious wealth:
old Mr. Bicksit, who dared not, for his fame's sake, fail to have seen
all things, had visited Chateaurien under the present Duke's father,
and descanted to the curious upon its grandeurs. The young noble had one
fault, he was so poor a gambler. He cared nothing for the hazards of a
die or the turn of a card. Gayly admitting that he had been born with no
spirit of adventure in him, he was sure, he declared, that he failed of
much happiness by his lack of taste in such matters.

But he was not long wanting the occasion to prove his taste in the
matter of handling a weapon. A certain led-captain, Rohrer by
name, notorious, amongst other things, for bearing a dexterous and
bloodthirsty blade, came to Bath post-haste, one night, and jostled
heartily against him, in the pump-room on the following morning. M.
de Chauteaurien bowed, and turned aside without offense, continuing a
conversation with some gentlemen near by. Captain Rohrer jostled
against him a second time. M. de Chateaurien looked him in the eye, and
apologized pleasantly for being so much in the way. Thereupon Rohrer
procured an introduction to him, and made some observations derogatory
to the valor and virtue of the French. There was current a curious piece
of gossip of the French court: a prince of the blood royal, grandson of
the late Regent and second in the line of succession to the throne
of France, had rebelled against the authority of Louis XV, who had
commanded him to marry the Princess Henriette, cousin to both of them.
The princess was reported to be openly devoted to the cousin who refused
to accept her hand at the bidding of the king; and, as rumor ran, the
prince's caprice elected in preference the discipline of Vincennes, to
which retirement the furious king had consigned him. The story was the
staple gossip of all polite Europe; and Captain Rohrer, having in his
mind a purpose to make use of it in leading up to a statement that
should be general to the damage of all Frenchwomen, and which a
Frenchman might not pass over as he might a jog of the elbow, repeated
it with garbled truths to make a scandal of a story which bore none on a
plain relation.

He did not reach his deduction. M. de Chateaurien, breaking into his
narrative, addressed him very quietly. "Monsieur," he said, "none but
swine deny the nobleness of that good and gentle lady, Mademoiselle la
Princesse de Bourbon-Conti. Every Frenchman know' that her cousin is a
bad rebel and ingrate, who had only honor and rispec' for her, but was
so wilful he could not let even the king say, 'You shall marry here,
you shall marry there.' My frien's," the young man turned to the others,
"may I ask you to close roun' in a circle for one moment? It is clearly
shown that the Duke of Orleans is a scurvy fellow, but not--" he wheeled
about and touched Captain Rohrer on the brow with the back of his gloved
hand--"but not so scurvy as thou, thou swine of the gutter!"

Two hours later, with perfect ease, he ran Captain Rohrer through the
left shoulder--after which he sent a basket of red roses to the Duke
of Winterset. In a few days he had another captain to fight. This was
a ruffling buck who had the astounding indiscretion to proclaim M.
de Chateaurien an impostor. There was no Chateaurien, he swore. The
Frenchman laughed in his face, and, at twilight of the same day, pinked
him carefully through the right shoulder. It was not that he could
not put aside the insult to himself, he declared to Mr. Molyneux,
his second, and the few witnesses, as he handed his wet sword to his
lackey--one of his station could not be insulted by a doubt of that
station--but he fought in the quarrel of his friend Winterset. This
rascal had asserted that M. le Duc had introduced an impostor. Could he
overlook the insult to a friend, one to whom he owed his kind reception
in Bath? Then, bending over his fallen adversary, he whispered: "Naughty
man, tell your master find some better quarrel for the nex' he sen'
agains' me."

The conduct of M. de Chateaurien was pronounced admirable.

There was no surprise when the young foreigner fell naturally into the
long train of followers of the beautiful Lady Mary Carlisle, nor was
there great astonishment that he should obtain marked favor in her eyes,
shown so plainly that my Lord Townbrake, Sir Hugh Guilford, and the rich
Squire Bantison, all of whom had followed her through three seasons,
swore with rage, and his Grace of Winterset stalked from her aunt's
house with black brows.

Meeting the Duke there on the evening after his second encounter de
Chateaurien smiled upon him brilliantly. "It was badly done; oh, so
badly!" he whispered. "Can you afford to have me strip' of my mask by
any but yourself? You, who introduce' me? They will say there is some
bad scandal that I could force you to be my god-father. You mus' get the
courage yourself."

"I told you a rose had a short life," was the answer.

"Oh, those roses! 'Tis the very greates' rizzon to gather each day
a fresh one." He took a red bud from his breast for an instant, and
touched it to his lips.

"M. de Chateaurien!" It was Lady Mary's voice; she stood at a table
where a vacant place had been left beside her. "M. de Chateaurien, we
have been waiting very long for you."

The Duke saw the look she did not know she gave the Frenchman, and he
lost countenance for a moment.

"We approach a climax, eh, monsieur?" said M. de Chateaurien.



Chapter Four


There fell a clear September night, when the moon was radiant over town
and country, over cobbled streets and winding roads. From the fields the
mists rose slowly, and the air was mild and fragrant, while distances
were white and full of mystery. All of Bath that pretended to fashion or
condition was present that evening at a fete at the house of a country
gentleman of the neighborhood. When the stately junket was concluded, it
was the pleasure of M. de Chateaurien to form one of the escort of Lady
Mary's carriage for the return. As they took the road, Sir Hugh Guilford
and Mr. Bantison, engaging in indistinct but vigorous remonstrance with
Mr. Molyneux over some matter, fell fifty or more paces behind, where
they continued to ride, keeping up their argument. Half a dozen other
gallants rode in advance, muttering among themselves, or attended laxly
upon Lady Mary's aunt on the other side of the coach, while the happy
Frenchman was permitted to ride close to that adorable window which
framed the fairest face in England.

He sang for her a little French song, a song of the voyageur who dreamed
of home. The lady, listening, looking up at the bright moon, felt a warm
drop upon her cheek, and he saw the tears sparkling upon her lashes.

"Mademoiselle," he whispered then, "I, too, have been a wanderer, but my
dreams were not of France; no, I do not dream of that home, of that dear
country. It is of a dearer country, a dream country--a country of gold
and snow," he cried softly, looking it her white brow and the fair,
lightly powdered hair above it. "Gold and snow, and the blue sky of a
lady's eyes!"

"I had thought the ladies of France were dark, sir.

"Cruel! It is that she will not understan'! Have I speak of the ladies
of France? No, no, no! It is of the faires' country; yes, 'tis a
province of heaven, mademoiselle. Do I not renounce my allegiance to
France? Oh, yes! I am subjec'--no, content to be slave--in the lan' of
the blue sky, the gold, and the snow.

"A very pretty figure," answered Lady Mary, her eyes downcast. "But does
it not hint a notable experience in the making of such speeches?"

"Tormentress! No. It prove only the inspiration it is to know you."

"We English ladies hear plenty of the like sir; and we even grow
brilliant enough to detect the assurance that lies beneath the
courtesies of our own gallants."

"Merci! I should believe so!" ejaculated M. de Chateaurien: but he
smothered the words upon his lips.

Her eyes were not lifted. She went on: "We come, in time, to believe
that true feeling comes faltering forth, not glibly; that smoothness
betokens the adept in the art, sir, rather than your true--your true--"
She was herself faltering; more, blushing deeply, and halting to a full
stop in terror of a word. There was a silence.

"Your--true--lover," he said huskily. When he had said that word both
trembled. She turned half away into the darkness of the coach.

"I know what make' you to doubt me," he said, faltering himself, though
it was not his art that prompted him. "They have tol' you the French
do nothing always but make love, is it not so? Yes, you think I am like
that. You think I am like that now!"

She made no sign.

"I suppose," he sighed, "I am unriz'nable; I would have the snow not so
col'--for jus' me."

She did not answer.

"Turn to me," he said.

The fragrance of the fields came to them, and from the distance the
faint, clear note of a hunting-horn.

"Turn to me."

The lovely head was bent very low. Her little gloved hand lay upon the
narrow window ledge. He laid his own gently upon it. The two hands were
shaking like twin leaves in the breeze. Hers was not drawn away. After
a pause, neither knew how long, he felt the warm fingers turn and clasp
themselves tremulously about his own. At last she looked up bravely and
met his eyes. The horn was wound again--nearer.

"All the cold was gone from the snows--long ago," she said.

"My beautiful!" he whispered; it was all he could say. "My beautiful!"
But she clutched his arm, startled.

"'Ware the road!" A wild halloo sounded ahead. The horn wound loudly.
"'Ware the road!" There sprang up out of the night a flying thunder of
hoof-beats. The gentlemen riding idly in front of the coach scattered to
the hedge-sides; and, with drawn swords flashing in the moon, a party of
horsemen charged down the highway, their cries blasting the night.

"Barber! Kill the barber!" they screamed. "Barber! Kill the barber!"

Beaucaire had but time to draw his sword when they were upon him.

"A moi!" his voice rang out clearly as he rose in his stirrups. "A moi,
Francois, Louis, Berquin! A moi, Francois!"

The cavaliers came straight at him. He parried the thrust of the first,
but the shock of collision hurled his horse against the side of the
coach. "Sacred swine!" he cried bitterly. "To endanger a lady, to make
this brawl in a lady's presence! Drive on!" he shouted.

"No!" cried Lady Mary.

The Frenchman's assailants were masked, but they were not highwaymen.
"Barber! Barber!" they shouted hoarsely, and closed in on him in a
circle.

"See how he use his steel!" laughed M. Beaucaire, as his point passed
through a tawdry waistcoat. For a moment he cut through the ring and
cleared a space about him, and Lady Mary saw his face shining in the
moonlight. "Canaille!" he hissed, as his horse sank beneath him; and,
though guarding his head from the rain of blows from above, he managed
to drag headlong from his saddle the man who had hamstrung the poor
brute. The fellow came suddenly to the ground, and lay there.

"Is it not a compliment," said a heavy voice, "to bring six large men to
subdue monsieur?"

"Oh, you are there, my frien'! In the rear--a little in the rear, I
think. Ha, ha!"

The Frenchman's play with his weapon was a revelation of skill, the more
extraordinary as he held in his hand only a light dress sword. But the
ring closed about him, and his keen defense could not avail him for more
than a few moments. Lady Mary's outriders, the gallants of her escort,
rode up close to the coach and encircled it, not interfering.

"Sir Hugh Guilford!" cried Lady Mary wildly, "if you will not help him,
give me your sword!" She would have leaped to the ground, but Sir Hugh
held the door.

"Sit quiet, madam," he said to her; then, to the man on the box, "Drive
on."

"If he does, I'll kill him!" she said fiercely. "Ah, what cowards! Will
you see the Duke murdered?"

"The Duke!" laughed Guilford. "They will not kill him, unless--be easy,
dear madam, 'twill be explained. Gad's life!" he muttered to Molyneux,
"'Twere time the varlet had his lashing! D'ye hear her?"

"Barber or no barber," answered Molyneux, "I wish I had warned him. He
fights as few gentlemen could. Ah--ah! Look at that! 'Tis a shame!"

On foot, his hat gone, his white coat sadly rent and gashed, flecked,
too, with red, M. Beaucaire, wary, alert, brilliant, seemed to transform
himself into a dozen fencing-masters; and, though his skill appeared
to lie in delicacy and quickness, his play being continually with
the point, sheer strength failed to beat him down. The young man was
laughing like a child.

"Believe me," said Molyneux "he's no barber! No, and never was!"

For a moment there was even a chance that M. Beaucaire might have the
best of it. Two of his adversaries were prostrate, more than one were
groaning, and the indomitable Frenchman had actually almost beat off the
ruffians, when, by a trick, he was overcome. One of them, dismounting,
ran in suddenly from behind, and seized his blade in a thick leather
gauntlet. Before Beaucaire could disengage the weapon, two others threw
themselves from their horses and hurled him to the earth. "A moi! A moi,
Francois!" he cried as he went down, his sword in fragments, but his
voice unbroken and clear.

"Shame!" muttered one or two of the gentlemen about the coach.

"'Twas dastardly to take him so," said Molyneux. "Whatever his
deservings, I'm nigh of a mind to offer him a rescue in the Duke's
face."

"Truss him up, lads," said the heavy voice. "Clear the way in front of
the coach. There sit those whom we avenge upon a presumptuous lackey.
Now, Whiffen, you have a fair audience, lay on and baste him."

Two men began to drag M. Beaucaire toward a great oak by the roadside.
Another took from his saddle a heavy whip with three thongs.

"A moi, Francois!"

There was borne on the breeze an answer--"Monseigneur! Monseigneur!"
The cry grew louder suddenly. The clatter of hoofs urged to an anguish
of speed sounded on the night. M. Beaucaire's servants had lagged sorely
behind, but they made up for it now. Almost before the noise of their
own steeds they came riding down the moonlit aisle between the mists.
Chosen men, these servants of Beaucaire, and like a thunderbolt they
fell upon the astounded cavaliers.

"Chateaurien! Chateaurien!" they shouted, and smote so swiftly that,
through lack of time, they showed no proper judgment, discriminating
nothing between non-combatants and their master's foes. They charged
first into the group about M. Beaucaire, and broke and routed it
utterly. Two of them leaped to the young man's side, while the other
four, swerving, scarce losing the momentum of their onset, bore on upon
the gentlemen near the coach, who went down beneath the fierceness of
the onslaught, cursing manfully.

"Our just deserts," said Mr. Molyneux, his mouth full of dust and
philosophy.

Sir Hugh Guilford's horse fell with him, being literally ridden over,
and the baronet's leg was pinned under the saddle. In less than ten
minutes from the first attack on M. Beaucaire, the attacking party
had fled in disorder, and the patrician non-combatants, choking with
expletives, consumed with wrath, were prisoners, disarmed by the
Frenchman's lackeys.

Guilford's discomfiture had freed the doors of the coach; so it was that
when M. Beaucaire, struggling to rise, assisted by his servants, threw
out one hand to balance himself, he found it seized between two small,
cold palms, and he looked into two warm, dilating eyes, that were doubly
beautiful because of the fright and rage that found room in them, too.

M. le Duc Chateaurien sprang to his feet without the aid of his lackeys,
and bowed low before Lady Mary.

"I make ten thousan' apology to be' the cause of a such melee in your
presence," he said; and then, turning to Francois, he spoke in French:
"Ah, thou scoundrel! A little, and it had been too late."

Francois knelt in the dust before him. "Pardon!" he said. "Monseigneur
commanded us to follow far in the rear, to remain unobserved. The wind
malignantly blew against monseigneur's voice."

"See what it might have cost, my children," said his master, pointing
to the ropes with which they would have bound him and to the whip lying
beside them. A shudder passed over the lackey's frame; the utter horror
in his face echoed in the eyes of his fellows.

"Oh, monseigneur!" Francois sprang back, and tossed his arms to heaven.

"But it did not happen," said M. Beaucaire.

"It could not!" exclaimed Francois.

"No. And you did very well, my children--" the young man smiled
benevolently--"very well. And now," he continued, turning to Lady Mary
and speaking in English, "let me be asking of our gallants yonder what
make' them to be in cabal with highwaymen. One should come to a polite
understanding with them, you think? Not so?"

He bowed, offering his hand to conduct her to the coach, where Molyneux
and his companions, having drawn Sir Hugh from under his horse, were
engaged in reviving and reassuring Lady Rellerton, who had fainted. But
Lady Mary stayed Beaucaire with a gesture, and the two stood where they
were.

"Monseigneur!" she said, with a note of raillery in her voice, but
raillery so tender that he started with happiness. His movement brought
him a hot spasm of pain, and he clapped his hand to a red stain on his
waistcoat.

"You are hurt!"

"It is nothing," smiled M. Beaucaire. Then, that she might not see
the stain spreading, he held his handkerchief over the spot. "I am a
little--but jus' a trifling--bruise'; 'tis all."

"You shall ride in the coach," she whispered. "Will you be pleased, M.
de Chateaurien?"

"Ah, my beautiful!" She seemed to wave before him like a shining
mist. "I wish that ride might las' for always! Can you say that,
mademoiselle?"

"Monseigneur," she cried in a passion of admiration, "I would what you
would have be, should be. What do you not deserve? You are the bravest
man in the world!"

"Ha, ha! I am jus' a poor Frenchman."

"Would that a few Englishmen had shown themselves as 'poor' tonight.
The vile cowards, not to help you!" With that, suddenly possessed by her
anger, she swept away from him to the coach.

Sir Hugh, groaning loudly, was being assisted into the vehicle.

"My little poltroons," she said, "what are you doing with your
fellow-craven, Sir Hugh Guilford, there?"

"Madam," replied Molyneux humbly, "Sir Hugh's leg is broken. Lady
Rellerton graciously permits him to be taken in."

"I do not permit it! M. de Chateaurien rides with us."

"But--"

"Sir! Leave the wretch to groan by the roadside," she cried fiercely,
"which plight I would were that of all of you! But there will be a
pretty story for the gossips to-morrow! And I could almost find pity
for you when I think of the wits when you return to town. Fine gentlemen
you; hardy bravos, by heaven! to leave one man to meet a troop of horse
single-handed, while you huddle in shelter until you are overthrown and
disarmed by servants! Oh, the wits! Heaven save you from the wits!"

"Madam."

"Address me no more! M. de Chateaurien, Lady Rellerton and I will
greatly esteem the honor of your company. Will you come?"

She stepped quickly into the coach, and was gathering her skirts to make
room for the Frenchman, when a heavy voice spoke from the shadows of the
tree by the wayside.

"Lady Mary Carlisle will, no doubt, listen to a word of counsel on this
point."

The Duke of Winterset rode out into the moonlight, composedly untieing a
mask from about his head. He had not shared the flight of his followers,
but had retired into the shade of the oak, whence he now made his
presence known with the utmost coolness.

"Gracious heavens, 'tis Winterset!" exclaimed Lady Rellerton.

"Turned highwayman and cut-throat," cried Lady Mary.

"No, no," laughed M. Beaucaire, somewhat unsteadily, as he stood,
swaying a little, with one hand on the coach-door, the other pressed
hard on his side, "he only oversee'; he is jus' a little bashful,
sometime'. He is a great man, but he don' want all the glory!"

"Barber," replied the Duke, "I must tell you that I gladly descend to
bandy words with you; your monstrous impudence is a claim to rank
I cannot ignore. But a lackey who has himself followed by six other
lackeys--"

"Ha, ha! Has not M. le Duc been busy all this evening to justify me? And
I think mine mus' be the bes' six. Ha, ha! You think?"

"M. de Chateaurien," said Lady Mary, "we are waiting for you."

"Pardon," he replied. "He has something to say; maybe it is bes' if you
hear it now."

"I wish to hear nothing from him--ever!"

"My faith, madam," cried the Duke, "this saucy fellow has paid you the
last insult! He is so sure of you he does not fear you will believe the
truth. When all is told, if you do not agree he deserved the lashing we
planned to--"

"I'll hear no more!"

"You will bitterly repent it, madam. For your own sake I entreat--"

"And I also," broke in M. Beaucaire. "Permit me, mademoiselle; let him
speak."

"Then let him be brief," said Lady Mary, "for I am earnest to be quit of
him. His explanation or an attack on my friend and on my carriage should
be made to my brother."

"Alas that he was not here," said the Duke, "to aid me! Madam, was your
carriage threatened? I have endeavored only to expunge a debt I owed to
Bath and to avenge an insult offered to yourself through--"

"Sir, sir, my patience will bear little more!"

"A thousan' apology," said M. Beaucaire. "You will listen, I only beg,
Lady Mary?"

She made an angry gesture of assent.

"Madam, I will be brief as I may. Two months ago there came to Bath a
French gambler calling himself Beaucaire, a desperate fellow with the
cards or dice, and all the men of fashion went to play at his lodging,
where he won considerable sums. He was small, wore a black wig and
mustachio. He had the insolence to show himself everywhere until the
Master of Ceremonies rebuffed him in the pump-room, as you know, and
after that he forbore his visits to the rooms. Mr. Nash explained (and
was confirmed, madam, by indubitable information) that this Beaucaire
was a man of unspeakable, vile, low birth, being, in fact, no other than
a lackey of the French king's ambassador, Victor by name, de Mirepoix's
barber. Although his condition was known, the hideous impudence of the
fellow did not desert him, and he remained in Bath, where none would
speak to him."

"Is your farrago nigh done, sir?"

"A few moments, madam. One evening, three weeks gone, I observed a very
elegant equipage draw up to my door, and the Duke of Chateaurien was
announced. The young man's manners were worthy--according to the French
acceptance--and 'twere idle to deny him the most monstrous assurance. He
declared himself a noble traveling for pleasure. He had taken lodgings
in Bath for a season, he said, and called at once to pay his respects
to me. His tone was so candid--in truth, I am the simplest of men, very
easily gulled--and his stroke so bold, that I did not for one moment
suspect him; and, to my poignant regret--though in the humblest spirit
I have shown myself eager to atone--that very evening I had the shame of
presenting him to yourself."

"The shame, sir!"

"Have patience, pray, madam. Ay, the shame! You know what figure he hath
cut in Bath since that evening. All ran merrily with him until several
days ago Captain Badger denounced him as an impostor, vowing that
Chateaurien was nothing."

"Pardon," interrupted M. Beaucaire. "'Castle Nowhere' would have been so
much better. Why did you not make him say it that way, monsieur?"

Lady Mary started; she was looking at the Duke, and her face was white.
He continued: "Poor Captain Badger was stabbed that same day.--"

"Most befitting poor Captain Badger," muttered Molyneux.

"----And his adversary had the marvelous insolence to declare that he
fought in my quarrel! This afternoon the wounded man sent for me, and
imparted a very horrifying intelligence. He had discovered a lackey whom
he had seen waiting upon Beaucaire in attendance at the door of
this Chateaurien's lodging. Beaucaire had disappeared the day before
Chateaurien's arrival. Captain Badger looked closely at Chateaurien at
their next meeting, and identified him with the missing Beaucaire beyond
the faintest doubt. Overcome with indignation, he immediately proclaimed
the impostor. Out of regard for me, he did not charge him with being
Beaucaire; the poor soul was unwilling to put upon me the humiliation of
having introduced a barber; but the secret weighed upon him till he sent
for me and put everything in my hands. I accepted the odium; thinking
only of atonement. I went to Sir John Wimpledon's. I took poor Sir
Hugh, there, and these other gentlemen aside, and told them my news. We
narrowly observed this man, and were shocked at our simplicity in not
having discovered him before. These are men of honor and cool judgment,
madam. Mr. Molyneux had acted for him in the affair of Captain Badger,
and was strongly prejudiced in his favor; but Mr. Molyneux, Sir Hugh,
Mr. Bantison, every one of them, in short, recognized him. In spite of
his smooth face and his light hair, the adventurer Beaucaire was
writ upon him amazing plain. Look at him, madam, if he will dare the
inspection. You saw this Beaucaire well, the day of his expulsion from
the rooms. Is not this he?"

M. Beaucaire stepped close to her. Her pale face twitched.

"Look!" he said.

"Oh, oh!" she whispered with a dry throat, and fell back in the
carriage.

"Is it so?" cried the Duke.

"I do not know.--I--cannot tell."

"One moment more. I begged these gentlemen to allow me to wipe out the
insult I had unhappily offered to Bath, but particularly to you. They
agreed not to forestall me or to interfere. I left Sir John Wimpledon's
early, and arranged to give the sorry rascal a lashing under your own
eyes, a satisfaction due the lady into whose presence he had dared to
force himself."

"'Noblesse oblige'?" said M. Beaucaire in a tone of gentle inquiry.

"And now, madam," said the Duke, "I will detain you not one second
longer. I plead the good purpose of my intentions, begging you to
believe that the desire to avenge a hateful outrage, next to the wish to
serve you, forms the dearest motive in the heart of Winterset."

"Bravo!" cried Beaucaire softly.

Lady Mary leaned toward him, a thriving terror in her eyes. "It is
false?" she faltered.

"Monsieur should not have been born so high. He could have made little
book'."

"You mean it is false?" she cried breathlessly.

"'Od's blood, is she not convinced?" broke out Mr. Bantison. "Fellow,
were you not the ambassador's barber?"

"It is all false?" she whispered.

"The mos' fine art, mademoiselle. How long you think it take M. de
Winterset to learn that speech after he write it out? It is a mix of
what is true and the mos' chaste art. Monsieur has become a man of
letters. Perhaps he may enjoy that more than the wars. Ha, ha!"

Mr. Bantison burst into a roar of laughter. "Do French gentlemen
fight lackeys? Ho, ho, ho! A pretty country! We English do as was done
to-night, have our servants beat them."

"And attend ourselves," added M. Beaucaire, looking at the Duke,
"somewhat in the background? But, pardon," he mocked, "that remind' me.
Francois, return to Mr. Bantison and these gentlemen their weapons."

"Will you answer a question?" said Molyneux mildly.

"Oh, with pleasure, monsieur."

"Were you ever a barber?"

"No, monsieur," laughed the young man.

"Pah!" exclaimed Bantison. "Let me question him. Now, fellow, a
confession may save you from jail. Do you deny you are Beaucaire?"

"Deny to a such judge?"

"Ha!" said Bantison. "What more do you want, Molyneux? Fellow, do you
deny that you came to London in the ambassador's suite?"

"No, I do not deny."

"He admits it! Didn't you come as his barber?"

"Yes, my frien', as his barber." Lady Mary cried out faintly, and,
shuddering, put both hands over her eyes.

"I'm sorry," said Molyneux. "You fight like a gentleman."

"I thank you, monsieur."

"You called yourself Beaucaire?"

"Yes, monsieur." He was swaying to and fro; his servants ran to support
him.

"I wish--" continued Molyneux, hesitating. "Evil take me!--but I'm
sorry you're hurt."

"Assist Sir Hugh into my carriage," said Lady Mary.

"Farewell, mademoiselle!" M. Beaucaire's voice was very faint. His eyes
were fixed upon her face. She did not look toward him.

They were propping Sir Hugh on the cushions. The Duke rode up close to
Beaucaire, but Francois seized his bridle fiercely, and forced the horse
back on its haunches.

"The man's servants worship him," said Molyneux.

"Curse your insolence!" exclaimed the Duke. "How much am I to bear from
this varlet and his varlets? Beaucaire, if you have not left Bath by
to-morrow noon, you will be clapped into jail, and the lashing you
escaped to-night shall be given you thrice tenfold!"

"I shall be-in the--Assemily--Room' at nine--o'clock, one week
--from--to-night," answered the young man, smiling jauntily, though
his lips were colorless. The words cost him nearly all his breath and
strength. "You mus' keep--in the--backgroun', monsieur. Ha, ha!" The
door of the coach closed with a slam.

"Mademoiselle--fare--well!"

"Drive on!" said Lady Mary.

M. Beaucaire followed the carriage with his eyes. As the noise of the
wheels and the hoof-beats of the accompanying cavalcade grew fainter in
the distance, the handkerchief he had held against his side dropped into
the white dust, a heavy red splotch.

"Only--roses," he gasped, and fell back in the arms of his servants.


Chapter Five


Beau Nash stood at the door of the rooms, smiling blandly upon a dainty
throng in the pink of its finery and gay furbelows. The great exquisite
bent his body constantly in a series of consummately adjusted bows:
before a great dowager, seeming to sweep the floor in august deference;
somewhat stately to the young bucks; greeting the wits with gracious
friendliness and a twinkle of raillery; inclining with fatherly
gallantry before the beauties; the degree of his inclination measured
the altitude of the recipient as accurately as a nicely calculated
sand-glass measures the hours.

The King of Bath was happy, for wit, beauty, fashion--to speak more
concretely: nobles, belles, gamesters, beaux, statesmen, and poets
--made fairyland (or opera bouffe, at least) in his dominions; play ran
higher and higher, and Mr. Nash's coffers filled up with gold. To
crown his pleasure, a prince of the French blood, the young Comte de
Beaujolais, just arrived from Paris, had reached Bath at noon in state,
accompanied by the Marquis de Mirepoix, the ambassador of Louis XV. The
Beau dearly prized the society of the lofty, and the present visit was
an honor to Bath: hence to the Master of Ceremonies. What was better,
there would be some profitable hours with the cards and dice. So it was
that Mr. Nash smiled never more benignly than on that bright evening.
The rooms rang with the silvery voices of women and delightful laughter,
while the fiddles went merrily, their melodies chiming sweetly with the
joyance of his mood.

The skill and brazen effrontery of the ambassador's scoundrelly servant
in passing himself off for a man of condition formed the point of
departure for every conversation. It was discovered that there were but
three persons present who had not suspected him from the first; and, by
a singular paradox, the most astute of all proved to be old Mr. Bicksit,
the traveler, once a visitor at Chateaurien; for he, according to
report, had by a coup of diplomacy entrapped the impostor into an
admission that there was no such place. However, like poor Captain
Badger, the worthy old man had held his peace out of regard for the Duke
of Winterset. This nobleman, heretofore secretly disliked, suspected
of irregular devices at play, and never admired, had won admiration and
popularity by his remorse for the mistake, and by the modesty of his
attitude in endeavoring to atone for it, without presuming upon the
privilege of his rank to laugh at the indignation of society; an action
the more praiseworthy because his exposure of the impostor entailed the
disclosure of his own culpability in having stood the villain's sponsor.
To-night, the happy gentleman, with Lady Mary Carlisle upon his arm,
went grandly about the rooms, sowing and reaping a harvest of smiles.
'Twas said work would be begun at once to rebuild the Duke's country
seat, while several ruined Jews might be paid out of prison. People
gazing on the beauty and the stately but modest hero by her side, said
they would make a noble pair. She had long been distinguished by his
attentions, and he had come brilliantly out of the episode of the
Frenchman, who had been his only real rival. Wherever they went, there
arose a buzz of pleasing gossip and adulation. Mr. Nash, seeing them
near him, came forward with greetings. A word on the side passed between
the nobleman and the exquisite.

"I had news of the rascal tonight," whispered Nash. "He lay at a farm
till yesterday, when he disappeared; his ruffians, too."

"You have arranged?" asked the Duke.

"Fourteen bailiffs are watching without. He could not come within
gunshot. If they clap eyes on him, they will hustle him to jail, and his
cutthroats shall not avail him a hair's weight. The impertinent swore
he'd be here by nine, did he?"

"He said so; and 'tis a rash dog, sir."

"It is just nine now."

"Send out to see if they have taken him."

"Gladly."

The Beau beckoned an attendant, and whispered in his ear.

Many of the crowd had edged up to the two gentlemen with apparent
carelessness, to overhear their conversation. Those who did overhear
repeated it in covert asides, and this circulating undertone, confirming
a vague rumor that Beaucaire would attempt the entrance that night, lent
a pleasurable color of excitement to the evening. The French prince, the
ambassador, and their suites were announced. Polite as the assembly
was, it was also curious, and there occurred a mannerly rush to see the
newcomers. Lady Mary, already pale, grew whiter as the throng closed
round her; she looked up pathetically at the Duke, who lost no time in
extricating her from the pressure.

"Wait here," he said; "I will fetch you a glass of negus," and
disappeared. He had not thought to bring a chair, and she, looking about
with an increasing faintness and finding none, saw that she was standing
by the door of a small side-room. The crowd swerved back for the passage
of the legate of France, and pressed upon her. She opened the door, and
went in.

The room was empty save for two gentlemen, who were quietly playing
cards at a table. They looked up as she entered. They were M. Beaucaire
and Mr. Molyneux.

She uttered a quick cry and leaned against the wall, her hand to her
breast. Beaucaire, though white and weak, had brought her a chair before
Molyneux could stir.

"Mademoiselle--"

"Do not touch me!" she said, with such frozen abhorrence in her voice
that he stopped short. "Mr. Molyneux, you seek strange company!"

"Madam," replied Molyneux, bowing deeply, as much to Beaucaire as to
herself, "I am honored by the presence of both of you.

"Oh, are you mad!" she exclaimed, contemptuously.

"This gentleman has exalted me with his confidence, madam," he replied.

"Will you add your ruin to the scandal of this fellow's presence here?
How he obtained entrance--"

"Pardon, mademoiselle," interrupted Beaucaire. "Did I not say I should
come? M. Molyneux was so obliging as to answer for me to the fourteen
frien's of M. de Winterset and Meestaire Nash."

"Do you not know," she turned vehemently upon Molyneux, "that he will be
removed the moment I leave this room? Do you wish to be dragged out
with him? For your sake, sir, because I have always thought you a man
of heart, I give you a chance to save yourself from disgrace--and--your
companion from jail. Let him slip out by some retired way, and you
may give me your arm and we will enter the next room as if nothing had
happened. Come, sir--"

"Mademoiselle--"

"Mr. Molyneux, I desire to hear nothing from your companion. Had I not
seen you at cards with him I should have supposed him in attendance as
your lackey. Do you desire to take advantage of my offer, sir?"

"Mademoiselle, I could not tell you, on that night--"

"You may inform your high-born friend, Mr. Molyneux, that I heard
everything he had to say; that my pride once had the pleasure of
listening to his high-born confession!"

"Ah, it is gentle to taunt one with his birth, mademoiselle? Ah, no!
There is a man in my country who say strange things of that--that a man
is not his father, but himself."

"You may inform your friend, Mr. Molyneux, that he had a chance to
defend himself against accusation; that he said all--"

"That I did say all I could have strength to say. Mademoiselle, you did
not see--as it was right--that I had been stung by a big wasp. It was
nothing, a scratch; but, mademoiselle, the sky went round and the moon
dance' on the earth. I could not wish that big wasp to see he had stung
me; so I mus' only say what I can have strength for, and stand straight
till he is gone. Beside', there are other rizzons. Ah, you mus' belief!
My Molyneux I sen' for, and tell him all, because he show courtesy
to the yo'ng Frenchman, and I can trus' him. I trus' you,
mademoiselle--long ago--and would have tol' you ev'rything, excep' jus'
because--well, for the romance, the fon! You belief? It is so clearly
so; you do belief, mademoiselle?"

She did not even look at him. M. Beaucaire lifted his hand appealingly
toward her. "Can there be no faith in--in--he said timidly, and paused.
She was silent, a statue, my Lady Disdain.

"If you had not belief' me to be an impostor; if I had never said I was
Chateaurien; if I had been jus' that Monsieur Beaucaire of the story
they tol' you, but never with the heart of a lackey, an hones' man, a
man, the man you knew, himself, could you--would you--" He was trying
to speak firmly; yet, as he gazed upon her splendid beauty, he
choked slightly, and fumbled in the lace at his throat with unsteady
fingers.--"Would you--have let me ride by your side in the autumn
moonlight?" Her glance passed by him as it might have passed by a
footman or a piece of furniture. He was dressed magnificently, a
multitude of orders glittering on his breast. Her eye took no knowledge
of him.

"Mademoiselle-I have the honor to ask you: if you had known this
Beaucaire was hones', though of peasant birth, would you--"

Involuntarily, controlled as her icy presence was, she shuddered. There
was a moment of silence.

"Mr. Molyneux," said Lady Mary, "in spite of your discourtesy in
allowing a servant to address me, I offer you a last chance to leave
this room undisgraced. Will you give me your arm?"

"Pardon me, madam," said Mr. Molyneux.

Beaucaire dropped into a chair with his head bent low and his arm
outstretched on the table; his eyes filled slowly in spite of himself,
and two tears rolled down the young man's cheeks.

"An' live men are jus'--names!" said M. Beaucaire.



Chapter Six


In the outer room, Winterset, unable to find Lady Mary, and supposing
her to have joined Lady Rellerton, disposed of his negus, then
approached the two visitors to pay his respects to the young prince,
whom he discovered to be a stripling of seventeen, arrogant looking,
but pretty as a girl. Standing beside the Marquis de Mirepoix--a man of
quiet bearing--he was surrounded by a group of the great, among whom Mr.
Nash naturally counted himself. The Beau was felicitating himself that
the foreigners had not arrived a week earlier, in which case he and Bath
would have been detected in a piece of gross ignorance concerning the
French nobility--making much of de Mirepoix's ex-barber.

"'Tis a lucky thing that fellow was got out of the way," he ejaculated,
under cover.

"Thank me for it," rejoined Winterset.

An attendant begged Mr. Nash's notice. The head bailiff sent word that
Beaucaire had long since entered the building by a side door. It was
supposed Mr. Nash had known of it, and the Frenchman was not arrested,
as Mr. Molyneux was in his company, and said he would be answerable for
him. Consternation was so plain on the Beau's trained face that the Duke
leaned toward him anxiously.

"The villain's in, and Molyneux hath gone mad!"

Mr. Bantison, who had been fiercely elbowing his way toward them, joined
heads with them. "You may well say he is in," he exclaimed "and if you
want to know where, why, in yonder card-room. I saw him through the
half-open door."

"What's to be done?" asked the Beau.

"Send the bailiffs--"

"Fie, fie! A file of bailiffs? The scandal!"

"Then listen to me," said the Duke. "I'll select half-a-dozen gentlemen,
explain the matter, and we'll put him in the center of us and take him
out to the bailiffs. 'Twill appear nothing. Do you remain here and
keep the attention of Beaujolais and de Mirepoix. Come, Bantison, fetch
Townbrake and Harry Rakell yonder; I'll bring the others."

Three minutes later, his Grace of Winterset flung wide the card-room
door, and, after his friends had entered, closed it.

"Ah!" remarked M. Beaucaire quietly. "Six more large men."

The Duke, seeing Lady Mary, started; but the angry signs of her
interview had not left her face, and reassured him. He offered his hand
to conduct her to the door. "May I have the honor?"

"If this is to be known, 'twill be better if I leave after; I should be
observed if I went now."

"As you will, madam," he answered, not displeased. "And now, you
impudent villain," he began, turning to M. Beaucaire, but to fall back
astounded. "'Od's blood, the dog hath murdered and robbed some royal
prince!" He forgot Lady Mary's presence in his excitement. "Lay hands on
him!" he shouted. "Tear those orders from him!"

Molyneux threw himself between. "One word!" he cried. "One word before
you offer an outrage you will repent all your lives!"

"Or let M. de Winterset come alone," laughed M. Beaucaire.

"Do you expect me to fight a cut-throat barber, and with bare hands?"

"I think one does not expec' monsieur to fight anybody. Would I fight
you, you think? That was why I had my servants, that evening we play.
I would gladly fight almos' any one in the won'; but I did not wish to
soil my hand with a--"

"Stuff his lying mouth with his orders!" shouted the Duke.

But Molyneux still held the gentlemen back. "One moment," he cried.

"M. de Winterset," said Beaucaire, "of what are you afraid? You
calculate well. Beaucaire might have been belief--an impostor that you
yourself expose'? Never! But I was not goin' reveal that secret. You
have not absolve me of my promise."

"Tell what you like," answered the Duke. "Tell all the wild lies
you have time for. You have five minutes to make up your mind to go
quietly."

"Now you absolve me, then? Ha, ha! Oh, yes! Mademoiselle," he bowed to
Lady Mary, "I have the honor to reques' you leave the room. You shall
miss no details if these frien's of yours kill me, on the honor of a
French gentleman."

"A French what?" laughed Bantison.

"Do you dare keep up the pretense?" cried Lord Town brake. "Know, you
villain barber, that your master, the Marquis de Mirepoix, is in the
next room."

Molyneux heaved a great sigh of relief. "Shall I--" He turned to M.
Beaucaire.

The young man laughed, and said: "Tell him come here at once.

"Impudent to the last!" cried Bantison, as Molyneux hurried from the
room.

"Now you goin' to see M. Beaucaire's master," said Beaucaire to Lady
Mary. "'Tis true what I say, the other night. I cross from Prance in his
suite; my passport say as his barber. Then to pass the ennui of exile, I
come to Bath and play for what one will. It kill the time. But when the
people hear I have been a servant they come only secretly; and there
is one of them--he has absolve' me of a promise not to speak--of him I
learn something he cannot wish to be tol'. I make some trouble to learn
this thing. Why I should do this? Well--that is my own rizzon. So I make
this man help me in a masque, the unmasking it was, for, as there is no
one to know me, I throw off my black wig and become myself--and so I
am 'Chateaurien,' Castle Nowhere. Then this man I use', this Winterset,
he--"

"I have great need to deny these accusations?" said the Duke.

"Nay," said Lady Mary wearily.

"Shall I tell you why I mus' be 'Victor' and 'Beaucaire' and
'Chateaurien,' and not myself?"

"To escape from the bailiffs for debts for razors and soap," gibed Lord
Townbrake.

"No, monsieur. In France I have got a cousin who is a man with a very
bad temper at some time', and he will never enjoy his relatives to do
what he does not wish--"

He was interrupted by a loud commotion from without. The door was flung
open, and the young Count of Beaujolais bounded in and threw his arms
about the neck of M. Beaucaire.

"Philippe!" he cried. "My brother, I have come to take you back with
me."

M. de Mirepoix followed him, bowing as a courtier, in deference; but M.
Beaucaire took both his hands heartily. Molyneux came after, with Mr.
Nash, and closed the door.

"My warmest felicitations," said the Marquis. "There is no longer need
for your incognito."

"Thou best of masters!" said Beaucaire, touching him fondly on the
shoulder. "I know. Your courier came safely. And so I am forgiven! But
I forget." He turned to the lady. She had begun to tremble exceedingly.
"Faires' of all the English fair," he said, as the gentlemen bowed low
to her deep courtesy, "I beg the honor to presen' to Lady Mary Carlisle,
M. le Comte de Beaujolais. M. de Mirepoix has already the honor. Lady
Mary has been very kind to me, my frien's; you mus' help me make my
acknowledgment. Mademoiselle and gentlemen, will you give me that favour
to detain you one instan'?"

"Henri," he turned to the young Beaujolais, "I wish you had shared my
masque--I have been so gay!" The surface of his tone was merry, but
there was an undercurrent, weary--sad, to speak of what was the mood,
not the manner. He made the effect of addressing every one present, but
he looked steadily at Lady Mary. Her eyes were fixed upon him, with a
silent and frightened fascination, and she trembled more and more. "I am
a great actor, Henri. These gentlemen are yet scarce convince' I am not
a lackey! And I mus' tell you that I was jus' now to be expelled for
having been a barber!"

"Oh, no!" the ambassador cried out. "He would not be content with me;
he would wander over a strange country."

"Ha, ha, my Mirepoix! And what is better, one evening I am oblige'
to fight some frien's of M. de Winterset there, and some ladies and
cavaliers look on, and they still think me a servant. Oh, I am a great
actor! 'Tis true there is not a peasant in France who would not have
then known one 'born'; but they are wonderful, this English people,
holding by an idea once it is in their heads--a mos' worthy quality. But
my good Molyneux here, he had speak to me with courtesy, jus' because
I am a man an' jus' because he is always kind. (I have learn' that
his great-grandfather was a Frenchman.) So I sen' to him and tell him
ev'rything, and he gain admittance for me here to-night to await my
frien's.

"I was speaking to messieurs about my cousin, who will meddle in the
affair' of his relatives. Well, that gentleman, he make a marriage for
me with a good and accomplish' lady, very noble and very beautiful--and
amiable." (The young count at his elbow started slightly at this, but
immediately appeared to wrap himself in a mantle of solemn thought.)
"Unfortunately, when my cousin arrange' so, I was a dolt, a little
blockhead; I swear to marry for myself and when I please, or never if
I like. That lady is all things charming and gentle, and, in truth, she
is--very much attach' to me--why should I not say it? I am so proud of
it. She is very faithful and forgiving and sweet; she would be the
same, I think, if I--were even--a lackey. But I? I was a dolt, a little
unsensible brute; I did not value such thing' then; I was too yo'ng,
las' June. So I say to my cousin, 'No, I make my own choosing!' 'Little
fool,' he answer, 'she is the one for you. Am I not wiser than you?' And
he was very angry, and, as he has influence in France, word come' that
he will get me put in Vincennes, so I mus' run away quick till his anger
is gone. My good frien' Mirepoix is jus' leaving for London; he take'
many risk' for my sake; his hairdresser die before he start', so I
travel as that poor barber. But my cousin is a man to be afraid of when
he is angry, even in England, and I mus' not get my Mirepoix in trouble.
I mus' not be discover' till my cousin is ready to laugh about it all
and make it a joke. And there may be spies; so I change my name again,
and come to Bath to amuse my retreat with a little gaming--I am always
fond of that. But three day' ago M. le Marquis send me a courier to say
that my brother, who know where I had run away, is come from France to
say that my cousin is appease'; he need me for his little theatre, the
play cannot go on. I do not need to espouse mademoiselle. All shall be
forgiven if I return, and my brother and M. de Mirepoix will meet me in
Bath to felicitate.

"There is one more thing to say, that is all. I have said I learn' a
secret, and use it to make a man introduce me if I will not tell. He has
absolve' me of that promise. My frien's, I had not the wish to ruin that
man. I was not receive'; Meestaire Nash had reboff me; I had no other
way excep' to use this fellow. So I say, 'Take me to Lady Malbourne's
ball as "Chateaurien."' I throw off my wig, and shave, and behol', I am
M. le Duc de Castle Nowhere. Ha, ha! You see?"

The young man's manner suddenly changed. He became haughty, menacing.
He stretched out his arm, and pointed at Winterset. "Now I am no
'Beaucaire,' messieurs. I am a French gentleman. The man who introduce'
me at the price of his honor, and then betray' me to redeem it, is that
coward, that card-cheat there!"

Winterset made a horrible effort to laugh. The gentlemen who surrounded
him fell away as from pestilence. "A French gentleman!" he sneered
savagely, and yet fearfully. "I don't know who you are. Hide behind as
many toys and ribbons as you like; I'll know the name of the man who
dares bring such a charge!"

"Sir!" cried de Mirepoix sharply, advancing a step towards him; but he
checked himself at once. He made a low bow of state, first to the young
Frenchman, then to Lady Mary and the company. "Permit me, Lady Mary
and gentlemen," he said, "to assume the honor of presenting you to His
Highness, Prince Louis-Philippe de Valois, Duke of Orleans, Duke of
Chartres, Duke of Nemours, Duke of Montpeti'sier, First Prince of
the Blood Royal, First Peer of France, Lieutenant-General of French
Infantry, Governor of Dauphine, Knight of the Golden Fleece, Grand
Master of the Order of Notre Dame, of Mount Carmel, and of St. Lazarus
in Jerusalem; and cousin to His most Christian Majesty, Louis the
Fifteenth, King of France."

"Those are a few of my brother's names," whispered Henri of Beaujolais
to Molyneux. "Old Mirepoix has the long breath, but it take' a strong
man two day' to say all of them. I can suppose this Winterset know' now
who bring the charge!"

"Castle Nowhere!" gasped Beau Nash, falling back upon the burly prop of
Mr. Bantison's shoulder.

"The Duke of Orleans will receive a message from me within the hour!"
said Winterset, as he made his way to the door. His face was black with
rage and shame.

"I tol' you that I would not soil my hand with you," answered the young
man. "If you send a message no gentleman will bring it. Whoever shall
bear it will receive a little beating from Francois."

He stepped to Lady Mary's side. Her head was bent low, her face averted.
She seemed to breathe with difficulty, and leaned heavily upon a chair.
"Monseigneur," she faltered in a half whisper, "can you--forgive me? It
is a bitter--mistake-I have made. Forgive."

"Forgive?" he answered, and his voice was as broken as hers; but he went
on, more firmly: "It is--nothing--less than nothing. There is--only jus'
one--in the--whole worl' who would not have treat' me the way that you
treat' me. It is to her that I am goin' to make reparation. You know
something, Henri? I am not goin' back only because the king forgive'
me. I am goin' to please him; I am goin' to espouse mademoiselle, our
cousin. My frien's, I ask your felicitations."

"And the king does not compel him!" exclaimed young Henri.

"Henri, you want to fight me?" cried his brother sharply. "Don' you
think the King of France is a wiser man than me?"

He offered his hand to Lady Mary. "Mademoiselle is fatigue'. Will she
honor me?"

He walked with her to the door. Her hand fluttering faintly in his.
From somewhere about the garments of one of them a little cloud of faded
rose-leaves fell, and lay strewn on the floor behind them. He opened the
door, and the lights shone on a multitude of eager faces turned toward
it. There was a great hum of voices, and, over all, the fiddles wove a
wandering air, a sweet French song of the voyageur.

He bowed very low, as, with fixed and glistening eyes, Lady Mary
Carlisle, the Beauty of Bath, passed slowly by him and went out of the
room.

========================================
========================================

HIS OWN PEOPLE

by Booth Tarkington





I. A Change of Lodging

The glass-domed "palm-room" of the Grand Continental Hotel Magnifique in
Rome is of vasty heights and distances, filled with a mellow green light
which filters down languidly through the upper foliage of tall palms,
so that the two hundred people who may be refreshing or displaying
themselves there at the tea-hour have something the look of under-water
creatures playing upon the sea-bed. They appear, however, to be unaware
of their condition; even the ladies, most like anemones of that
gay assembly, do not seem to know it; and when the Hungarian band
(crustacean-like in costume, and therefore well within the picture)
has sheathed its flying tentacles and withdrawn by dim processes, the
tea-drinkers all float out through the doors, instead of bubbling up
and away through the filmy roof. In truth, some such exit as that was
imagined for them by a young man who remained in the aquarium after they
had all gone, late one afternoon of last winter. They had been marvelous
enough, and to him could have seemed little more so had they made such a
departure. He could almost have gone that way himself, so charged was
he with the uplift of his belief that, in spite of the brilliant
strangeness of the hour just past, he had been no fish out of water.

While the waiters were clearing the little tables, he leaned back in his
chair in a content so rich it was nearer ecstasy. He could not bear to
disturb the possession joy had taken of him, and, like a half-awake boy
clinging to a dream that his hitherto unkind sweetheart has kissed him,
lingered on in the enchanted atmosphere, his eyes still full of all they
had beheld with such delight, detaining and smiling upon each revelation
of this fresh memory--the flashingly lovely faces, the dreamily lovely
faces, the pearls and laces of the anemone ladies, the color and
romantic fashion of the uniforms, and the old princes who had been
pointed out to him: splendid old men wearing white mustaches and single
eye-glasses, as he had so long hoped and dreamed they did.

"Mine own people!" he whispered. "I have come unto mine own at last.
Mine own people!" After long waiting (he told himself), he had seen
them--the people he had wanted to see, wanted to know, wanted to
be _of!_ Ever since he had begun to read of the "beau monde" in his
schooldays, he had yearned to know some such sumptuous reality as that
which had come true to-day, when, at last, in Rome he had seen--as he
wrote home that night--"the finest essence of Old-World society mingling
in Cosmopolis."

Artificial odors (too heavy to keep up with the crowd that had
worn them) still hung about him; he breathed them deeply, his eyes
half-closed and his lips noiselessly formed themselves to a quotation
from one of his own poems:

       While trails of scent, like cobweb's films
         Slender and faint and rare,
       Of roses, and rich, fair fabrics,
         Cling on the stirless air,
       The sibilance of voices,
         At a wave of Milady's glove,
       Is stilled--

He stopped short, interrupting himself with a half-cough of laughter as
he remembered the inspiration of these verses. He had written them three
months ago, at home in Cranston, Ohio, the evening after Anna McCord's
"coming-out tea." "Milady" meant Mrs. McCord; she had "stilled" the
conversation of her guests when Mary Kramer (whom the poem called a
"sweet, pale singer") rose to sing Mavourneen; and the stanza closed
with the right word to rhyme with "glove." He felt a contemptuous pity
for his little, untraveled, provincial self of three months ago, if,
indeed, it could have been himself who wrote verses about Anna McCord's
"coming-out tea" and referred to poor, good old Mrs. McCord as "Milady"!

The second stanza had intimated a conviction of a kind which only poets
may reveal:

       She sang to that great assembly,
         They thought, as they praised her tone;
       But she and my heart knew better:
         Her song was for me alone.

He had told the truth when he wrote of Mary Kramer as pale and sweet,
and she was paler, but no less sweet, when he came to say good-by to
her before he sailed. Her face, as it was at the final moment of the
protracted farewell, shone before him very clearly now for a moment:
young, plaintive, white, too lamentably honest to conceal how much her
"God-speed" to him cost her. He came very near telling her how fond of
her he had always been; came near giving up his great trip to remain
with her always.

"Ah!" He shivered as one shivers at the thought of disaster narrowly
averted. "The fates were good that I only came near it!"

He took from his breast-pocket an engraved card, without having to
search for it, because during the few days the card had been in his
possession the action had become a habit.

"Comtesse de Vaurigard," was the name engraved, and below was written in
pencil: "To remember Monsieur Robert Russ Mellin he promise to come to
tea Hotel Magnifique, Roma, at five o'clock Thursday."


There had been disappointment in the first stages of his journey, and
that had gone hard with Mellin. Europe had been his goal so long, and
his hopes of pleasure grew so high when (after his years of saving and
putting by, bit by bit, out of his salary in a real-estate office)
he drew actually near the shining horizon. But London, his first
stopping-place, had given him some dreadful days. He knew nobody, and
had not understood how heavily sheer loneliness--which was something he
had never felt until then--would weigh upon his spirits. In Cranston,
where the young people "grew up together," and where he met a dozen
friends on the street in a half-hour's walk, he often said that he
"liked to be alone with himself." London, after his first excitement in
merely being there, taught him his mistake, chilled him with weeks of
forbidding weather, puzzled and troubled him.

He was on his way to Paris when (as he recorded in his journal) a light
came into his life. This illumination first shone for him by means of
one Cooley, son and inheritor of all that had belonged to the late great
Cooley, of Cooley Mills, Connecticut. Young Cooley, a person of
cheery manners and bright waistcoats, was one of Mellin's few
sea-acquaintances; they had played shuffleboard together on the steamer
during odd half-hours when Mr. Cooley found it possible to absent
himself from poker in the smoking-room; and they encountered each other
again on the channel boat crossing to Calais.

_"Hey!"_ was Mr. Cooley's lively greeting. "I'm meetin' lots of people
I know to-day. You runnin' over to Paris, too? Come up to the boat-deck
and meet the Countess de Vaurigard."

"Who?" said Mellin, red with pleasure, yet fearing that he did not hear
aright.

"The Countess de Vaurigard. Queen! met her in London. Sneyd introduced
me to her. You remember Sneyd on the steamer? Baldish Englishman--red
nose--doesn't talk much--younger brother of Lord Rugden, so he says.
Played poker some. Well, _yes!_"

"I saw him. I didn't meet him."

"You didn't miss a whole lot. Fact is, before we landed I almost had him
sized up for queer, but when he introduced me to the Countess I saw my
mistake. He must be the real thing. _She_ certainly is! You come along
up and see."

So Mellin followed, to make his bow before a thin, dark, charmingly
pretty young woman, who smiled up at him from her deck-chair through
an enhancing mystery of veils; and presently he found himself sitting
beside her. He could not help trembling slightly at first, but he would
have giving a great deal if, by some miraculous vision, Mary Kramer and
other friends of his in Cranston could have seen him engaged in what he
thought of as "conversational badinage" with the Comtesse de Vaurigard.

Both the lady and her name thrilled him. He thought he remembered the
latter in Froissart: it conjured up "baronial halls" and "donjon keeps,"
rang resonantly in his mind like "Let the portcullis fall!" At home he
had been wont to speak of the "oldest families in Cranston," complaining
of the invasions of "new people" into the social territory of the
McCords and Mellins and Kramers--a pleasant conception which the
presence of a De Vaurigard revealed to him as a petty and shameful
fiction; and yet his humility, like his little fit of trembling, was
of short duration, for gay geniality of Madame de Vaurigard put him
amazingly at ease.

At Calais young Cooley (with a matter-of-course air, and not seeming to
feel the need of asking permission) accompanied her to a compartment,
and Mellin walked with them to the steps of the coach, where he paused,
murmuring some words of farewell.

Madame de Vaurigard turned to him with a prettily assumed dismay.

"What! You stay at Calais?" she cried, pausing with one foot on the step
to ascend. "Oh! I am sorry for you. Calais is ter-rible!"

"No. I am going on to Paris."

"So? You have frien's in another coach which you wish to be wiz?"

"No, no, indeed," he stammered hastily.

"Well, my frien'," she laughed gayly, "w'y don' you come wiz us?"

Blushing, he followed Cooley into the coach, to spend five happy hours,
utterly oblivious of the bright French landscape whirling by outside the
window.

There ensued a month of conscientious sightseeing in Paris, and that
unfriendly city afforded him only one glimpse of the Countess. She
whizzed by him in a big touring-car one afternoon as he stood on an
"isle of safety" at the foot of the Champs Elysees. Cooley was driving
the car. The raffish, elderly Englishman (whose name, Mellin knew,
was Sneyd) sat with him, and beside Madame de Vaurigard in the tonneau
lolled a gross-looking man--unmistakably an American--with a jovial,
red, smooth-shaven face and several chins. Brief as the glimpse was,
Mellin had time to receive a distinctly disagreeable impression of this
person, and to wonder how Heaven could vouchsafe the society of Madame
de Vaurigard to so coarse a creature.

All the party were dressed as for the road, gray with dust, and to all
appearances in a merry mood. Mellin's heart gave a leap when he saw that
the Countess recognized him. Her eyes, shining under a white veil, met
his for just the instant before she was quite by, and when the machine
had passed a little handkerchief waved for a moment from the side of the
tonneau where she sat.

With that he drew the full breath of Romance.

He had always liked to believe that _"grandes dames"_ leaned back in
the luxurious upholstery of their victorias, landaulettes, daumonts or
automobiles with an air of inexpressible though languid hauteur. The
Newport letter in the Cranston Telegraph often referred to it. But
the gayety of that greeting from the Countess' little handkerchief
was infinitely refreshing, and Mellin decided that animation was more
becoming than hauteur--even to a _"grande dame."_

That night he wrote (almost without effort) the verses published in the
Cranston Telegraph two weeks later. They began:

       _Marquise, ma belle_, with your kerchief of
         lace
       Awave from your flying car,
       And your slender hand--

The hand to which he referred was the same which had arrested his
gondola and his heart simultaneously, five days ago, in Venice. He was
on his way to the station when Madame de Vaurigard's gondola shot out
into the Grand Canal from a narrow channel, and at her signal both boats
paused.

"Ah! but you fly away!" she cried, lifting her eyebrows mournfully,
as she saw the steamer-trunk in his gondola. "You are goin' return to
America?"

"No. I'm just leaving for Rome."

"Well, in three day' _I_ am goin' to Rome!" She clapped her hands
lightly and laughed. "You know this is three time' we meet jus' by
chance, though that second time it was so quick--_pff_! like that--we
didn't talk much togezzer! Monsieur Mellin," she laughed again, "I think
we mus' be frien's. Three time'--an' we are both goin' to Rome! Monsieur
Mellin, you believe in _Fate_?"

With a beating heart he did.

Thence came the invitation to meet her at the Magnifique for tea, and
the card she scribbled for him with a silver pencil. She gave it with
the prettiest gesture, leaning from her gondola to his as they parted.
She turned again, as the water between them widened, and with her "_Au
revoir_" offered him a faintly wistful smile to remember.

All the way to Rome the noises of the train beat out the measure of his
Parisian verses:

       _Marquise, ma belle_, with your kerchief of
         lace
       Awave from your flying car--

He came out of his reverie with a start. A dozen men and women, dressed
for dinner, with a gold-fish officer or two among them, swam leisurely
through the aquarium on their way to the hotel restaurant. They were the
same kind of people who had sat at the little tables for tea--people of
the great world, thought Mellin: no vulgar tourists or "trippers" among
them; and he shuddered at the remembrance of his pension (whither it was
time to return) and its conscientious students of Baedeker, its dingy
halls and permanent smell of cold food. Suddenly a high resolve lit his
face: he got his coat and hat from the brass-and-blue custodian in the
lobby, and without hesitation entered the "bureau."

"I 'm not quite satisfied where I am staying--where I'm stopping, that
is," he said to the clerk. "I think I'll take a room here."

"Very well, sir. Where shall I send for your luggage?"

"I shall bring it myself," replied Mellin coldly, "in my cab."

He did not think it necessary to reveal the fact that he was staying at
one of the cheaper pensions; and it may be mentioned that this reticence
(as well as the somewhat chilling, yet careless, manner of a gentleman
of the "great world" which he assumed when he returned with his trunk
and bag) very substantially increased the rate put upon the room he
selected at the Magnifique. However, it was with great satisfaction
that he found himself installed in the hotel, and he was too recklessly
exhilarated, by doing what he called the "right thing," to waste any
time wondering what the "right thing" would do to the diminishing pad of
express checks he carried in the inside pocket of his waistcoat.

"Better live a fortnight like a gentleman," he said, as he tossed his
shoes into a buhl cabinet, "than vegetate like a tourist for a year."

He had made his entrance into the "great world" and he meant to hold his
place in it as one "to the manor born." Its people should not find
him lacking: he would wear their manner and speak their language--no
gaucherie should betray him, no homely phrase escape his lips.

This was the chance he had always hoped for, and when he fell asleep
in his gorgeous, canopied bed, his soul was uplifted with happy
expectations.





II. Music on the Pincio

The following afternoon found him still in that enviable condition as
he stood listening to the music on the Pincian Hill. He had it of rumor
that the Fashion of Rome usually took a turn there before it went to
tea, and he had it from the lady herself that Madame de Vaurigard would
be there. Presently she came, reclining in a victoria, the harness of
her horses flashing with gold in the sunshine. She wore a long ermine
stole; her hat was ermine; she carried a muff of the same fur, and
Mellin thought it a perfect finish to the picture that a dark gentleman
of an appearance most distinguished should be sitting beside her. An
Italian noble, surely!

He saw the American at once, nodded to him and waved her hand. The
victoria went on a little way beyond the turn of the drive, drew out of
the line of carriages, and stopped.

"Ah, Monsieur Mellin," she cried, as he came up, "I am glad! I was so
foolish yesterday I didn' give you the address of my little apartment
an' I forgot to ask you what is your hotel. I tol' you I would come here
for my drive, but still I might have lost you for ever. See what many
people! It is jus' that Fate again."

She laughed, and looked to the Italian for sympathy in her kindly
merriment. He smiled cordially upon her, then lifted his hat and smiled
as cordially upon Mellin.

"I am so happy to fin' myself in Rome that I forget"--Madame de
Vaurigard went on--"_ever'sing!_ But now I mus' make sure not to lose
you. What is your hotel?"

"Oh, the Magnifique," Mellin answered carelessly. "I suppose everybody
that one knows stops there. One does stop there, when one is in Rome,
doesn't one?"

"Everybody go' there for tea, and to eat, sometime, but to _stay_--ah,
that is for the American!" she laughed. "That is for you who are all so
abomin-_ab_-ly rich!" She smiled to the Italian again, and both of them
smiled beamingly on Mellin.

"But that isn't always our fault, is it?" said Mellin easily.

"Aha! You mean you are of the new generation, of the yo'ng American' who
come over an' try to spen' these immense fortune'--those _'pile'_--your
father or your gran-father make! I know quite well. Ah?"

"Well," he hesitated, smiling. "I suppose it does look a little by way
of being like that."

"Wicked fellow!" She leaned forward and tapped his shoulder chidingly
with two fingers. "I know what you wish the mos' in the worl'--you
wish to get into mischief. That is it! No, sir, I will jus' take you in
han'!"

"When will you take me?" he asked boldly.

At this, the pleasant murmur of laughter--half actual and half
suggested--with which she underlined the conversation, became loud and
clear, as she allowed her vivacious glance to strike straight into his
upturned eyes, and answered:

"As long as a little turn roun' the hill, _now_. Cavaliere Corni--"

To Mellin's surprise and delight the Italian immediately descended from
the victoria without the slightest appearance of irritation; on
the contrary, he was urbane to a fine degree, and, upon Madame de
Vaurigard's formally introducing him to Mellin, saluted the latter with
grave politeness, expressing in good English a hope that they might meet
often. When the American was installed at the Countess' side she spoke
to the driver in Italian, and they began to move slowly along the ilex
avenue, the coachman reining his horses to a walk.

"You speak Italian?" she inquired.

"Oh, not a great deal more than a smattering," he replied airily--a
truthful answer, inasmuch as a vocabulary consisting simply of _"quanty
costy"_ and _"troppo"_ cannot be seriously considered much more than a
smattering. Fortunately she made no test of his linguistic attainment,
but returned to her former subject.

"Ah, yes, all the worl' to-day know' the new class of American," she
said--"_your_ class. Many year' ago we have another class which Europe
didn' like. That was when the American was ter-ri-ble! He was the--what
is that you call?--oh, yes; he 'make himself,' you say: that is it. My
frien', he was abominable! He brag'; he talk' through the nose; yes,
and he was niggardly, rich as he was! But you, you yo'ng men of the new
generation, you are gentlemen of the idleness; you are aristocrats, with
polish an' with culture. An' yet you throw your money away--yes, you
throw it to poor Europe as if to a beggar!"

"No, no," he protested with an indulgent laugh which confessed that the
truth was really "Yes, yes."

"Your smile betray' you!" she cried triumphantly. "More than jus' bein'
guilty of that fault, I am goin' to tell you of others. You are not the
ole-time--what is it you say?--Ah, yes, the 'goody-goody.' I have
heard my great American frien', Honor-able Chanlair Pedlow, call it the
Sonday-school. Is it not? Yes, you are not the Sonday-school yo'ng men,
you an' your class!"

"No," he said, bestowing a long glance upon a stout nurse who
was sitting on a bench near the drive and attending to twins in a
perambulator. "No, we're not exactly dissenting parsons."

"Ah, no!" She shook her head at him prettily. "You are wicked! You are
up into all the mischief! Have I not hear what wild sums you risk at
your game, that poker? You are famous for it."

"Oh, we play," he admitted with a reckless laugh, "and I suppose we do
play rather high."

"High!" she echoed. "_Souzands!_ But that is not all. Ha, ha, ha,
naughty one! Have I not observe' you lookin' at these pretty creature',
the little contadina-girl, an' the poor ladies who have hire' their
carriages for two lire to drive up and down the Pincio in their bes'
dress an' be admire' by the yo'ng American while the music play'? Which
one I wonder, is it on whose wrist you would mos' like to fasten a
bracelet of diamon's? Wicked, I have watch' you look at them--"

"No, no," he interrupted earnestly. "I have not once looked away from
you, I _could n't_." Their eyes met, but instantly hers were lowered;
the bright smile with which she had been rallying him faded and there
was a pause during which he felt that she had become very grave. When
she spoke, it was with a little quaver, and the controlled pathos of
her voice was so intense that it evoked a sympathetic catch in his own
throat.

"But, my frien', if it should be that I cannot wish you to look so at
me, or to speak so to me?"

"I beg your pardon!" he exclaimed, almost incoherently. "I didn't mean
to hurt your feelings. I wouldn't do anything you'd think ungentlemanly
for the world!"

Her eyes lifted again to his with what he had no difficulty in
recognizing as a look of perfect trust; but, behind that, he perceived a
darkling sadness.

"I know it is true," she murmured--"I know. But you see there are time'
when a woman has sorrow--sorrow of one kind--when she mus' be sure that
there is only--only rispec' in the hearts of her frien's."

With that, the intended revelation was complete, and the young man
understood, as clearly as if she had told him in so many words, that she
was not a widow and that her husband was the cause of her sorrow. His
quickened instinct marvelously divined (or else it was conveyed to him
by some intangible method of hers) that the Count de Vaurigard was a
very bad case, but that she would not divorce him.

"I know," he answered, profoundly touched. "I understand."

In silent gratitude she laid her hand for a second upon his sleeve. Then
her face brightened, and she said gayly:

"But we shall not talk of _me!_ Let us see how we can keep you out of
mischief at leas' for a little while. I know very well what you will do
to-night: you will go to Salone Margherita an' sit in a box like all the
wicked Americans--"

"No, indeed, I shall not!"

"Ah, yes, you will!" she laughed. "But until dinner let me keep you from
wickedness. Come to tea jus' wiz me, not at the hotel, but at the little
apartment I have taken, where it is quiet. The music is finish', an' all
those pretty girl' are goin' away, you see. I am not selfish if I take
you from the Pincio now. You will come?"





III. Glamour

It was some fair dream that would be gone too soon, he told himself, as
they drove rapidly through the twilight streets, down from the Pincio
and up the long slope of the Quirinal. They came to a stop in the gray
courtyard of a palazzo, and ascended in a sleepy elevator to the fifth
floor. Emerging, they encountered a tall man who was turning away
from the Countess' door, which he had just closed. The landing was not
lighted, and for a moment he failed to see the American following Madame
de Vaurigard.

"Eow, it's you, is it," he said informally. "Waitin' a devil of a long
time for you. I've gawt a message for you. _He's_ comin'. He writes that
Cooley--"

_"Attention!"_ she interrupted under her breath, and, stepping forward
quickly, touched the bell. "I have brought a frien' of our dear, droll
Cooley with me to tea. Monsieur Mellin, you mus' make acquaintance with
Monsieur Sneyd. He is English, but we shall forgive him because he is a
such ole frien' of mine."

"Ah, yes," said Mellin. "Remember seeing you on the boat, running across
the pond."

"Yes, ev coss," responded Mr. Sneyd cordially. "I wawsn't so fawchnit
as to meet you, but dyuh eold Cooley's talked ev you often. Heop I sh'll
see maw of you hyuh."

A very trim, very intelligent-looking maid opened the door, and the
two men followed Madame de Vaurigard into a square hall, hung with
tapestries and lit by two candles of a Brobdingnagian species Mellin had
heretofore seen only in cathedrals. Here Mr. Sneyd paused.


"I weon't be bawthring you," he said. "Just a wad with you, Cantess, and
I'm off."

The intelligent-looking maid drew back some heavy curtains leading to a
salon beyond the hall, and her mistress smiled brightly at Mellin.

"I shall keep him to jus' his one word," she said, as the young man
passed between the curtains.

It was a nobly proportioned room that he entered, so large that, in
spite of the amount of old furniture it contained, the first impression
it gave was one of spaciousness. Panels of carved and blackened wood
lined the walls higher than his head; above them, Spanish leather
gleamed here and there with flickerings of red and gilt, reflecting
dimly a small but brisk wood fire which crackled in a carved stone
fireplace. His feet slipped on the floor of polished tiles and wandered
from silky rugs to lose themselves in great black bear skins as in
unmown sward. He went from the portrait of a "cinquecento" cardinal to
a splendid tryptich set over a Gothic chest, from a cabinet sheltering
a collection of old glass to an Annunciation by an unknown Primitive.
He told himself that this was a "room in a book," and became dreamily
assured that he was a man in a book. Finally he stumbled upon something
almost grotesquely out of place: a large, new, perfectly-appointed
card-table with a sliding top, a smooth, thick, green cover and patent
compartments.

He halted before this incongruity, regarding it with astonishment.
Then a light laugh rippled behind him, and he turned to find Madame de
Vaurigard seated in a big red Venetian chair by the fire.

She wore a black lace dress, almost severe in fashion, which gracefully
emphasized her slenderness; and she sat with her knees crossed, the
firelight twinkling on the beads of her slipper, on her silken instep,
and flashing again from the rings upon the slender fingers she had
clasped about her knee.

She had lit a thin, long Russian cigarette.

"You see?" she laughed. "I mus' keep up with the time. I mus' do
somesing to hold my frien's about me. Even the ladies like to play
now--that breedge w'ich is so tiresome--they play, play, play! And
you--you Americans, you refuse to endure us if we do not let you play.
So for my frien's when they come to my house--if they wish it, there
is that foolish little table. I fear"--she concluded with a bewitching
affectation of sadness--"they prefer that to talkin' wiz me."

"You know that couldn't be so, _Comtesse_," he said. "I would rather
talk to you than--than--"

"Ah, yes, you say so, Monsieur!" She looked at him gravely; a little
sigh seemed to breathe upon her lips; she leaned forward nearer the
fire, her face wistful in the thin, rosy light, and it seemed to him he
had never seen anything so beautiful in his life.

He came across to her and sat upon a stool at her feet. "On my soul," he
began huskily, "I swear--"

She laid her finger on her lips, shaking her head gently; and he was
silent, while the intelligent maid--at that moment entering--arranged a
tea-table and departed.

"American an' Russian, they are the worse," said the Countess
thoughtfully, as she served him with a generous cup, laced with rum,
"but the American he is the bes' to play _wiz_." Mellin found her
irresistible when she said "wiz."

"Why is that?"

"Oh, the Russian play high, yes--but the American"--she laughed
delightedly and stretched her arms wide--"he make' it all a joke! He is
beeg like his beeg country. If he win or lose, he don' care! Ah, I mus'
tell you of my great American frien', that Honor-able Chanlair Pedlow,
who is comin' to Rome. You have heard of Honor-able Chanlair Pedlow in
America?"

"I remember hearing that name."

"Ah, I shall make you know him. He is a man of distinction; he did sit
in your Chamber of Deputies--what you call it?--yes, your Con-gress. He
is funny, eccentric--always he roar like a lion--Boum!--but so simple,
so good, a man of such fine heart--so lovable!"

"I'll be glad to meet him," said Mellin coldly.

"An', oh, yes, I almos' forget to tell you," she went on, "your frien',
that dear Cooley, he is on his way from Monte Carlo in his automobile. I
have a note from him to-day."

"Good sort of fellow, little Cooley, in his way," remarked her companion
graciously. "Not especially intellectual or that, you know. His father
was a manufacturer chap, I believe, or something of the sort. I suppose
you saw a lot of him in Paris?"

"Eh, I thought he is dead!" cried Madame de Vaurigard.

"The father is. I mean, little Cooley."

"Oh, yes," she laughed softly. "We had some gay times, a little party
of us. We shall be happy here, too; you will see. I mus' make a little
dinner very soon, but not unless you will come. You will?"

"Do you want me very much?"

He placed his empty cup on the table and leaned closer to her, smiling.
She did not smile in response; instead, her eyes fell and there was the
faintest, pathetic quiver of her lower lip.

"Already you know that," she said in a low voice.

She rose quickly, turned away from him and walked across the room to the
curtains which opened upon the hall. One of these she drew back.

"My frien', you mus' go now," she said in the same low voice. "To-morrow
I will see you again. Come at four an' you shall drive with me--but
not--not more--_now_. Please!"

She stood waiting, not looking at him, but with head bent and eyes
veiled. As he came near she put out a limp hand. He held it for a few
seconds of distinctly emotional silence, then strode swiftly into the
hall.

She immediately let the curtain fall behind him, and as he got his
hat and coat he heard her catch her breath sharply with a sound like a
little sob.

Dazed with glory, he returned to the hotel. In the lobby he approached
the glittering concierge and said firmly:

"What is the Salone Margherita? Cam you get me a box there to-night?"





IV. Good Fellowship

He confessed his wickedness to Madame de Vaurigard the next afternoon
as they drove out the Appian Way. "A fellow must have just a bit of
a fling, you know," he said; "and, really, Salone Margherita isn't so
tremendously wicked."

She shook her head at him in friendly raillery. "Ah, that may be;
but how many of those little dancing-girl' have you invite to supper
afterward?"

This was a delicious accusation, and though he shook his head in
virtuous denial he was before long almost convinced that he _had_ given
a rather dashing supper after the vaudeville and had _not_ gone quietly
back to the hotel, only stopping by the way to purchase an orange and a
pocketful of horse-chestnuts to eat in his room.

It was a happy drive for Robert Russ Mellin, though not happier than
that of the next day. Three afternoons they spent driving over the
Campagna, then back to Madame de Vaurigard's apartment for tea by the
firelight, till the enraptured American began to feel that the dream in
which he had come to live must of happy necessity last forever.

On the fourth afternoon, as he stepped out of the hotel elevator into
the corridor, he encountered Mr. Sneyd.

"Just stottin', eh?" said the Englishman, taking an envelope from his
pocket. "Lucky I caught you. This is for you. I just saw the Cantess
and she teold me to give it you. Herry and read it and kem on t' the
Amairikin Baw. Chap I want you to meet. Eold Cooley's thyah too. Gawt in
with his tourin'-caw at noon."

     "You will forgive, dear friend," wrote Madame de Vaurigard,
     "if I ask you that we renounce our drive to-day.  You see, I
     wish to have that little dinner to-night and must make
     preparation. Honorable Chandler Pedlow arrived this morning
     from Paris and that droll Mr. Cooley I have learn is
     coincidentally arrived also.  You see I think it would be
     very pleasant to have the dinner to welcome these friends on
     their arrival.  You will come surely--or I shall be so truly
     miserable.  You know it perhaps too well!  We shall have a
     happy evening if you come to console us for renouncing our
     drive.  A thousand of my prettiest wishes for you.

     "Helene."


The signature alone consoled him. To have that note from her, to own it,
was like having one of her gloves or her fan. He would keep it forever,
he thought; indeed, he more than half expressed a sentiment to that
effect in the response which he wrote in the aquarium, while Sneyd
waited for him at a table near by. The Englishman drew certain
conclusions in regard to this reply, since it permitted a waiting
friend to consume three long tumblers of brandy-and-soda before it was
finished. However, Mr. Sneyd kept his reflections to himself, and, when
the epistle had been dispatched by a messenger, took the American's
arm and led him to the "American Bar" of the hotel, a region hitherto
unexplored by Mellin.

Leaning against the bar were Cooley and the man whom Mellin had seen
lolling beside Madame de Vaurigard in Cooley's automobile in Paris,
the same gross person for whom he had instantly conceived a strong
repugnance, a feeling not at once altered by a closer view.

Cooley greeted Mellin uproariously and Mr. Sneyd introduced the fat man.
"Mr. Mellin, the Honorable Chandler Pedlow," he said; nor was the shock
to the first-named gentleman lessened by young Cooley's adding, "Best
feller in the world!"

Mr. Pedlow's eyes were sheltered so deeply beneath florid rolls of flesh
that all one saw of them was an inscrutable gleam of blue; but, small
though they were, they were not shifty, for they met Mellin's with a
squareness that was almost brutal. He offered a fat paw, wet by a full
glass which he set down too suddenly on the bar.

"Shake," he said, in a loud and husky voice, "and be friends! Tommy," he
added to the attendant, "another round of Martinis."

"Not for me," said Mellin hastily. "I don't often--"

"_What!_" Mr. Pedlow roared suddenly. "Why, the first words Countess de
Vaurigard says to me this afternoon was, 'I want you to meet my young
friend Mellin,' she says; 'the gamest little Indian that ever come down
the pike! He's game,' she says--'he'll see you _all_ under the table!'
That's what the smartest little woman in the world, the Countess de
Vaurigard, says about you."

This did not seem very closely to echo Madame de Vaurigard's habit of
phrasing, but Mellin perceived that it might be only the fat man's way
of putting things.

"You ain't goin' back on _her_, are you?" continued Mr. Pedlow. "You
ain't goin' to make her out a liar? I tell you, when the Countess de
Vaurigard says a man 's game, he is game!" He laid his big paw cordially
on Mellin's shoulder and smiled, lowering his voice to a friendly
whisper. "And I'll bet ten thousand dollars right out of my pants pocket
you _are_ game, too!"

He pressed a glass into the other's hand. Smiling feebly, the
embarrassed Mellin accepted it.

"Make it four more, Tommy," said Pedlow. "And here," continued
this thoughtful man, "I don't go bandying no ladies' names around a
bar-room--that ain't my style--but I do want to propose a toast. I won't
name her, but you all know who I mean."

"Sure we do," interjected Cooley warmly. "Queen! That's what she is."

"Here's _to_ her," continued Mr. Pedlow. "Here's to her--brightest and
best--and no heel-taps! And now let's set down over in the corner and
take it easy. It ain't hardly five o'clock yet, and we can set here
comfortable, gittin' ready for dinner, until half-past six, anyway."

Whereupon the four seated themselves about a tabouret in the corner,
and, a waiter immediately bringing them four fresh glasses from the bar,
Mellin began to understand what Mr. Pedlow meant by "gittin' ready for
dinner." The burden of the conversation was carried almost entirely
by the Honorable Chandler, though Cooley, whose boyish face was deeply
flushed, now and then managed to interrupt by talking louder than the
fat man. Mr. Sneyd sat silent.

"Good ole Sneyd," said Pedlow. "_He_ never talks, jest saws wood. Only
Britisher I ever liked. Plays cards like a goat."

"He played a mighty good game on the steamer," said Cooley warmly.

"I don't care what he did on the steamer, he played like a goat the
only time _I_ ever played with him. You know he did. I reckon you was
_there!_"

"Should say I _was_ there! He played mighty well--"

"Like a goat," reiterated the fat man firmly.

"Nothing of the sort. You had a run of hands, that was all. Nobody can
go against the kind of luck you had that night; and you took it away
from Sneyd and me in rolls. But we'll land you pretty soon, won't we,
ole Sneydie?"

"We sh'll have a shawt at him, at least," said the Englishman.

"Perhaps he won't want us to try," young Cooley pursued derisively.
"Perhaps he thinks I play like a goat, too!"

Mr. Pedlow threw back his head and roared. "Give me somep'n easy! You
don't know no more how to play a hand of cards than a giraffe does. I'll
throw in all of my Blue Gulch gold-stock--and it's worth eight hundred
thousand dollars if it's worth a cent--I'll put it up against that tin
automobile of yours, divide chips even and play you freeze-out for it.
You play cards? Go learn hop-scotch!"

"You wait!" exclaimed the other indignantly. "Next time we play we'll
make you look so small you'll think you're back in Congress!"

At this Mr. Pedlow again threw back his head and roared, his vast body
so shaken with mirth that the glass he held in his hand dropped to the
floor.

"There," said Cooley, "that's the second Martini you've spilled. You're
two behind the rest of us."

"What of it?" bellowed the fat man. "There's plenty comin', ain't there?
Four more, Tommy, and bring cigars. Don't take a cent from none of these
Indians. Gentlemen, your money ain't good here. I own this bar, and this
is my night."

Mellin had begun to feel at ease, and after a time--as they continued to
sit--he realized that his repugnance to Mr. Pedlow was wearing off; he
felt that there must be good in any one whom Madame de Vaurigard liked.
She had spoken of Pedlow often on their drives; he was an "eccentric,"
she said, an "original." Why not accept her verdict? Besides, Pedlow
was a man of distinction and force; he had been in Congress; he was a
millionaire; and, as became evident in the course of a long recital of
the principal events of his career, most of the great men of the time
were his friends and proteges.

"'Well, Mack,' says I one day when we were in the House together"--(thus
Mr. Pedlow, alluding to the late President McKinley)--"'Mack,' says I,
'if you'd drop that double standard business'--he was waverin' toward
silver along then--'I don't know but I might git the boys to nominate
you fer President.' 'I'll think it over,' he says--'I'll think it over.'
You remember me tellin' you about that at the time, don't you, Sneyd,
when you was in the British Legation at Washin'ton?"

"Pahfictly," said Mr. Sneyd, lighting a cigar with great calmness.

"'Yes,' I says, 'Mack,' I says, 'if you'll drop it, I'll turn in and git
you the nomination.'"

"Did he drop it?" asked Mellin innocently.

Mr. Pedlow leaned forward and struck the young man's knee a resounding
blow with the palm of his hand.

"He was _nominated_, wasn't he?"

"Time to dress," announced Mr. Sneyd, looking at his watch.

"One more round first," insisted Cooley with prompt vehemence. "Let's
finish with our first toast again. Can't drink that too often."

This proposition was received with warmest approval, and they drank
standing. "Brightest and best!" shouted Mr. Pedlow.

"Queen! What she is!" exclaimed Cooley.

_"Ma belle Marquise!"_ whispered Mellin tenderly, as the rim touched his
lips.

A small, keen-faced man, whose steady gray eyes were shielded by
tortoise-rimmed spectacles, had come into the room and now stood quietly
at the bar, sipping a glass of Vichy. He was sharply observant of the
party as it broke up, Pedlow and Sneyd preceding the younger men to
the corridor, and, as the latter turned to follow, the stranger stepped
quickly forward, speaking Cooley's name.

"What's the matter?"

"Perhaps you don't remember me. My name's Cornish. I'm a newspaper man,
a correspondent." (He named a New York paper.) "I'm down here to get
a Vatican story. I knew your father for a number of years before his
death, and I think I may claim that he was a friend of mine."

"That's good," said the youth cordially. "If I hadn't a fine start
already, and wasn't in a hurry to dress, we'd have another."

"You were pointed out to me in Paris," continued Cornish. "I found
where you were staying and called on you the next day, but you had just
started for the Riviera." He hesitated, glancing at Mellin. "Can you
give me half a dozen words with you in private?"

"You'll have to excuse me, I'm afraid. I've only got about ten minutes
to dress. See you to-morrow."

"I should like it to be as soon as possible," the journalist said
seriously. "It isn't on my own account, and I--"

"All right. You come to my room at ten t'morrow morning?"

"Well, if you can't possibly make it to-night," said Cornish
reluctantly. "I wish--"

"Can't possibly."

And Cooley, taking Mellin by the arm, walked rapidly down the corridor.
"Funny ole correspondent," he murmured. "What do _I_ know about the
Vatican?"




V. Lady Mount Rhyswicke

The four friends of Madame de Vaurigard were borne to her apartment from
the Magnifique in Cooley's big car. They sailed triumphantly down and up
the hills in a cool and bracing air, under a moon that shone as brightly
for them as it had for Caesar, and Mellin's soul was buoyant within him.
He thought of Cranston and laughed aloud. What would Cranston say if it
could see him in a sixty-horse touring-car, with two millionaires and an
English diplomat, brother of an earl, and all on the way to dine with a
countess? If Mary Kramer could see him!... Poor Mary Kramer! Poor little
Mary Kramer!

A man-servant took their coats in Madame de Vaurigard's hall, where
they could hear through the curtains the sound of one or two voices in
cheerful conversation.

Sneyd held up his hand.

"Listen," he said. "Shawly, that isn't Lady Mount-Rhyswicke's voice! She
couldn't be in Reom--always a Rhyswicke Caws'l for Decembah. By Jev, it
is!"

"Nothin' of the kind," said Pedlow. "I know Lady Mount-Rhyswicke as well
as I know you. I started her father in business when he was clerkin'
behind a counter in Liverpool. I give him the money to begin on. 'Make
good,' says I, 'that's all. Make good!' And he done it, too. Educated
his daughter fit fer a princess, married her to Mount-Rhyswicke, and
when he died left her ten million dollars if he left her a cent! I know
Madge Mount-Rhyswicke and that ain't her voice."

A peal of silvery laughter rang from the other side of the curtain.

"They've heard you," said Cooley.

"An' who could help it?" Madame de Vaurigard herself threw back the
curtains. "Who could help hear our great, dear, ole lion? How he roar'!"

She wore a white velvet "princesse" gown of a fashion which was a shade
less than what is called "daring," with a rope of pearls falling from
her neck and a diamond star in her dark hair. Standing with one arm
uplifted to the curtains, and with the mellow glow of candles and
firelight behind her, she was so lovely that both Mellin and Cooley
stood breathlessly still until she changed her attitude. This she did
only to move toward them, extending a hand to each, letting Cooley seize
the right and Mellin the left.

Each of them was pleased with what he got, particularly Mellin. "The
left is nearer the heart," he thought.

She led them through the curtains, not withdrawing her hands until they
entered the salon. She might have led them out of her fifth-story window
in that fashion, had she chosen.

"My two wicked boys!" she laughed tenderly. This also pleased both of
them, though each would have preferred to be her only wicked boy--a
preference which, perhaps, had something to do with the later events of
the evening.

"Aha! I know you both; before twenty minute' you will be makin' love to
Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. Behol' those two already! An' they are only ole
frien's."

She pointed to Pedlow and Sneyd. The fat man was shouting at a woman in
pink satin, who lounged, half-reclining, among a pile of cushions upon a
divan near the fire; Sneyd gallantly bending over her to kiss her hand.

"It is a very little dinner, you see," continued the hostess, "only
seven, but we shall be seven time' happier."

The seventh person proved to be the Italian, Corni, who had surrendered
his seat in Madame de Vaurigard's victoria to Mellin on the Pincio. He
presently made his appearance followed by a waiter bearing a tray of
glasses filled with a pink liquid, while the Countess led her two wicked
boys across the room to present them to Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. Already
Mellin was forming sentences for his next letter to the Cranston
Telegraph: "Lady Mount-Rhyswicke said to me the other evening,
while discussing the foreign policy of Great Britain, in Comtesse de
Vaurigard's salon..." "An English peeress of pronounced literary acumen
has been giving me rather confidentially her opinion of our American
poets..."

The inspiration of these promising fragments was a large, weary-looking
person, with no lack of powdered shoulder above her pink bodice and a
profusion of "undulated" hair of so decided a blond that it might have
been suspected that the decision had lain with the lady herself.

"Howjdo," she said languidly, when Mellin's name was pronounced to her.
"There's a man behind you tryin' to give you something to drink."

"Who was it said these were Martinis?" snorted Pedlow. "They've got
perfumery in 'em."

"Ah, what a bad lion it is!" Madame de Vaurigard lifted both hands in
mock horror. "Roar, lion, roar!" she cried. "An' think of the emotion of
our good Cavaliere Corni, who have come an hour early jus' to make them
for us! I ask Monsieur Mellin if it is not good."

"And I'll leave it to Cooley," said Pedlow. "If he can drink all of his
I'll eat crow!"

Thus challenged, the two young men smilingly accepted glasses from the
waiter, and lifted them on high.

"Same toast," said Cooley. "Queen!"

_"A la belle Marquise!"_

Gallantly they drained the glasses at a gulp, and Madame de Vaurigard
clapped her hands.

"Bravo!" she cried. "You see? Corni and I, we win."

"Look at their faces!" said Mr. Pedlow, tactlessly drawing attention to
what was, for the moment, an undeniably painful sight. "Don't tell me an
Italian knows how to make a good Martini!"

Mellin profoundly agreed, but, as he joined the small procession to the
Countess' dinner-table, he was certain that an Italian at least knew how
to make a strong one.

The light in the dining-room was provided by six heavily-shaded candles
on the table; the latter decorated with delicate lines of orchids. The
chairs were large and comfortable, covered with tapestry; the glass was
old Venetian, and the servants, moving like useful ghosts in the shadow
outside the circle of mellow light, were particularly efficient in the
matter of keeping the wine-glasses full. Madame de Vaurigard had put
Pedlow on her right, Cooley on her left, with Mellin directly opposite
her, next to Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. Mellin was pleased, because he
thought he would have the Countess's face toward him. Anything would
have pleased him just then.

"This is the kind of table _everybody_ ought to have," he observed to
the party in general, as he finished his first glass of champagne. "I'm
going to have it like this at my place in the States--if I ever decide
to go back. I'll have six separate candlesticks like this, not a
candelabrum, and that will be the only light in the room. And I'll never
have anything but orchids on my table--"

"For my part," Lady Mount-Rhyswicke interrupted in the loud, tired
monotone which seemed to be her only manner of speaking, "I like more
light. I like all the light that's goin'."

"If Lady Mount-Rhyswicke sat at _my_ table," returned Mellin dashingly,
"I should wish all the light in the world to shine upon so happy an
event."

"Hear the man!" she drawled. "He's proposing to me. Thinks I'm a widow."

There was a chorus of laughter, over which rose the bellow of Mr.
Pedlow.

"'He's game!' she says--and _ain't_ he?"

Across the table Madame de Vaurigard's eyes met Mellin's with a mocking
intelligence so complete that he caught her message without need of the
words she noiselessly formed with her lips: "I tol' you you would be
making love to her!"

He laughed joyously in answer. Why shouldn't he flirt with Lady
Mount-Rhyswicke? He was thoroughly happy; his Helene, his _belle
Marquise_, sat across the table from him sending messages to him with
her eyes. He adored her, but he liked Lady Mount-Rhyswicke--he liked
everybody and everything in the world. He liked Pedlow particularly, and
it no longer troubled him that the fat man should be a friend of Madame
de Vaurigard. Pedlow was a "character" and a wit as well. Mellin laughed
heartily at everything the Honorable Chandler Pedlow said.

"This is life," remarked the young man to his fair neighbor.

"What is? Sittin' round a table, eatin' and drinkin'?"

"Ah, lovely skeptic!" She looked at him strangely, but he continued with
growing enthusiasm: "I mean to sit at such a table as this, with such
a chef, with such wines--to know one crowded hour like this is to live!
Not a thing is missing; all this swagger furniture, the rich atmosphere
of smartness about the whole place; best of all, the company. It's a
great thing to have the _real_ people around you, the right sort, you
know, socially; people you'd ask to your own table at home. There are
only seven, but every one _distingue_, every one--"

She leaned both elbows on the table with her hands palm to palm, and,
resting her cheek against the back of her left hand, looked at him
steadily.

"And you--are you distinguished, too?"

"Oh, I wouldn't be much known over _here_," he said modestly.

"Do you write poetry?"

"Oh, not professionally, though it is published. I suppose"--he sipped
his champagne with his head a little to one side as though judging its
quality--"I suppose I 've been more or less a dilettante. I've knocked
about the world a good bit."

"Helene says you're one of these leisure American billionaires like Mr.
Cooley there," she said in her tired voice.

"Oh, none of us are really quite billionaires." He laughed
deprecatingly.

"No, I suppose not--not really. Go on and tell me some more about life
and this distinguished company."

"Hey, folks!" Mr. Pedlow's roar broke in upon this dialogue. "You two
are gittin' mighty thick over there. We're drinking a toast, and you'll
have to break away long enough to join in."

"Queen! That's what she is!" shouted Cooley.

Mellin lifted his glass with the others and drank to Madame de
Vaurigard, but the woman at his side did not change her attitude and
continued to sit with her elbows on the table, her cheek on the back of
her hand, watching him thoughtfully.





VI. Rake's Progress

Many toasts were uproariously honored, the health of each member of the
party in turn, then the country of each: France and England first,
out of courtesy to the ladies, Italy next, since this beautiful and
extraordinary meeting of distinguished people (as Mellin remarked in a
short speech he felt called upon to make) took place in that wonderful
land, then the United States. This last toast the gentlemen felt it
necessary to honor by standing in their chairs.

[_Song: The Star-Spangled Banner--without words--by Mr. Cooley and
chorus._]

When the cigars were brought, the ladies graciously remained, adding
tiny spirals of smoke from their cigarettes to the layers of blue haze
which soon overhung the table. Through this haze, in the gentle light
(which seemed to grow softer and softer) Mellin saw the face of Helene
de Vaurigard, luminous as an angel's. She _was_ an angel--and the others
were gods. What could be more appropriate in Rome? Lady Mount-Rhyswicke
was Juno, but more beautiful. For himself, he felt like a god too,
Olympic in serenity.

He longed for mysterious dangers. How debonair he would stroll among
them! He wished to explore the unknown; felt the need of a splendid
adventure, and had a happy premonition that one was coming nearer and
nearer. He favored himself with a hopeful vision of the apartment on
fire, Robert Russ Mellin smiling negligently among the flames and Madame
de Vaurigard kneeling before him in adoration. Immersed in delight, he
puffed his cigar and let his eyes rest dreamily upon the face of Helene.
He was quite undisturbed by an argument, more a commotion than a debate,
between Mr. Pedlow and young Cooley. It ended by their rising, the
latter overturning a chair in his haste.

"I don't know the rudiments, don't I!" cried the boy. "You wait! Ole
Sneydie and I'll trim you down! Corni says he'll play, too. Come on,
Mellin."

"I won't go unless Helene goes," said Mellin. "What are you going to do
when you get there?"

"Alas, my frien'!" exclaimed Madame de Vaurigard, rising, "is it not
what I tol' you? Always you are never content wizout your play. You come
to dinner an' when it is finish' you play, play, play!"

"_Play_?" He sprang to his feet. "Bravo! That's the very thing I've been
wanting to do. I knew there was something I wanted to do, but I couldn't
think what it was."

Lady Mount-Rhyswicke followed the others into the salon, but Madame de
Vaurigard waited just inside the doorway for Mellin.

"_High_ play!" he cried. "We must play high! I won't play any other
way.--I want to play _high_!"

"Ah, wicked one! What did I tell you?"

He caught her hand. "And you must play too, Helene."

"No, no," she laughed breathlessly.

"Then you'll watch. Promise you'll watch me. I won't let you go till you
promise to watch me."

"I shall adore it, my frien'!"

"Mellin," called Cooley from the other room. "You comin' or not?"

"Can't you see me?" answered Mellin hilariously, entering with Madame de
Vaurigard, who was rosy with laughter. "Peculiar thing to look at a man
and not see him."

Candles were lit in many sconces on the walls, and the card-table had
been pushed to the centre of the room, little towers of blue, white
and scarlet counters arranged upon it in orderly rows like miniature
castles.

"Now, then," demanded Cooley, "are the ladies goin' to play?"

"Never!" cried Madame de Vaurigard.

"All right," said the youth cheerfully; "you can look on. Come and sit
by me for a mascot."

"You'll need a mascot, my boy!" shouted Pedlow. "That's right, though;
take her."

He pushed a chair close to that in which Cooley had already seated
himself, and Madame de Vaurigard dropped into it, laughing. "Mellin,
you set there," he continued, pushing the young man into a seat opposite
Cooley. "We'll give both you young fellers a mascot." He turned to Lady
Mount-Rhyswicke, who had gone to the settee by the fire. "Madge, you
come and set by Mellin," he commanded jovially. "Maybe he'll forget you
ain't a widow again."

"I don't believe I care much about bein' anybody's mascot to-night," she
answered. There was a hint of anger in her tired monotone.

"What?" He turned from the table and walked over to the fireplace. "I
reckon I didn't understand you," he said quietly, almost gently. "You
better come, hadn't you?"

She met his inscrutable little eyes steadily. A faint redness slowly
revealed itself on her powdered cheeks; then she followed him back to
the table and took the place he had assigned to her at Mellin's elbow.

"I'll bank," said Pedlow, taking a chair between Cooley and the Italian,
"unless somebody wants to take it off my hands. Now, what are we
playing?"

"Pokah," responded Sneyd with mild sarcasm.

"Bravo!" cried Mellin. "That's _my_ game. Ber-_ravo!_"

This was so far true: it was the only game upon which he had ever
ventured money; he had played several times when the wagers were allowed
to reach a limit of twenty-five cents.

"You know what I mean, I reckon," said Pedlow. "I mean what we are
playin' _fer_?"

"Twenty-five franc limit," responded Cooley authoritatively. "Double for
jacks. Play two hours and settle when we quit."

Mellin leaned back in his chair. "You call that high?" he asked, with a
sniff of contempt. "Why not double it?"

The fat man hammered the table with his fist delightedly. "'He's game,'
she says. 'He's the gamest little Indian ever come down the big road!'
she says. Was she right? What? Maybe she wasn't! We'll double it before
very long, my boy; this'll do to start on. There." He distributed
some of the small towers of ivory counters and made a memorandum in a
notebook. "There's four hundred apiece."

"That all?" inquired Mellin, whereupon Mr. Pedlow uproariously repeated
Madame de Vaurigard's alleged tribute.

As the game began, the intelligent-looking maid appeared from the
dining-room, bearing bottles of whisky and soda, and these she deposited
upon small tables at the convenience of the players, so that at the
conclusion of the first encounter in the gentle tournament there was
material for a toast to the gallant who had won it.

"Here's to the gamest Indian of us all," proposed the fat man. "Did you
notice him call me with a pair of tens? And me queen-high!"

Mellin drained a deep glass in honor of himself. "On my soul, Chan'
Pedlow, I think you're the bes' fellow in the whole world," he said
gratefully. "Only trouble with you--you don't want to play high enough."

He won again and again, adding other towers of counters to his original
allotment, so that he had the semblance of a tiny castle. When the cards
had been dealt for the fifth time he felt the light contact of a slipper
touching his foot under the table.

That slipper, he decided (from the nature of things) could belong to
none other than his Helene, and even as he came to this conclusion the
slight pressure against his foot was gently but distinctly increased
thrice. He pressed the slipper in return with his shoe, at the same time
giving Madame de Vaurigard a look of grateful surprise and tenderness,
which threw her into a confusion so evidently genuine that for an
unworthy moment he had a jealous suspicion she had meant the little
caress for some other.

It was a disagreeable thought, and, in the hope of banishing it, he
refilled his glass; but his mood had begun to change. It seemed to him
that Helene was watching Cooley a great deal too devotedly. Why had she
consented to sit by Cooley, when she had promised to watch Robert Russ
Mellin? He observed the pair stealthily.

Cooley consulted her in laughing whispers upon every discard, upon every
bet. Now and then, in their whisperings, Cooley's hair touched hers;
sometimes she laid her hand on his the more conveniently to look at his
cards. Mellin began to be enraged. Did she think that puling milksop
had as much as a shadow of the daring, the devilry, the carelessness of
consequences which lay within Robert Russ Mellin? "Consequences?" What
were they? There were no such things! She would not look at him--well,
he would make her! Thenceforward he raised every bet by another to the
extent of the limit agreed upon.

Mr. Cooley was thoroughly happy. He did not resemble Ulysses; he would
never have had himself bound to the mast; and there were already sounds
of unearthly sweetness in his ears. His conferences with his lovely
hostess easily consoled him for his losses. In addition, he was
triumphing over the boaster, for Mr. Pedlow, with a very ill grace
and swearing (not under his breath), was losing too. The Countess,
reiterating for the hundredth time that Cooley was a "wicked one,"
sweetly constituted herself his cup-bearer; kept his glass full and
brought him fresh cigars.

Mellin dealt her furious glances, and filled his own glass, for Lady
Mount-Rhyswicke plainly had no conception of herself in the role of a
Hebe. The hospitable Pedlow, observing this neglect, was moved to chide
her.

"Look at them two cooing doves over there," he said reproachfully, a
jerk of his bulbous thumb indicating Madame de Vaurigard and her young
protege. "Madge, can't you do nothin' fer our friend the Indian? Can't
you even help him to sody?"

"Oh, perhaps," she answered with the slightest flash from her tired
eyes. Then she nonchalantly lifted Mellin's replenished glass from the
table and drained it. This amused Cooley.

"I like that!" he chuckled. "That's one way of helpin' a feller! Helene,
can you do any better than that?"

"Ah, this dear, droll Cooley!"

The tantalizing witch lifted the youth's glass to his lips and let
him drink, as a mother helps a thirsty child. "_Bebe!_" she laughed
endearingly.

As the lovely Helene pronounced that word, Lady Mount-Rhyswicke was
leaning forward to replace Mellin's empty glass upon the table.

"I don't care whether you're a widow or not!" he shouted furiously. And
he resoundingly kissed her massive shoulder.

There was a wild shout of laughter; even the imperturbable Sneyd (who
had continued to win steadily) wiped tears from his eyes, and Madame
de Vaurigard gave way to intermittent hysteria throughout the ensuing
half-hour.

For a time Mellin sat grimly observing this inexplicable merriment with
a cold smile.

"Laugh on!" he commanded with bitter satire, some ten minutes after play
had been resumed--and was instantly obeyed.

Whereupon his mood underwent another change, and he became convinced
that the world was a warm and kindly place, where it was good to live.
He forgot that he was jealous of Cooley and angry with the Countess; he
liked everybody again, especially Lady Mount-Rhyswicke. "Won't you
sit farther forward?" he begged her earnestly; "so that I can see your
beautiful golden hair?"

He heard but dimly the spasmodic uproar that followed. "Laugh on!" he
repeated with a swoop of his arm. "I don't care! Don't you care either,
Mrs. Mount-Rhyswicke. Please sit where I can see your beautiful golden
hair. Don't be afraid I'll kiss you again. I wouldn't do it for the
whole world. You're one of the noblest women I ever knew. I feel that's
true. I don't know how I know it, but I know it. Let 'em laugh!"

After this everything grew more and more hazy to him. For a time there
was, in the centre of the haze, a nimbus of light which revealed his
cards to him and the towers of chips which he constantly called for and
which as constantly disappeared--like the towers of a castle in Spain.
Then the haze thickened, and the one thing clear to him was a phrase
from an old-time novel he had read long ago:

"Debt of honor."

The three words appeared to be written in flames against a background of
dense fog. A debt of honor was as promissory note which had to be
paid on Monday, and the appeal to the obdurate grandfather--a peer of
England, the Earl of Mount-Rhyswicke, in fact--was made at midnight,
Sunday. The fog grew still denser, lifted for a moment while he wrote
his name many times on slips of blue paper; closed down once more, and
again lifted--out-of-doors this time--to show him a lunatic ballet of
moons dancing streakily upon the horizon.

He heard himself say quite clearly, "All right, old man, thank you;
but don't bother about me," to a pallid but humorous Cooley in evening
clothes; the fog thickened; oblivion closed upon him for a seeming
second....




VII. The Next Morning

Suddenly he sat up in bed in his room at the Magnifique, gazing upon a
disconsolate Cooley in gray tweeds who sat heaped in a chair at the foot
of the bed with his head in his hands.

Mellin's first sensation was of utter mystification; his second was more
corporeal: the consciousness of physical misery, of consuming fever, of
aches that ran over his whole body, converging to a dreadful climax in
his head, of a throat so immoderately partched it seemed to crackle, and
a thirst so avid it was a passion. His eye fell upon a carafe of water
on a chair at his bedside; he seized upon it with a shaking hand and
drank half its contents before he set it down. The action attracted
his companion's attention and he looked up, showing a pale and haggard
countenance.

"How do you feel?" inquired Cooley with a wan smile.

Mellin's head dropped back upon the pillow and he made one or two
painful efforts to speak before he succeeded in finding a ghastly
semblance of his voice.

"I thought I was at Madame de Vaurigard's."

"You were," said the other, adding grimly: "We both were."

"But that was only a minute ago."

"It was six hours ago. It's goin' on ten o'clock in the morning."

"I don't understand how that can be. How did I get here?"

"I brought you. I was pretty bad, but you--I never saw anything like
you! From the time you kissed Lady Mount-Rhyswicke--"

Mellin sat bolt upright in bed, staring wildly. He began to tremble
violently.

"Don't you remember that?" asked Cooley.

Suddenly he did. The memory of it came with inexorable clarity, he
crossed forearms over his horror-stricken face and fell back upon his
pillow.

"Oh," he gasped. "Un-speakable! Un-speakable!"

"Lord! Don't worry about that! I don't think she minded."

"It's the thought of Madame de Vaurigard--it kills me! The horror of
it--that I should do such a thing in her house! She'll never speak to
me again, she oughtn't to; she ought to send her groom to beat me! You
can't think what I've lost--"

"Can't I!" Mr. Cooley rose from his chair and began to pace up and down
the chamber. "I can guess to within a thousand francs of what _I_'ve
lost! I had to get the hotel to cash a check on New York for me this
morning. I've a habit of carrying all my money in bills, and a fool
trick, too. Well, I'm cured of it!"

"Oh, if it were only a little _money_ and nothing else that I'd lost!
The money means nothing." Mellin choked.

"I suppose you're pretty well fixed. Well, so am I," Cooley shook his
head, "but money certainly means something to me!"

"It wouldn't if you'd thrown away the most precious friendship of your
life."

"See here," said Cooley, halting at the foot of the bed and looking at
his stricken companion from beneath frowning brows, "I guess I can see
how it is with you, and I'll tell you frankly it's been the same with
me. I never met such a fascinating woman in my life: she throws a
reg'ler ole-fashioned _spell_ over you! Now I hate to say it, but I
can't help it, because it plain hits me in the face every time I think
of it; the truth is--well, sir, I'm afraid you and me have had little
red soldier-coats and caps put on us and strings tied to our belts while
we turned somersets for the children."

"I don't understand. I don't know what you're talking about."

"No? It seems to get more and more simple to me. I've been thinking it
all over and over again. I can't _help_ it! See here: I met Sneyd on the
steamer, without any introduction. He sort of warmed into the game in
the smoking-room, and he won straight along the trip. He called on me in
London and took me to meet the Countess at her hotel. We three went
to the theatre and lunch and so forth a few times; and when I left for
Paris she turned up on the way: that's when you met her. Couple of days
later, Sneyd came over, and he and the Countess introduced me to dear
ole friend Pedlow. So you see, I don't rightly even know who any of 'em
really _are_: just took 'em for granted, as it were. We had lots of fun,
I admit that, honkin' about in my car. We only played cards once, and
that was in her apartment the last night before I left Paris, but that
one time Pedlow won fifteen thousand francs from me. When I told them my
plans, how I was goin' to motor down to Rome, she said _she_ would be in
Rome--and, I tell you, I was happy as a poodle-pup about it. Sneyd said
he might be in Rome along about then, and open-hearted ole Pedlow said
not to be surprised if _he_ turned up, too. Well, he did, almost to the
minute, and in the meantime she'd got _you_ hooked on, fine and tight."

"I don't understand you," Mellin lifted himself painfully on an elbow.
"I don't know what you're getting at, but it seems to me that you're
speaking disrespectfully of an angel that I've insulted, and I--"

"Now see here, Mellin, I'll tell you something." The boy's white face
showed sudden color and there was a catch in his voice. "I was--I've
been mighty near in _love_ with that woman! But I've had a kind of a
shock; I've got my common-sense back, and I'm _not_, any more. I don't
know exactly how much money I had, but it was between thirty-five and
thirty-eight thousand francs, and Sneyd won it all after we took off the
limit--over seven thousand dollars--at her table last night. Putting two
and two together, honestly it looks bad. It looks _mighty_ bad! Now, I'm
pretty well fixed, and yesterday I didn't care whether school kept or
not, but seven thousand dollars is real money to anybody! My old man
worked pretty hard for his first seven thousand, I guess, and"--he
gulped--"he'd think a lot of me for lettin' go of it the way I did last
night, _wouldn't_ he? You never _see_ things like this till the next
morning! And you remember that other woman sat where she could see every
hand _you_ drew, and the Countess--"

"Stop!" Mellin flung one arm up violently, striking the headboard with
his knuckles. "I won't hear a syllable against Madame de Vaurigard!"
Young Cooley regarded him steadily for a moment. "Have you remembered
yet," he said slowly, "how much _you_ lost last night?"

"I only remember that I behaved like an unspeakable boor in the presence
of the divinest creature that ever--"

Cooley disregarded the outburst, and said:

"When we settled, you had a pad of express company checks worth six
hundred dollars. You signed all of 'em and turned 'em over to Sneyd with
three one-hundred-lire bills, which was all the cash you had with you.
Then you gave him your note for twelve thousand francs to be paid within
three days. You made a great deal of fuss about its being a 'debt of
honor.'" He paused. "You hadn't remembered that, had you?"

Mellin had closed his eyes. He lay quite still and made no answer.

"No, I'll bet you hadn't," said Cooley, correctly deducing the fact.
"You're well off, or you wouldn't be at this hotel, and, for all I know,
you may be fixed so you won't mind your loss as much as I do mine; but
it ought to make you kind of charitable toward my suspicions of Madame
de Vaurigard's friends."

The six hundred dollars in express company checks and the three
hundred-lire bills were all the money the unhappy Mellin had in the
world, and until he could return to Cranston and go back to work in the
real-estate office again, he had no prospect of any more. He had not
even his steamer ticket. In the shock of horror and despair he whispered
brokenly:

"I don't care if they 're the worst people in the world, they're better
than I am!"

The other's gloom cleared a little at this. "Well, you _have_ got it!"
he exclaimed briskly. "You don't know how different you'll feel after a
long walk in the open air." He looked at his watch. "I've got to go and
see what that newspaper-man, Cornish, wants; it's ten o'clock. I'll be
back after a while; I want to reason this out with you. I don't deny but
it's possible I'm wrong; anyway, you think it over while I'm gone. You
take a good hard think, will you?"

As he closed the door, Mellin slowly drew the coverlet over his head. It
was as if he covered the face of some one who had just died.




VIII. What Cornish Knew


Two hours passed before young Cooley returned. He knocked twice without
a reply; then he came in.

The coverlet was still over Mellin's head.

"Asleep?" asked Cooley.

"No."

The coverlet was removed by a shaking hand.

"Murder!" exclaimed Cooley sympathetically, at sight of the other's
face. "A night off certainly does things to you! Better let me get you
some--"

"No. I'll be all right--after while."

"Then I'll go right ahead with our little troubles. I've decided to
leave for Paris by the one-thirty and haven't got a whole lot of time.
Cornish is here with me in the hall: he's got something to say that's
important for you to hear, and I'm goin' to bring him right in." He
waved his hand toward the door, which he had left open. "Come along,
Cornish. Poor ole Mellin'll play Du Barry with us and give us a morning
leevy while he listens in a bed with a palanquin to it. Now let's draw
up chairs and be sociable."

The journalist came in, smoking a long cigar, and took the chair the
youth pushed toward him; but, after a twinkling glance through his big
spectacles at the face on the pillow, he rose and threw the cigar out of
the window.

"Go ahead," said Cooley. "I want you to tell him just what you told me,
and when you're through I want to see if he doesn't think I'm Sherlock
Holmes' little brother."

"If Mr. Mellin does not feel too ill," said Cornish dryly; "I know how
painful such cases sometimes--"

"No." Mellin moistened his parched lips and made a pitiful effort to
smile. "I'll be all right very soon."

"I am very sorry," began the journalist, "that I wasn't able to get a
few words with Mr. Cooley yesterday evening. Perhaps you noticed that I
tried as hard as I could, without using actual force"--he laughed--"to
detain him."

"You did your best," agreed Cooley ruefully, "and I did my worst. Nobody
ever listens till the next day!"

"Well, I'm glad no vital damage was done, anyway," said Cornish. "It
would have been pretty hard lines if you two young fellows had been
poor men, but as it is you're probably none the worse for a lesson like
this."

"You seem to think seven thousand dollars is a joke," remarked Cooley.

Cornish laughed again. "You see, it flatters me to think my time was
so valuable that a ten minutes' talk with me would have saved so much
money."

"I doubt it," said Cooley. "Ten to one we'd neither of us have believed
you--last night!"

"I doubt it, too." Cornish turned to Mellin. "I hear that you, Mr.
Mellin, are still of the opinion that you were dealing with straight
people?"

Mellin managed to whisper "Yes."

"Then," said Cornish, "I'd better tell you just what I know about it,
and you can form your own opinion as to whether I do know or not. I have
been in the newspaper business on this side for fifteen years, and my
headquarters are in Paris, where these people are very well known. The
man who calls himself 'Chandler Pedlow' was a faro-dealer for Tom Stout
in Chicago when Stout's place was broken up, a good many years ago.
There was a real Chandler Pedlow in Congress from a California district
in the early nineties, but he is dead. This man's name is Ben Welch:
he's a professional swindler; and the Englishman, Sneyd, is another; a
quiet man, not so well known as Welch, and not nearly so clever, but a
good 'feeder' for him. The very attractive Frenchwoman who calls herself
'Comtesse de Vaurigard' is generally believed to be Sneyd's wife, though
I could not take the stand on that myself. Welch is the brains of the
organization: you mightn't think it, but he's a very brilliant
man--he might have made a great reputation in business if he'd been
straight--and, with this woman's help, he's carried out some really
astonishing schemes. His manner is clumsy; _he_ knows that, bless you,
but it's the only manner he can manage, and she is so adroit she can
sugar-coat even such a pill as that and coax people to swallow it. I
don't know anything about the Italian who is working with them down
here. But a gang of the Welch-Vaurigard-Sneyd type has tentacles all
over the Continent; such people are in touch with sharpers everywhere,
you see."

"Yes," Cooley interpolated, "and with woolly little lambkins, too."

"Well," chuckled Cornish, "that's the way they make their living, you
know."

"Go on and tell him the rest of it," urged Cooley.

"About Lady Mount-Rhyswicke," said Cornish, "it seems strange enough,
but she has a perfect right to her name. She is a good deal older than
she looks, and I've heard she used to be remarkably beautiful. Her third
husband was Lord George Mount-Rhyswicke, a man who'd been dropped from
his clubs, and he deserted her in 1903, but she has not divorced him. It
is said that he is somewhere in South America; however, as to that I do
not know."

Mr. Cornish put the very slightest possible emphasis on the word "know,"
and proceeded:

"I've heard that she is sincerely attached to him and sends him money
from time to time, when she has it--though that, too, is third-hand
information. She has been _declasse_ ever since her first divorce. That
was a 'celebrated case,' and she's dropped down pretty far in the world,
though I judge she's a good deal the best of this crowd. Exactly what
her relations to the others are I don't know, but I imagine that she's
pretty thick with 'em."

"Just a little!" exclaimed Cooley. "She sits behind one of the lambkins
and Helene behind the other while they get their woolly wool clipped. I
suppose the two of 'em signaled what was in every hand we held, though
I'm sure they needn't have gone to the trouble! Fact is, I don't see why
they bothered about goin' through the form of playin' cards with us
at all. They could have taken it away without that! Whee!" Mr. Cooley
whistled loud and long. "And there's loads of wise young men on the
ocean now, hurryin' over to take our places in the pens. Well, they can
have _mine_! Funny, Mellin: nobody would come up to you or me in the
Grand Central in New York and try to sell us greenbacks just as good
as real. But we come over to Europe with our pockets full o' money and
start in to see the Big City with Jesse James in a false mustache on one
arm, and Lucresha Borgy, under an assumed name, on the other!"

"I am afraid I agree with you," said Cornish; "though I must say that,
from all I hear, Madame de Vaurigard might put an atmosphere about a
thing which would deceive almost any one who wasn't on his guard. When a
Parisienne of her sort is clever at all she's irresistible."

"I believe you," Cooley sighed deeply.

"Yesterday evening, Mr. Mellin," continued the journalist, "when I saw
the son of my old friend in company with Welch and Sneyd, of course I
tried to warn him. I've often seen them in Paris, though I believe they
have no knowledge of me. As I've said, they are notorious, especially
Welch, yet they have managed, so far, to avoid any difficulty with the
Paris police, and, I'm sorry to say, it might be hard to actually prove
anything against them. You couldn't _prove_ that anything was crooked
last night, for instance. For that matter, I don't suppose you want to.
Mr. Cooley wishes to accept his loss and bear it, and I take it that
that will be your attitude, too. In regard to the note you gave Sneyd,
I hope you will refuse to pay; I don't think that they would dare press
the matter."

"Neither do I," Mr. Cooley agreed. "I left a silver cigarette-case at
the apartment last night, and after talkin' to Cornish a while ago, I
sent my man for it with a note to her that'll make 'em all sit up and
take some notice. The gang's all there together, you can be sure. I
asked for Sneyd and Pedlow in the office and found they'd gone out early
this morning leavin' word they wouldn't be back till midnight. And, see
here; I know I'm easy, but somehow I believe you're even a softer piece
o' meat than I am. I want you to promise me that whatever happens you
won't pay that I O U."

Mellin moistened his lips in vain. He could not answer.

"I want you to promise me not to pay it," repeated Cooley earnestly.

"I promise," gasped Mellin.

"You won't pay it no matter what they do?"

"No."

This seemed to reassure Mr. Cooley.

"Well," he said, "I've got to hustle to get my car shipped and make the
train. Cornish has finished his job down here and he's goin' with me. I
want to get out. The whole thing's left a mighty bad taste in my mouth,
and I'd go crazy if I didn't get away from it. Why don't you jump into
your clothes and come along, too?"

"I can't."

"Well," said the young man with a sympathetic shake of the head, "you
certainly look sick. It may be better if you stay in bed till evening:
a train's a mighty mean place for the day after. But I wouldn't hang
around here too long. If you want money, all you have to do is to ask
the hotel to cash a check on your home bank; they're always glad to
do that for Americans." He turned to the door. "Mr. Cornish, if you're
goin' to help me about shipping the car, I'm ready."

"So am I. Good-by, Mr. Mellin."

"Good-by," Mellin said feebly--"and thank you."

Young Cooley came back to the bedside and shook the other's feverish
hand. "Good-by, ole man. I'm awful sorry it's all happened, but I'm glad
it didn't cost you quite as much money as it did me. Otherwise I expect
it's hit us about equally hard. I wish--I wish I could find a _nice
one_"--the youth gulped over something not unlike a sob--"as fascinatin'
as her!"

Most people have had dreams of approaching dangers in the path of which
their bodies remained inert; when, in spite of the frantic wish to fly,
it was impossible to move, while all the time the horror crept closer
and closer. This was Mellin's state as he saw the young man going. It
was absolutely necessary to ask Cooley for help, to beg him for a loan.
But he could not.

He saw Cooley's hand on the doorknob; saw the door swing open.

"Good-by, again," Cooley said; "and good luck to you!"

Mellin's will strove desperately with the shame that held him silent.

The door was closing.

"Oh, Cooley," called Mellin hoarsely.

"Yes. What?"

"J-j-just good-by," said Mellin.

And with that young Cooley was gone.





IX. Expiation

A multitudinous clangor of bells and a dozen neighboring chimes rang
noon; then the rectangular oblongs of hot sunlight that fell from the
windows upon the carpet of Mellin's room began imperceptibly to shift
their angles and move eastward. From the stone pavement of the street
below came the sound of horses pawing and the voices of waiting cabmen;
then bells again, and more bells; clamoring the slow and cruel afternoon
into the past. But all was silent in Mellin's room, save when, from time
to time, a long, shuddering sigh came from the bed.

The unhappy young man had again drawn the coverlet over his head, but
not to sleep: it was more like a forlorn and desperate effort to hide,
as if he crept into a hole, seeking darkness to cover the shame and fear
that racked his soul. For though his shame had been too great to let him
confess to young Cooley and ask for help, his fear was as great as
his shame; and it increased as the hours passed. In truth his case was
desperate. Except the people who had stripped him, Cooley was the
only person in all of Europe with whom he had more than a very casual
acquaintance. At home, in Cranston, he had no friends susceptible
to such an appeal as it was vitally necessary for him to make. His
relatives were not numerous: there were two aunts, the widows of his
father's brothers, and a number of old-maid cousins; and he had an uncle
in Iowa, a country minister whom he had not seen for years. But he could
not cable to any of these for money; nor could he quite conjure his
imagination into picturing any of them sending it if he did. And even to
cable he would have to pawn his watch, which was an old-fashioned one of
silver and might not bring enough to pay the charges.

He began to be haunted by fragmentary, prophetic visions--confused but
realistic in detail, and horridly probable--of his ejectment from the
hotel, perhaps arrest and trial. He wondered what they did in Italy to
people who "beat" hotels; and, remembering what some one had told him
of the dreadfulness of Italian jails, convulsive shudderings seized upon
him.

The ruddy oblongs of sunlight crawled nearer to the east wall of the
room, stretching themselves thinner and thinner, until finally they
were not there at all, and the room was left in deepening grayness.
Carriages, one after the other, in unintermittent succession, rumbled
up to the hotel-entrance beneath the window, bringing goldfish for
the Pincio and the fountains of Villa Borghese. Wild strains from the
Hungarian orchestra, rhapsodical twankings of violins, and the runaway
arpeggios of a zither crazed with speed-mania, skipped along the
corridors and lightly through Mellin's door. In his mind's eye he saw
the gay crowd in the watery light, the little tables where only
five days ago he had sat with the loveliest of all the anemone-like
ladies....

The beautifully-dressed tea-drinkers were there now, under the green
glass dome, prattling and smiling, those people he had called his own.
And as the music sounded louder, faster, wilder and wilder with the
gipsy madness--then in that darkening bedchamber his soul became
articulate in a cry of humiliation--

"God in His mercy forgive me, how raw I was!"


A vision came before his closed eyes; the maple-bordered street in
Cranston, the long, straight, wide street where Mary Kramer lived; a
summer twilight; Mary in her white muslin dress on the veranda steps,
and a wistaria vine climbing the post beside her, half-embowering her.
How cool and sweet and good she looked! How dear--and how _kind_!--she
had always been to him.


Dusk stole through the windows: the music ceased and the tea-hour was
over. The carriages were departing, bearing the gay people who went
away laughing, calling last words to one another, and, naturally, quite
unaware that a young man, who, five days before, had adopted them and
called them "his own," was lying in a darkened room above them, and
crying like a child upon his pillow.





X. The Cab at the Corner

A ten o'clock, a page bearing a card upon a silver tray knocked upon the
door, and stared with wide-eyed astonishment at the disordered gentleman
who opened it.

The card was Lady Mount-Rhyswicke's. Underneath the name was written:

If you are there will you give me a few minutes? I am waiting in a cab
at the next corner by the fountain.

Mellin's hand shook as he read. He did not doubt that she came as an
emissary; probably they meant to hound him for payment of the note
he had given Sneyd, and at that thought he could have shrieked with
hysterical laughter.

"Do you speak English?" he asked.

"Spik little. Yes."

"Who gave you this card?"

"Coachman," said the boy. "He wait risposta."

"Tell him to say that I shall be there in five minutes."

"Fi' minute. Yes. Good-by."

Mellin was partly dressed--he had risen half an hour earlier and
had been distractedly pacing the floor when the page knocked--and he
completed his toilet quickly. He passed down the corridors, descended by
the stairway (feeling that to use the elevator would be another abuse of
the confidence of the hotel company) and slunk across the lobby with the
look and the sensations of a tramp who knows that he will be kicked into
the street if anybody catches sight of him.

A closed cab stood near the fountain at the next corner. There was a
trunk on the box by the driver, and the roof was piled with bags and
rugs. He approached uncertainly.

"Is--is this--is it Lady Mount-Rhyswicke?" he stammered pitifully.

She opened the door.

"Yes. Will you get in? We'll just drive round the block if you don't
mind. I'll bring you back here in ten minutes." And when he had
tremulously complied, "_Avanti, cocchiere_," she called to the driver,
and the tired little cab-horse began to draw them slowly along the
deserted street.

Lady Mount-Rhyswicke maintained silence for a time, while her companion
waited, his heart pounding with dreadful apprehensions. Finally she gave
a short, hard laugh and said:

"I saw your face by the corner light. Been havin' a hard day of it?"

The fear of breaking down kept him from answering. He gulped painfully
once or twice, and turned his face away from her. Light enough from a
streetlamp shone in for her to see.

"I was rather afraid you'd refuse," she said seriously. "Really, I
wonder you were willin' to come!"

"I was--I was afraid not to." He choked out the confession with the
recklessness of final despair.

"So?" she said, with another short laugh. Then she resumed her even,
tired monotone: "Your little friend Cooley's note this morning gave us
all a rather fair notion as to what you must be thinkin' of us. He seems
to have found a sort of walkin' 'Who's-Who-on-the-Continent' since last
night. Pity for some people he didn't find it before! I don't think I'm
sympathetic with your little Cooley. I 'guess,' as you Yankees say, 'he
can stand it.' But"--her voice suddenly became louder--"I'm not in the
business of robbin' babies and orphans, no, my dear friends, nor of
helpin' anybody else to rob them either!--Here you are!"

She thrust into his hand a small packet, securely wrapped in paper and
fastened with rubber bands. "There's your block of express checks for
six hundred dollars and your I O U to Sneyd with it. Take better care of
it next time."

He had been tremulous enough, but at that his whole body began to shake
violently.

"_What_!" he quavered.

"I say, take better care of it next time," she said, dropping again into
her monotone. "I didn't have such an easy time gettin' it back from them
as you might think. I've got rather a sore wrist, in fact."

She paused at an inarticulate sound from him.

"Oh, that's soon mended," she laughed drearily. "The truth is, it's been
a good thing for me--your turning up. They're gettin' in too deep water
for me, Helene and her friends, and I've broken with the lot, or they've
broken with me, whichever it is. We couldn't hang together after the
fightin' we've done to-day. I had to do a lot of threatenin' and things.
Welch was ugly, so I had to be ugly too. Never mind"--she checked an
uncertain effort of his to speak--"I saw what you were like, soon as
we sat down at the table last night--how new you were and all that. It
needed only a glance to see that Helene had made a mistake about you.
She'd got a notion you were a millionaire like the little Cooley, but
I knew better from your talk. She's clever, but she's French, and she
can't get it out of her head that you could be an American and not a
millionaire. Of course, they _all_ knew better when you brought out
your express checks and talked like somebody in one of the old-time
story-books about 'debts of honor.' Even Helene understood then that
the express checks were all you had." She laughed. "I didn't have any
trouble gettin' the _note_ back!"

She paused again for a moment, then resumed: "There isn't much use our
goin' over it all, but I want you to know one thing. Your little friend
Cooley made it rather clear that he accused Helene and me of signalin'.
Well, I didn't. Perhaps that's the reason you didn't lose as much as he
did; I can't say. And one thing more: all this isn't goin' to do you any
harm. I'm not very keen about philosophy and religion and that, but I
believe if you're let in for a lot of trouble, and it only _half_ kills
you, you can get some good of it."

"Do you think," he stammered--"do you think I'm worth saving?"

She smiled faintly and said:

"You've probably got a sweetheart in the States somewhere--a nice girl,
a pretty young thing who goes to church and thinks you're a great man,
perhaps? Is it so?"

"I am not worthy," he began, choked suddenly, then finished--"to breathe
the same air!"

"That's quite right," Lady Mount-Rhyswicke assured him. "Think what
you'd think of her if she'd got herself into the same sort of scrape by
doin' the things you've been doin'! And remember _that_ if you ever feel
impatient with her, or have any temptations to superiority in times to
come. And yet"--for the moment she spoke earnestly--"you go back to your
little girl, but don't you tell her a word of this. You couldn't
even tell her that meetin' you has helped me, because she wouldn't
understand."

"Nor do I. I can't."

"Oh, it's simple. I saw that if I was gettin' down to where I was
robbin' babies and orphans...." The cab halted. "Here's your corner. I
told him only to go round the block and come back. Good-by. I'm off for
Amalfi. It's a good place to rest."

He got out dazedly, and the driver cracked his whip over the little
horse; but Mellin lifted a detaining hand.

"_A spet_," called Lady Mount-Rhyswicke to the driver. "What is it, Mr.
Mellin?"

"I can't--I can't look you in the face," he stammered, his attitude
perfectly corroborative of his words. "I would--oh, I would kneel in the
dust here before you--"

"Some of the poetry you told me you write?"

"I've never written any poetry," he said, not looking up. "Perhaps I
can--now. What I want to say is--I'm so ashamed of it--I don't know how
to get the words out, but I must. I may never see you again, and I must.
I 'm sorry--please try to forgive me--I wasn't myself when I did it--"

"Blurt it out; that's the best way."

"I'm sorry," he floundered--"I'm sorry I kissed you."

She laughed her tired laugh and said in her tired voice the last words
he was ever destined to hear from her:

"Oh, I don't mind, if you don't. It was so innocent, it was what decided
me."

One of the hundreds of good saints that belong to Rome must have
overheard her and pitied the young man, for it is ascribable only to
some such special act of mercy that Mellin understood (and he did)
exactly what she meant.

========================================
========================================

MONSIEUR BEAUCAIRE


by Booth Tarkington




Chapter One


The young Frenchman did very well what he had planned to do. His guess
that the Duke would cheat proved good. As the unshod half-dozen figures
that had been standing noiselessly in the entryway stole softly into the
shadows of the chamber, he leaned across the table and smilingly plucked
a card out of the big Englishman's sleeve.

"Merci, M. le Duc!" he laughed, rising and stepping back from the table.

The Englishman cried out, "It means the dirty work of silencing you with
my bare hands!" and came at him.

"Do not move," said M. Beaucaire, so sharply that the other paused.
"Observe behind you."

The Englishman turned, and saw what trap he had blundered into; then
stood transfixed, impotent, alternately scarlet with rage and white
with the vital shame of discovery. M. Beaucaire remarked, indicating the
silent figures by a polite wave of the hand, "Is it not a compliment
to monsieur that I procure six large men to subdue him? They are quite
devote' to me, and monsieur is alone. Could it be that he did not wish
even his lackeys to know he play with the yo'ng Frenchman who Meestaire
Nash does not like in the pomp-room? Monsieur is unfortunate to have
come on foot and alone to my apartment."

The Duke's mouth foamed over with chaotic revilement. His captor
smiled brightly, and made a slight gesture, as one who brushes aside
a boisterous insect. With the same motion he quelled to stony quiet a
resentful impetus of his servants toward the Englishman.

"It's murder, is it, you carrion!" finished the Duke.

M. Beaucaire lifted his shoulders in a mock shiver. "What words! No, no,
no! No killing! A such word to a such host! No, no, not mur-r-der; only
disgrace!" He laughed a clear, light laugh with a rising inflection,
seeming to launch himself upon an adventurous quest for sympathy.

"You little devilish scullion!" spat out the Duke.

"Tut, tut! But I forget. Monsieur has pursue' his studies of deportment
amongs' his fellow-countrymen.

"Do you dream a soul in Bath will take your word that I--that I--"

"That M. le Duc de Winterset had a card up his sleeve?"

"You pitiful stroller, you stableboy, born in a stable--"

"Is it not an honor to be born where monsieur must have been bred?"

"You scurvy foot-boy, you greasy barber, you cutthroat groom--"

"Overwhelm'!" The young man bowed with imperturbable elation. "M. le Duc
appoint' me to all the office' of his househol'."

"You mustachioed fool, there are not five people of quality in Bath will
speak to you--"

"No, monsieur, not on the parade; but how many come to play with me
here? Because I will play always, night or day, for what one will, for
any long, and always fair, monsieur."

"You outrageous varlet! Every one knows you came to England as the
French Ambassador's barber. What man of fashion will listen to you? Who
will believe you?"

"All people, monsieur. Do you think I have not calculate', that I shall
make a failure of my little enterprise?"

"Bah!"

"Will monsieur not reseat himself?" M. Beaucaire made a low bow. "So. We
must not be too tire' for Lady Malbourne's rout. Ha, ha! And you,
Jean, Victor, and you others, retire; go in the hallway. Attend at the
entrance, Francois. So; now we shall talk. Monsieur, I wish you to think
very cool. Then listen; I will be briefly. It is that I am well known to
be all, entire' hones'. Gamblist? Ah, yes; true and mos profitable;
but fair, always fair; every one say that. Is it not so? Think of it.
And--is there never a w'isper come to M. le Duc that not all people
belief him to play always hones'? Ha, ha! Did it almos' be said to
him las' year, after when he play' with Milor' Tappin'ford at the
chocolate-house--"

"You dirty scandal-monger!" the Duke burst out. "I'll--"

"Monsieur, monsieur!" said the Frenchman. "It is a poor valor to insult
a helpless captor. Can he retort upon his own victim? But it is for you
to think of what I say. True, I am not reco'nize on the parade; that my
frien's who come here do not present me to their ladies; that Meestaire
Nash has reboff' me in the pomp-room; still, am I not known for being
hones' and fair in my play, and will I not be belief, even I, when I
lif' my voice and charge you aloud with what is already w'isper'? Think
of it! You are a noble, and there will be some hang-dogs who might not
fall away from you. Only such would be lef' to you. Do you want it tol'?
And you can keep out of France, monsieur? I have lef' his service, but
I have still the ear of M. de Mirepoix, and he know' I never lie. Not a
gentleman will play you when you come to Paris."

The Englishman's white lip showed a row of scarlet dots upon it. "How
much do you want?" he said.

The room rang with the gay laughter of Beaucaire. "I hol' your note' for
seven-hunder' pound'. You can have them, monsieur. Why does a such great
man come to play M. Beaucaire? Because no one else willin' to play M.
le Duc--he cannot pay. Ha, ha! So he come' to good Monsieur Beaucaire.
Money, ha, ha! What I want with money?"

His Grace of Winterset's features were set awry to a sinister pattern.
He sat glaring at his companion in a snarling silence.

"Money? Pouf!" snapped the little gambler. "No, no, no! It is that M.
le Duc, impoverish', somewhat in a bad odor as he is, yet command the
entree any-where--onless I--Ha, ha! Eh, monsieur?"

"Ha! You dare think to force me--"

M. Beaucaire twirled the tip of his slender mustache around the end
of his white forefinger. Then he said: "Monsieur and me goin' to Lady
Malbourne's ball to-night--M. le Duc and me!"

The Englishman roared, "Curse your impudence!"

"Sit quiet. Oh, yes, that's all; we goin' together."

"No!"

"Certain. I make all my little plan'. 'Tis all arrange'." He paused, and
then said gravely, "You goin' present me to Lady Mary Carlisle."

The other laughed in utter scorn. "Lady Mary Carlisle, of all women
alive, would be the first to prefer the devil to a man of no birth,
barber."

"'Tis all arrange'; have no fear; nobody question monsieur's You goin'
take me to-night--"

"No!"

"Yes. And after--then I have the entree. Is it much I ask? This one
little favor, and I never w'isper, never breathe that--it is to say, I
am always forever silent of monsieur's misfortune."

"You have the entree!" sneered the other. "Go to a lackeys' rout and
dance with the kitchen maids. If I would, I could not present you to
Bath society. I should have cartels from the fathers, brothers, and
lovers of every wench and madam in the place, even I. You would be
thrust from Lady Malbourne's door five minutes after you entered it."

"No, no, no!"

"Half the gentlemen in Bath have been here to play. They would know
you, wouldn't they, fool? You've had thousands out of Bantison, Rakell,
Guilford, and Townbrake. They would have you lashed by the grooms as
your ugly deserts are. You to speak to Lady Mary Carlisle! 'Od's blood!
You! Also, dolt, she would know you if you escaped the others. She stood
within a yard of you when Nash expelled you the pump-room."

M. Beaucaire flushed slightly. "You think I did not see?" he asked.

"Do you dream that' because Winterset introduces a low fellow he will be
tolerated--that Bath will receive a barber?"

"I have the distinction to call monsieur's attention," replied the young
man gayly, "I have renounce that profession."

"Fool!"

"I am now a man of honor!"

"Faugh!"

"A man of the parts," continued the the young Frenchman, "and of
deportment; is it not so? Have you seen me of a fluster, or gross ever,
or, what sall I say--bourgeois? Shall you be shame' for your guest'
manner? No, no! And my appearance, is it of the people? Clearly, no. Do
I not compare in taste of apparel with your yo'ng Englishman? Ha, ha! To
be hope'. Ha, ha! So I am goin' talk with Lady Mary Carlisle."

"Bah!" The Duke made a savage burlesque. "'Lady Mary Carlisle, may I
assume the honor of presenting the barber of the Marquis de Mirepoix?'
So, is it?"

"No, monsieur," smiled the young man. "Quite not so. You shall have
nothing to worry you, nothing in the worl'. I am goin' to assassinate my
poor mustachio--also remove this horrible black peruke, and emerge in my
own hair. Behol'!" He swept the heavy curled, mass from his head as he
spoke, and his hair, coiled under the great wig, fell to his shoulders,
and sparkled yellow in the candle-light. He tossed his head to shake the
hair back from his cheeks. "When it is dress', I am transform nobody can
know me; you shall observe. See how little I ask of you, how very little
bit. No one shall reco'nize 'M. Beaucaire' or 'Victor.' Ha, ha! 'Tis all
arrange'; you have nothing to fear."

"Curse you," said the Duke, "do you think I'm going to be saddled with
you wherever I go as long as you choose?"

"A mistake. No. All I requi--All I beg--is this one evening. 'Tis all
shall be necessary. After, I shall not need monsieur.

"Take heed to yourself--after!" vouchsafed the Englishman between his
teeth.

"Conquered!" cried M. Beaucaire, and clapped his hands gleefully.
"Conquered for the night! Aha, it ts riz'nable! I shall meet what
you send--after. One cannot hope too much of your patience. It is but
natural you should attemp' a little avengement for the rascal trap I
was such a wicked fellow as to set for you. I shall meet some strange
frien's of yours after to-night; not so? I must try to be not too much
frighten'." He looked at the Duke curiously. "You want to know why I
create this tragedy, why I am so unkind as to entrap monsieur?"

His Grace of Winterset replied with a chill glance; a pulse in the
nobleman's cheek beat less relentlessly; his eye raged not so bitterly;
the steady purple of his own color was returning; his voice was less
hoarse; he was regaining his habit. "'Tis ever the manner of the
vulgar," he observed, "to wish to be seen with people of fashion."

"Oh, no, no, no!" The Frenchman laughed. "'Tis not that. Am I not
already one of these 'men of fashion'? I lack only the reputation of
birth. Monsieur is goin' supply that. Ha, ha! I shall be noble from
to-night. 'Victor,' the artis', is condemn' to death; his throat shall
be cut with his own razor. 'M. Beaucaire--'" Here the young man sprang
to his feet, caught up the black wig, clapped into it a dice-box
from the table, and hurled it violently through the open door. "'M.
Beaucaire' shall be choke' with his own dice-box. Who is the Phoenix to
remain? What advantage have I not over other men of rank who are merely
born to it? I may choose my own. No! Choose for me, monsieur. Shall I
be chevalier, comte, vicomte, marquis, what? None. Out of compliment to
monsieur can I wish to be anything he is not? No, no! I shall be M.
le Duc, M. le Duc de--de Chateaurien. Ha, ha! You see? You are my
confrere."

M. Beaucaire trod a dainty step or two, waving his hand politely to the
Duke, as though in invitation to join the celebration of his rank.
The Englishman watched, his eye still and harsh, already gathering in
craftiness. Beaucaire stopped suddenly. "But how I forget my age! I am
twenty-three," he said, with a sigh. "I rejoice too much to be of the
quality. It has been too great for me, and I had always belief' myself
free of such ambition. I thought it was enough to behol' the opera
without wishing to sing; but no, England have teach' me I have those
vulgar desire'. Monsieur, I am goin' tell you a secret: the ladies of
your country are very diff'runt than ours. One may adore the demoiselle,
one must worship the lady of England. Our ladies have the--it is the
beauty of youth; yours remain comely at thirty. Ours are flowers, yours
are stars! See, I betray myself, I am so poor a patriot. And there is
one among these stars--ah, yes, there is one--the poor Frenchman has
observe' from his humble distance; even there he could bask in the
glowing!" M. Beaucaire turned to the window, and looked out into the
dark. He did not see the lights of the town. When he turned again, he
had half forgotten his prisoner; other pictures were before him.

"Ah, what radiance!" he cried. "Those people up over the sky, they want
to show they wish the earth to be happy, so they smile, and make this
lady. Gold-haired, an angel of heaven, and yet a Diana of the chase! I
see her fly by me on her great horse one day; she touch' his mane with
her fingers. I buy that clipping from the groom. I have it here with my
dear brother's picture. Ah, you! Oh, yes, you laugh! What do you know!
'Twas all I could get. But I have heard of the endeavor of M. le Duc to
recoup his fortunes. This alliance shall fail. It is not the way--that
heritage shall be safe' from him! It is you and me, monsieur! You can
laugh! The war is open', and by me! There is one great step taken: until
to-night there was nothing for you to ruin, to-morrow you have got a
noble of France--your own protege--to besiege and sack. And you are
to lose, because you think such ruin easy, and because you understand
nothing--far less--of divinity. How could you know? You have not the
fiber; the heart of a lady is a blank to you; you know nothing of the
vibration. There are some words that were made only to tell of Lady
Mary, for her alone--bellissima, divine, glorieuse! Ah, how I have
watch' her! It is sad to me when I see her surround' by your yo'ng
captains, your nobles, your rattles, your beaux--ha, ha!--and I mus'
hol' far aloof. It is sad for me--but oh, jus' to watch her and to
wonder! Strange it is, but I have almos' cry out with rapture at a look
I have see' her give another man, so beautiful it was, so tender, so
dazzling of the eyes and so mirthful of the lips. Ah, divine coquetry! A
look for another, ah-i-me! for many others; and even to you, one day,
a rose, while I--I, monsieur, could not even be so blessed as to be
the groun' beneath her little shoe! But to-night, monsieur--ha,
ha!--to-night, monsieur, you and me, two princes, M. le Duc de
Winterset and M. le Duc de Chateaurien--ha, ha! you see?--we are goin'
arm-in-arm to that ball, and I am goin' have one of those looks, I! And
a rose! I! It is time. But ten minute', monsieur. I make my apology to
keep you waitin' so long while I go in the nex' room and execute my poor
mustachio--that will be my only murder for jus' this one evening--and
inves' myself in white satin. Ha, ha! I shall be very gran', monsieur.
Francois, send Louis to me; Victor, to order two chairs for monsieur and
me; we are goin' out in the worl' to-right!"


Chapter Two


The chairmen swarmed in the street at Lady Malbourne's door, where the
joyous vulgar fought with muddied footmen and tipsy link-boys for places
of vantage whence to catch a glimpse of quality and of raiment at its
utmost. Dawn was in the east, and the guests were departing. Singly or
in pairs, glittering in finery, they came mincing down the steps, the
ghost of the night's smirk fading to jadedness as they sought the dark
recesses of their chairs. From within sounded the twang of fiddles still
swinging manfully at it, and the windows were bright with the light of
many candles. When the door was flung open to call the chair of Lady
Mary Carlisle, there was an eager pressure of the throng to see.

A small, fair gentleman in white satin came out upon the steps, turned
and bowed before a lady who appeared in the doorway, a lady whose royal
loveliness was given to view for a moment in that glowing frame. The
crowd sent up a hearty English cheer for the Beauty of Bath.

The gentleman smiled upon them delightedly. "What enchanting people!" he
cried. "Why did I not know, so I might have shout' with them?" The
lady noticed the people not at all; whereat, being pleased, the people
cheered again. The gentleman offered her his hand; she made a slow
courtesy; placed the tips of her fingers upon his own. "I am honored, M.
de Chateaurien," she said.

"No, no!" he cried earnestly. "Behol' a poor Frenchman whom emperors
should envy." Then reverently and with the pride of his gallant office
vibrant in every line of his slight figure, invested in white satin and
very grand, as he had prophesied, M. le Duc de Chateaurien handed Lady
Mary Carlisle down the steps, an achievement which had figured in the
ambitions of seven other gentlemen during the evening.

"Am I to be lef'in such onhappiness?" he said in a low voice. "That rose
I have beg' for so long--"


"Never!" said Lady Mary.

"Ah, I do not deserve it, I know so well! But--"

"Never!"

"It is the greatness of my onworthiness that alone can claim your
charity; let your kin' heart give this little red rose, this great alms,
to the poor beggar."

"Never!"

She was seated in the chair. "Ah, give the rose," he whispered. Her
beauty shone dazzlingly on him out of the dimness.

"Never!" she flashed defiantly as she was closed in. "Never!"

"Never!"

The rose fell at his feet.


"A rose lasts till morning," said a voice behind him.

Turning, M. de Chateaurien looked beamingly upon the face of the Duke of
Winterset.

"'Tis already the daylight," he replied, pointing to the east.
"Monsieur, was it not enough honor for you to han' out madame, the aunt
of Lady Mary? Lady Rellerton retain much trace of beauty. 'Tis strange
you did not appear more happy."

"The rose is of an unlucky color, I think," observed the Duke.

"The color of a blush, my brother."

"Unlucky, I still maintain," said the other calmly.

"The color of the veins of a Frenchman. Ha, ha!" cried the young man.
"What price would be too high? A rose is a rose! A good-night, my
brother, a good-night. I wish you dreams of roses, red roses, only
beautiful red, red roses!"

"Stay! Did you see the look she gave these street folk when they shouted
for her? And how are you higher than they, when she knows? As high as
yonder horse-boy!"

"Red roses, my brother, only roses. I wish you dreams of red, red
roses!"


Chapter Three


It was well agreed by the fashion of Bath that M. le Duc de Chateaurien
was a person of sensibility and haut ton; that his retinue and equipage
surpassed in elegance; that his person was exquisite, his manner
engaging. In the company of gentlemen his ease was slightly tinged with
graciousness (his single equal in Bath being his Grace of Winterset);
but it was remarked that when he bowed over a lady's hand, his air
bespoke only a gay and tender reverence.

He was the idol of the dowagers within a week after his appearance;
matrons warmed to him; young belles looked sweetly on him, while the
gentlemen were won to admiration or envy. He was of prodigious wealth:
old Mr. Bicksit, who dared not, for his fame's sake, fail to have seen
all things, had visited Chateaurien under the present Duke's father,
and descanted to the curious upon its grandeurs. The young noble had one
fault, he was so poor a gambler. He cared nothing for the hazards of a
die or the turn of a card. Gayly admitting that he had been born with no
spirit of adventure in him, he was sure, he declared, that he failed of
much happiness by his lack of taste in such matters.

But he was not long wanting the occasion to prove his taste in the
matter of handling a weapon. A certain led-captain, Rohrer by
name, notorious, amongst other things, for bearing a dexterous and
bloodthirsty blade, came to Bath post-haste, one night, and jostled
heartily against him, in the pump-room on the following morning. M.
de Chauteaurien bowed, and turned aside without offense, continuing a
conversation with some gentlemen near by. Captain Rohrer jostled
against him a second time. M. de Chateaurien looked him in the eye, and
apologized pleasantly for being so much in the way. Thereupon Rohrer
procured an introduction to him, and made some observations derogatory
to the valor and virtue of the French. There was current a curious piece
of gossip of the French court: a prince of the blood royal, grandson of
the late Regent and second in the line of succession to the throne
of France, had rebelled against the authority of Louis XV, who had
commanded him to marry the Princess Henriette, cousin to both of them.
The princess was reported to be openly devoted to the cousin who refused
to accept her hand at the bidding of the king; and, as rumor ran, the
prince's caprice elected in preference the discipline of Vincennes, to
which retirement the furious king had consigned him. The story was the
staple gossip of all polite Europe; and Captain Rohrer, having in his
mind a purpose to make use of it in leading up to a statement that
should be general to the damage of all Frenchwomen, and which a
Frenchman might not pass over as he might a jog of the elbow, repeated
it with garbled truths to make a scandal of a story which bore none on a
plain relation.

He did not reach his deduction. M. de Chateaurien, breaking into his
narrative, addressed him very quietly. "Monsieur," he said, "none but
swine deny the nobleness of that good and gentle lady, Mademoiselle la
Princesse de Bourbon-Conti. Every Frenchman know' that her cousin is a
bad rebel and ingrate, who had only honor and rispec' for her, but was
so wilful he could not let even the king say, 'You shall marry here,
you shall marry there.' My frien's," the young man turned to the others,
"may I ask you to close roun' in a circle for one moment? It is clearly
shown that the Duke of Orleans is a scurvy fellow, but not--" he wheeled
about and touched Captain Rohrer on the brow with the back of his gloved
hand--"but not so scurvy as thou, thou swine of the gutter!"

Two hours later, with perfect ease, he ran Captain Rohrer through the
left shoulder--after which he sent a basket of red roses to the Duke
of Winterset. In a few days he had another captain to fight. This was
a ruffling buck who had the astounding indiscretion to proclaim M.
de Chateaurien an impostor. There was no Chateaurien, he swore. The
Frenchman laughed in his face, and, at twilight of the same day, pinked
him carefully through the right shoulder. It was not that he could
not put aside the insult to himself, he declared to Mr. Molyneux,
his second, and the few witnesses, as he handed his wet sword to his
lackey--one of his station could not be insulted by a doubt of that
station--but he fought in the quarrel of his friend Winterset. This
rascal had asserted that M. le Duc had introduced an impostor. Could he
overlook the insult to a friend, one to whom he owed his kind reception
in Bath? Then, bending over his fallen adversary, he whispered: "Naughty
man, tell your master find some better quarrel for the nex' he sen'
agains' me."

The conduct of M. de Chateaurien was pronounced admirable.

There was no surprise when the young foreigner fell naturally into the
long train of followers of the beautiful Lady Mary Carlisle, nor was
there great astonishment that he should obtain marked favor in her eyes,
shown so plainly that my Lord Townbrake, Sir Hugh Guilford, and the rich
Squire Bantison, all of whom had followed her through three seasons,
swore with rage, and his Grace of Winterset stalked from her aunt's
house with black brows.

Meeting the Duke there on the evening after his second encounter de
Chateaurien smiled upon him brilliantly. "It was badly done; oh, so
badly!" he whispered. "Can you afford to have me strip' of my mask by
any but yourself? You, who introduce' me? They will say there is some
bad scandal that I could force you to be my god-father. You mus' get the
courage yourself."

"I told you a rose had a short life," was the answer.

"Oh, those roses! 'Tis the very greates' rizzon to gather each day
a fresh one." He took a red bud from his breast for an instant, and
touched it to his lips.

"M. de Chateaurien!" It was Lady Mary's voice; she stood at a table
where a vacant place had been left beside her. "M. de Chateaurien, we
have been waiting very long for you."

The Duke saw the look she did not know she gave the Frenchman, and he
lost countenance for a moment.

"We approach a climax, eh, monsieur?" said M. de Chateaurien.



Chapter Four


There fell a clear September night, when the moon was radiant over town
and country, over cobbled streets and winding roads. From the fields the
mists rose slowly, and the air was mild and fragrant, while distances
were white and full of mystery. All of Bath that pretended to fashion or
condition was present that evening at a fete at the house of a country
gentleman of the neighborhood. When the stately junket was concluded, it
was the pleasure of M. de Chateaurien to form one of the escort of Lady
Mary's carriage for the return. As they took the road, Sir Hugh Guilford
and Mr. Bantison, engaging in indistinct but vigorous remonstrance with
Mr. Molyneux over some matter, fell fifty or more paces behind, where
they continued to ride, keeping up their argument. Half a dozen other
gallants rode in advance, muttering among themselves, or attended laxly
upon Lady Mary's aunt on the other side of the coach, while the happy
Frenchman was permitted to ride close to that adorable window which
framed the fairest face in England.

He sang for her a little French song, a song of the voyageur who dreamed
of home. The lady, listening, looking up at the bright moon, felt a warm
drop upon her cheek, and he saw the tears sparkling upon her lashes.

"Mademoiselle," he whispered then, "I, too, have been a wanderer, but my
dreams were not of France; no, I do not dream of that home, of that dear
country. It is of a dearer country, a dream country--a country of gold
and snow," he cried softly, looking it her white brow and the fair,
lightly powdered hair above it. "Gold and snow, and the blue sky of a
lady's eyes!"

"I had thought the ladies of France were dark, sir.

"Cruel! It is that she will not understan'! Have I speak of the ladies
of France? No, no, no! It is of the faires' country; yes, 'tis a
province of heaven, mademoiselle. Do I not renounce my allegiance to
France? Oh, yes! I am subjec'--no, content to be slave--in the lan' of
the blue sky, the gold, and the snow.

"A very pretty figure," answered Lady Mary, her eyes downcast. "But does
it not hint a notable experience in the making of such speeches?"

"Tormentress! No. It prove only the inspiration it is to know you."

"We English ladies hear plenty of the like sir; and we even grow
brilliant enough to detect the assurance that lies beneath the
courtesies of our own gallants."

"Merci! I should believe so!" ejaculated M. de Chateaurien: but he
smothered the words upon his lips.

Her eyes were not lifted. She went on: "We come, in time, to believe
that true feeling comes faltering forth, not glibly; that smoothness
betokens the adept in the art, sir, rather than your true--your true--"
She was herself faltering; more, blushing deeply, and halting to a full
stop in terror of a word. There was a silence.

"Your--true--lover," he said huskily. When he had said that word both
trembled. She turned half away into the darkness of the coach.

"I know what make' you to doubt me," he said, faltering himself, though
it was not his art that prompted him. "They have tol' you the French
do nothing always but make love, is it not so? Yes, you think I am like
that. You think I am like that now!"

She made no sign.

"I suppose," he sighed, "I am unriz'nable; I would have the snow not so
col'--for jus' me."

She did not answer.

"Turn to me," he said.

The fragrance of the fields came to them, and from the distance the
faint, clear note of a hunting-horn.

"Turn to me."

The lovely head was bent very low. Her little gloved hand lay upon the
narrow window ledge. He laid his own gently upon it. The two hands were
shaking like twin leaves in the breeze. Hers was not drawn away. After
a pause, neither knew how long, he felt the warm fingers turn and clasp
themselves tremulously about his own. At last she looked up bravely and
met his eyes. The horn was wound again--nearer.

"All the cold was gone from the snows--long ago," she said.

"My beautiful!" he whispered; it was all he could say. "My beautiful!"
But she clutched his arm, startled.

"'Ware the road!" A wild halloo sounded ahead. The horn wound loudly.
"'Ware the road!" There sprang up out of the night a flying thunder of
hoof-beats. The gentlemen riding idly in front of the coach scattered to
the hedge-sides; and, with drawn swords flashing in the moon, a party of
horsemen charged down the highway, their cries blasting the night.

"Barber! Kill the barber!" they screamed. "Barber! Kill the barber!"

Beaucaire had but time to draw his sword when they were upon him.

"A moi!" his voice rang out clearly as he rose in his stirrups. "A moi,
Francois, Louis, Berquin! A moi, Francois!"

The cavaliers came straight at him. He parried the thrust of the first,
but the shock of collision hurled his horse against the side of the
coach. "Sacred swine!" he cried bitterly. "To endanger a lady, to make
this brawl in a lady's presence! Drive on!" he shouted.

"No!" cried Lady Mary.

The Frenchman's assailants were masked, but they were not highwaymen.
"Barber! Barber!" they shouted hoarsely, and closed in on him in a
circle.

"See how he use his steel!" laughed M. Beaucaire, as his point passed
through a tawdry waistcoat. For a moment he cut through the ring and
cleared a space about him, and Lady Mary saw his face shining in the
moonlight. "Canaille!" he hissed, as his horse sank beneath him; and,
though guarding his head from the rain of blows from above, he managed
to drag headlong from his saddle the man who had hamstrung the poor
brute. The fellow came suddenly to the ground, and lay there.

"Is it not a compliment," said a heavy voice, "to bring six large men to
subdue monsieur?"

"Oh, you are there, my frien'! In the rear--a little in the rear, I
think. Ha, ha!"

The Frenchman's play with his weapon was a revelation of skill, the more
extraordinary as he held in his hand only a light dress sword. But the
ring closed about him, and his keen defense could not avail him for more
than a few moments. Lady Mary's outriders, the gallants of her escort,
rode up close to the coach and encircled it, not interfering.

"Sir Hugh Guilford!" cried Lady Mary wildly, "if you will not help him,
give me your sword!" She would have leaped to the ground, but Sir Hugh
held the door.

"Sit quiet, madam," he said to her; then, to the man on the box, "Drive
on."

"If he does, I'll kill him!" she said fiercely. "Ah, what cowards! Will
you see the Duke murdered?"

"The Duke!" laughed Guilford. "They will not kill him, unless--be easy,
dear madam, 'twill be explained. Gad's life!" he muttered to Molyneux,
"'Twere time the varlet had his lashing! D'ye hear her?"

"Barber or no barber," answered Molyneux, "I wish I had warned him. He
fights as few gentlemen could. Ah--ah! Look at that! 'Tis a shame!"

On foot, his hat gone, his white coat sadly rent and gashed, flecked,
too, with red, M. Beaucaire, wary, alert, brilliant, seemed to transform
himself into a dozen fencing-masters; and, though his skill appeared
to lie in delicacy and quickness, his play being continually with
the point, sheer strength failed to beat him down. The young man was
laughing like a child.

"Believe me," said Molyneux "he's no barber! No, and never was!"

For a moment there was even a chance that M. Beaucaire might have the
best of it. Two of his adversaries were prostrate, more than one were
groaning, and the indomitable Frenchman had actually almost beat off the
ruffians, when, by a trick, he was overcome. One of them, dismounting,
ran in suddenly from behind, and seized his blade in a thick leather
gauntlet. Before Beaucaire could disengage the weapon, two others threw
themselves from their horses and hurled him to the earth. "A moi! A moi,
Francois!" he cried as he went down, his sword in fragments, but his
voice unbroken and clear.

"Shame!" muttered one or two of the gentlemen about the coach.

"'Twas dastardly to take him so," said Molyneux. "Whatever his
deservings, I'm nigh of a mind to offer him a rescue in the Duke's
face."

"Truss him up, lads," said the heavy voice. "Clear the way in front of
the coach. There sit those whom we avenge upon a presumptuous lackey.
Now, Whiffen, you have a fair audience, lay on and baste him."

Two men began to drag M. Beaucaire toward a great oak by the roadside.
Another took from his saddle a heavy whip with three thongs.

"A moi, Francois!"

There was borne on the breeze an answer--"Monseigneur! Monseigneur!"
The cry grew louder suddenly. The clatter of hoofs urged to an anguish
of speed sounded on the night. M. Beaucaire's servants had lagged sorely
behind, but they made up for it now. Almost before the noise of their
own steeds they came riding down the moonlit aisle between the mists.
Chosen men, these servants of Beaucaire, and like a thunderbolt they
fell upon the astounded cavaliers.

"Chateaurien! Chateaurien!" they shouted, and smote so swiftly that,
through lack of time, they showed no proper judgment, discriminating
nothing between non-combatants and their master's foes. They charged
first into the group about M. Beaucaire, and broke and routed it
utterly. Two of them leaped to the young man's side, while the other
four, swerving, scarce losing the momentum of their onset, bore on upon
the gentlemen near the coach, who went down beneath the fierceness of
the onslaught, cursing manfully.

"Our just deserts," said Mr. Molyneux, his mouth full of dust and
philosophy.

Sir Hugh Guilford's horse fell with him, being literally ridden over,
and the baronet's leg was pinned under the saddle. In less than ten
minutes from the first attack on M. Beaucaire, the attacking party
had fled in disorder, and the patrician non-combatants, choking with
expletives, consumed with wrath, were prisoners, disarmed by the
Frenchman's lackeys.

Guilford's discomfiture had freed the doors of the coach; so it was that
when M. Beaucaire, struggling to rise, assisted by his servants, threw
out one hand to balance himself, he found it seized between two small,
cold palms, and he looked into two warm, dilating eyes, that were doubly
beautiful because of the fright and rage that found room in them, too.

M. le Duc Chateaurien sprang to his feet without the aid of his lackeys,
and bowed low before Lady Mary.

"I make ten thousan' apology to be' the cause of a such melee in your
presence," he said; and then, turning to Francois, he spoke in French:
"Ah, thou scoundrel! A little, and it had been too late."

Francois knelt in the dust before him. "Pardon!" he said. "Monseigneur
commanded us to follow far in the rear, to remain unobserved. The wind
malignantly blew against monseigneur's voice."

"See what it might have cost, my children," said his master, pointing
to the ropes with which they would have bound him and to the whip lying
beside them. A shudder passed over the lackey's frame; the utter horror
in his face echoed in the eyes of his fellows.

"Oh, monseigneur!" Francois sprang back, and tossed his arms to heaven.

"But it did not happen," said M. Beaucaire.

"It could not!" exclaimed Francois.

"No. And you did very well, my children--" the young man smiled
benevolently--"very well. And now," he continued, turning to Lady Mary
and speaking in English, "let me be asking of our gallants yonder what
make' them to be in cabal with highwaymen. One should come to a polite
understanding with them, you think? Not so?"

He bowed, offering his hand to conduct her to the coach, where Molyneux
and his companions, having drawn Sir Hugh from under his horse, were
engaged in reviving and reassuring Lady Rellerton, who had fainted. But
Lady Mary stayed Beaucaire with a gesture, and the two stood where they
were.

"Monseigneur!" she said, with a note of raillery in her voice, but
raillery so tender that he started with happiness. His movement brought
him a hot spasm of pain, and he clapped his hand to a red stain on his
waistcoat.

"You are hurt!"

"It is nothing," smiled M. Beaucaire. Then, that she might not see
the stain spreading, he held his handkerchief over the spot. "I am a
little--but jus' a trifling--bruise'; 'tis all."

"You shall ride in the coach," she whispered. "Will you be pleased, M.
de Chateaurien?"

"Ah, my beautiful!" She seemed to wave before him like a shining
mist. "I wish that ride might las' for always! Can you say that,
mademoiselle?"

"Monseigneur," she cried in a passion of admiration, "I would what you
would have be, should be. What do you not deserve? You are the bravest
man in the world!"

"Ha, ha! I am jus' a poor Frenchman."

"Would that a few Englishmen had shown themselves as 'poor' tonight.
The vile cowards, not to help you!" With that, suddenly possessed by her
anger, she swept away from him to the coach.

Sir Hugh, groaning loudly, was being assisted into the vehicle.

"My little poltroons," she said, "what are you doing with your
fellow-craven, Sir Hugh Guilford, there?"

"Madam," replied Molyneux humbly, "Sir Hugh's leg is broken. Lady
Rellerton graciously permits him to be taken in."

"I do not permit it! M. de Chateaurien rides with us."

"But--"

"Sir! Leave the wretch to groan by the roadside," she cried fiercely,
"which plight I would were that of all of you! But there will be a
pretty story for the gossips to-morrow! And I could almost find pity
for you when I think of the wits when you return to town. Fine gentlemen
you; hardy bravos, by heaven! to leave one man to meet a troop of horse
single-handed, while you huddle in shelter until you are overthrown and
disarmed by servants! Oh, the wits! Heaven save you from the wits!"

"Madam."

"Address me no more! M. de Chateaurien, Lady Rellerton and I will
greatly esteem the honor of your company. Will you come?"

She stepped quickly into the coach, and was gathering her skirts to make
room for the Frenchman, when a heavy voice spoke from the shadows of the
tree by the wayside.

"Lady Mary Carlisle will, no doubt, listen to a word of counsel on this
point."

The Duke of Winterset rode out into the moonlight, composedly untieing a
mask from about his head. He had not shared the flight of his followers,
but had retired into the shade of the oak, whence he now made his
presence known with the utmost coolness.

"Gracious heavens, 'tis Winterset!" exclaimed Lady Rellerton.

"Turned highwayman and cut-throat," cried Lady Mary.

"No, no," laughed M. Beaucaire, somewhat unsteadily, as he stood,
swaying a little, with one hand on the coach-door, the other pressed
hard on his side, "he only oversee'; he is jus' a little bashful,
sometime'. He is a great man, but he don' want all the glory!"

"Barber," replied the Duke, "I must tell you that I gladly descend to
bandy words with you; your monstrous impudence is a claim to rank
I cannot ignore. But a lackey who has himself followed by six other
lackeys--"

"Ha, ha! Has not M. le Duc been busy all this evening to justify me? And
I think mine mus' be the bes' six. Ha, ha! You think?"

"M. de Chateaurien," said Lady Mary, "we are waiting for you."

"Pardon," he replied. "He has something to say; maybe it is bes' if you
hear it now."

"I wish to hear nothing from him--ever!"

"My faith, madam," cried the Duke, "this saucy fellow has paid you the
last insult! He is so sure of you he does not fear you will believe the
truth. When all is told, if you do not agree he deserved the lashing we
planned to--"

"I'll hear no more!"

"You will bitterly repent it, madam. For your own sake I entreat--"

"And I also," broke in M. Beaucaire. "Permit me, mademoiselle; let him
speak."

"Then let him be brief," said Lady Mary, "for I am earnest to be quit of
him. His explanation or an attack on my friend and on my carriage should
be made to my brother."

"Alas that he was not here," said the Duke, "to aid me! Madam, was your
carriage threatened? I have endeavored only to expunge a debt I owed to
Bath and to avenge an insult offered to yourself through--"

"Sir, sir, my patience will bear little more!"

"A thousan' apology," said M. Beaucaire. "You will listen, I only beg,
Lady Mary?"

She made an angry gesture of assent.

"Madam, I will be brief as I may. Two months ago there came to Bath a
French gambler calling himself Beaucaire, a desperate fellow with the
cards or dice, and all the men of fashion went to play at his lodging,
where he won considerable sums. He was small, wore a black wig and
mustachio. He had the insolence to show himself everywhere until the
Master of Ceremonies rebuffed him in the pump-room, as you know, and
after that he forbore his visits to the rooms. Mr. Nash explained (and
was confirmed, madam, by indubitable information) that this Beaucaire
was a man of unspeakable, vile, low birth, being, in fact, no other than
a lackey of the French king's ambassador, Victor by name, de Mirepoix's
barber. Although his condition was known, the hideous impudence of the
fellow did not desert him, and he remained in Bath, where none would
speak to him."

"Is your farrago nigh done, sir?"

"A few moments, madam. One evening, three weeks gone, I observed a very
elegant equipage draw up to my door, and the Duke of Chateaurien was
announced. The young man's manners were worthy--according to the French
acceptance--and 'twere idle to deny him the most monstrous assurance. He
declared himself a noble traveling for pleasure. He had taken lodgings
in Bath for a season, he said, and called at once to pay his respects
to me. His tone was so candid--in truth, I am the simplest of men, very
easily gulled--and his stroke so bold, that I did not for one moment
suspect him; and, to my poignant regret--though in the humblest spirit
I have shown myself eager to atone--that very evening I had the shame of
presenting him to yourself."

"The shame, sir!"

"Have patience, pray, madam. Ay, the shame! You know what figure he hath
cut in Bath since that evening. All ran merrily with him until several
days ago Captain Badger denounced him as an impostor, vowing that
Chateaurien was nothing."

"Pardon," interrupted M. Beaucaire. "'Castle Nowhere' would have been so
much better. Why did you not make him say it that way, monsieur?"

Lady Mary started; she was looking at the Duke, and her face was white.
He continued: "Poor Captain Badger was stabbed that same day.--"

"Most befitting poor Captain Badger," muttered Molyneux.

"----And his adversary had the marvelous insolence to declare that he
fought in my quarrel! This afternoon the wounded man sent for me, and
imparted a very horrifying intelligence. He had discovered a lackey whom
he had seen waiting upon Beaucaire in attendance at the door of
this Chateaurien's lodging. Beaucaire had disappeared the day before
Chateaurien's arrival. Captain Badger looked closely at Chateaurien at
their next meeting, and identified him with the missing Beaucaire beyond
the faintest doubt. Overcome with indignation, he immediately proclaimed
the impostor. Out of regard for me, he did not charge him with being
Beaucaire; the poor soul was unwilling to put upon me the humiliation of
having introduced a barber; but the secret weighed upon him till he sent
for me and put everything in my hands. I accepted the odium; thinking
only of atonement. I went to Sir John Wimpledon's. I took poor Sir
Hugh, there, and these other gentlemen aside, and told them my news. We
narrowly observed this man, and were shocked at our simplicity in not
having discovered him before. These are men of honor and cool judgment,
madam. Mr. Molyneux had acted for him in the affair of Captain Badger,
and was strongly prejudiced in his favor; but Mr. Molyneux, Sir Hugh,
Mr. Bantison, every one of them, in short, recognized him. In spite of
his smooth face and his light hair, the adventurer Beaucaire was
writ upon him amazing plain. Look at him, madam, if he will dare the
inspection. You saw this Beaucaire well, the day of his expulsion from
the rooms. Is not this he?"

M. Beaucaire stepped close to her. Her pale face twitched.

"Look!" he said.

"Oh, oh!" she whispered with a dry throat, and fell back in the
carriage.

"Is it so?" cried the Duke.

"I do not know.--I--cannot tell."

"One moment more. I begged these gentlemen to allow me to wipe out the
insult I had unhappily offered to Bath, but particularly to you. They
agreed not to forestall me or to interfere. I left Sir John Wimpledon's
early, and arranged to give the sorry rascal a lashing under your own
eyes, a satisfaction due the lady into whose presence he had dared to
force himself."

"'Noblesse oblige'?" said M. Beaucaire in a tone of gentle inquiry.

"And now, madam," said the Duke, "I will detain you not one second
longer. I plead the good purpose of my intentions, begging you to
believe that the desire to avenge a hateful outrage, next to the wish to
serve you, forms the dearest motive in the heart of Winterset."

"Bravo!" cried Beaucaire softly.

Lady Mary leaned toward him, a thriving terror in her eyes. "It is
false?" she faltered.

"Monsieur should not have been born so high. He could have made little
book'."

"You mean it is false?" she cried breathlessly.

"'Od's blood, is she not convinced?" broke out Mr. Bantison. "Fellow,
were you not the ambassador's barber?"

"It is all false?" she whispered.

"The mos' fine art, mademoiselle. How long you think it take M. de
Winterset to learn that speech after he write it out? It is a mix of
what is true and the mos' chaste art. Monsieur has become a man of
letters. Perhaps he may enjoy that more than the wars. Ha, ha!"

Mr. Bantison burst into a roar of laughter. "Do French gentlemen
fight lackeys? Ho, ho, ho! A pretty country! We English do as was done
to-night, have our servants beat them."

"And attend ourselves," added M. Beaucaire, looking at the Duke,
"somewhat in the background? But, pardon," he mocked, "that remind' me.
Francois, return to Mr. Bantison and these gentlemen their weapons."

"Will you answer a question?" said Molyneux mildly.

"Oh, with pleasure, monsieur."

"Were you ever a barber?"

"No, monsieur," laughed the young man.

"Pah!" exclaimed Bantison. "Let me question him. Now, fellow, a
confession may save you from jail. Do you deny you are Beaucaire?"

"Deny to a such judge?"

"Ha!" said Bantison. "What more do you want, Molyneux? Fellow, do you
deny that you came to London in the ambassador's suite?"

"No, I do not deny."

"He admits it! Didn't you come as his barber?"

"Yes, my frien', as his barber." Lady Mary cried out faintly, and,
shuddering, put both hands over her eyes.

"I'm sorry," said Molyneux. "You fight like a gentleman."

"I thank you, monsieur."

"You called yourself Beaucaire?"

"Yes, monsieur." He was swaying to and fro; his servants ran to support
him.

"I wish--" continued Molyneux, hesitating. "Evil take me!--but I'm
sorry you're hurt."

"Assist Sir Hugh into my carriage," said Lady Mary.

"Farewell, mademoiselle!" M. Beaucaire's voice was very faint. His eyes
were fixed upon her face. She did not look toward him.

They were propping Sir Hugh on the cushions. The Duke rode up close to
Beaucaire, but Francois seized his bridle fiercely, and forced the horse
back on its haunches.

"The man's servants worship him," said Molyneux.

"Curse your insolence!" exclaimed the Duke. "How much am I to bear from
this varlet and his varlets? Beaucaire, if you have not left Bath by
to-morrow noon, you will be clapped into jail, and the lashing you
escaped to-night shall be given you thrice tenfold!"

"I shall be-in the--Assemily--Room' at nine--o'clock, one week
--from--to-night," answered the young man, smiling jauntily, though
his lips were colorless. The words cost him nearly all his breath and
strength. "You mus' keep--in the--backgroun', monsieur. Ha, ha!" The
door of the coach closed with a slam.

"Mademoiselle--fare--well!"

"Drive on!" said Lady Mary.

M. Beaucaire followed the carriage with his eyes. As the noise of the
wheels and the hoof-beats of the accompanying cavalcade grew fainter in
the distance, the handkerchief he had held against his side dropped into
the white dust, a heavy red splotch.

"Only--roses," he gasped, and fell back in the arms of his servants.


Chapter Five


Beau Nash stood at the door of the rooms, smiling blandly upon a dainty
throng in the pink of its finery and gay furbelows. The great exquisite
bent his body constantly in a series of consummately adjusted bows:
before a great dowager, seeming to sweep the floor in august deference;
somewhat stately to the young bucks; greeting the wits with gracious
friendliness and a twinkle of raillery; inclining with fatherly
gallantry before the beauties; the degree of his inclination measured
the altitude of the recipient as accurately as a nicely calculated
sand-glass measures the hours.

The King of Bath was happy, for wit, beauty, fashion--to speak more
concretely: nobles, belles, gamesters, beaux, statesmen, and poets
--made fairyland (or opera bouffe, at least) in his dominions; play ran
higher and higher, and Mr. Nash's coffers filled up with gold. To
crown his pleasure, a prince of the French blood, the young Comte de
Beaujolais, just arrived from Paris, had reached Bath at noon in state,
accompanied by the Marquis de Mirepoix, the ambassador of Louis XV. The
Beau dearly prized the society of the lofty, and the present visit was
an honor to Bath: hence to the Master of Ceremonies. What was better,
there would be some profitable hours with the cards and dice. So it was
that Mr. Nash smiled never more benignly than on that bright evening.
The rooms rang with the silvery voices of women and delightful laughter,
while the fiddles went merrily, their melodies chiming sweetly with the
joyance of his mood.

The skill and brazen effrontery of the ambassador's scoundrelly servant
in passing himself off for a man of condition formed the point of
departure for every conversation. It was discovered that there were but
three persons present who had not suspected him from the first; and, by
a singular paradox, the most astute of all proved to be old Mr. Bicksit,
the traveler, once a visitor at Chateaurien; for he, according to
report, had by a coup of diplomacy entrapped the impostor into an
admission that there was no such place. However, like poor Captain
Badger, the worthy old man had held his peace out of regard for the Duke
of Winterset. This nobleman, heretofore secretly disliked, suspected
of irregular devices at play, and never admired, had won admiration and
popularity by his remorse for the mistake, and by the modesty of his
attitude in endeavoring to atone for it, without presuming upon the
privilege of his rank to laugh at the indignation of society; an action
the more praiseworthy because his exposure of the impostor entailed the
disclosure of his own culpability in having stood the villain's sponsor.
To-night, the happy gentleman, with Lady Mary Carlisle upon his arm,
went grandly about the rooms, sowing and reaping a harvest of smiles.
'Twas said work would be begun at once to rebuild the Duke's country
seat, while several ruined Jews might be paid out of prison. People
gazing on the beauty and the stately but modest hero by her side, said
they would make a noble pair. She had long been distinguished by his
attentions, and he had come brilliantly out of the episode of the
Frenchman, who had been his only real rival. Wherever they went, there
arose a buzz of pleasing gossip and adulation. Mr. Nash, seeing them
near him, came forward with greetings. A word on the side passed between
the nobleman and the exquisite.

"I had news of the rascal tonight," whispered Nash. "He lay at a farm
till yesterday, when he disappeared; his ruffians, too."

"You have arranged?" asked the Duke.

"Fourteen bailiffs are watching without. He could not come within
gunshot. If they clap eyes on him, they will hustle him to jail, and his
cutthroats shall not avail him a hair's weight. The impertinent swore
he'd be here by nine, did he?"

"He said so; and 'tis a rash dog, sir."

"It is just nine now."

"Send out to see if they have taken him."

"Gladly."

The Beau beckoned an attendant, and whispered in his ear.

Many of the crowd had edged up to the two gentlemen with apparent
carelessness, to overhear their conversation. Those who did overhear
repeated it in covert asides, and this circulating undertone, confirming
a vague rumor that Beaucaire would attempt the entrance that night, lent
a pleasurable color of excitement to the evening. The French prince, the
ambassador, and their suites were announced. Polite as the assembly
was, it was also curious, and there occurred a mannerly rush to see the
newcomers. Lady Mary, already pale, grew whiter as the throng closed
round her; she looked up pathetically at the Duke, who lost no time in
extricating her from the pressure.

"Wait here," he said; "I will fetch you a glass of negus," and
disappeared. He had not thought to bring a chair, and she, looking about
with an increasing faintness and finding none, saw that she was standing
by the door of a small side-room. The crowd swerved back for the passage
of the legate of France, and pressed upon her. She opened the door, and
went in.

The room was empty save for two gentlemen, who were quietly playing
cards at a table. They looked up as she entered. They were M. Beaucaire
and Mr. Molyneux.

She uttered a quick cry and leaned against the wall, her hand to her
breast. Beaucaire, though white and weak, had brought her a chair before
Molyneux could stir.

"Mademoiselle--"

"Do not touch me!" she said, with such frozen abhorrence in her voice
that he stopped short. "Mr. Molyneux, you seek strange company!"

"Madam," replied Molyneux, bowing deeply, as much to Beaucaire as to
herself, "I am honored by the presence of both of you.

"Oh, are you mad!" she exclaimed, contemptuously.

"This gentleman has exalted me with his confidence, madam," he replied.

"Will you add your ruin to the scandal of this fellow's presence here?
How he obtained entrance--"

"Pardon, mademoiselle," interrupted Beaucaire. "Did I not say I should
come? M. Molyneux was so obliging as to answer for me to the fourteen
frien's of M. de Winterset and Meestaire Nash."

"Do you not know," she turned vehemently upon Molyneux, "that he will be
removed the moment I leave this room? Do you wish to be dragged out
with him? For your sake, sir, because I have always thought you a man
of heart, I give you a chance to save yourself from disgrace--and--your
companion from jail. Let him slip out by some retired way, and you
may give me your arm and we will enter the next room as if nothing had
happened. Come, sir--"

"Mademoiselle--"

"Mr. Molyneux, I desire to hear nothing from your companion. Had I not
seen you at cards with him I should have supposed him in attendance as
your lackey. Do you desire to take advantage of my offer, sir?"

"Mademoiselle, I could not tell you, on that night--"

"You may inform your high-born friend, Mr. Molyneux, that I heard
everything he had to say; that my pride once had the pleasure of
listening to his high-born confession!"

"Ah, it is gentle to taunt one with his birth, mademoiselle? Ah, no!
There is a man in my country who say strange things of that--that a man
is not his father, but himself."

"You may inform your friend, Mr. Molyneux, that he had a chance to
defend himself against accusation; that he said all--"

"That I did say all I could have strength to say. Mademoiselle, you did
not see--as it was right--that I had been stung by a big wasp. It was
nothing, a scratch; but, mademoiselle, the sky went round and the moon
dance' on the earth. I could not wish that big wasp to see he had stung
me; so I mus' only say what I can have strength for, and stand straight
till he is gone. Beside', there are other rizzons. Ah, you mus' belief!
My Molyneux I sen' for, and tell him all, because he show courtesy
to the yo'ng Frenchman, and I can trus' him. I trus' you,
mademoiselle--long ago--and would have tol' you ev'rything, excep' jus'
because--well, for the romance, the fon! You belief? It is so clearly
so; you do belief, mademoiselle?"

She did not even look at him. M. Beaucaire lifted his hand appealingly
toward her. "Can there be no faith in--in--he said timidly, and paused.
She was silent, a statue, my Lady Disdain.

"If you had not belief' me to be an impostor; if I had never said I was
Chateaurien; if I had been jus' that Monsieur Beaucaire of the story
they tol' you, but never with the heart of a lackey, an hones' man, a
man, the man you knew, himself, could you--would you--" He was trying
to speak firmly; yet, as he gazed upon her splendid beauty, he
choked slightly, and fumbled in the lace at his throat with unsteady
fingers.--"Would you--have let me ride by your side in the autumn
moonlight?" Her glance passed by him as it might have passed by a
footman or a piece of furniture. He was dressed magnificently, a
multitude of orders glittering on his breast. Her eye took no knowledge
of him.

"Mademoiselle-I have the honor to ask you: if you had known this
Beaucaire was hones', though of peasant birth, would you--"

Involuntarily, controlled as her icy presence was, she shuddered. There
was a moment of silence.

"Mr. Molyneux," said Lady Mary, "in spite of your discourtesy in
allowing a servant to address me, I offer you a last chance to leave
this room undisgraced. Will you give me your arm?"

"Pardon me, madam," said Mr. Molyneux.

Beaucaire dropped into a chair with his head bent low and his arm
outstretched on the table; his eyes filled slowly in spite of himself,
and two tears rolled down the young man's cheeks.

"An' live men are jus'--names!" said M. Beaucaire.



Chapter Six


In the outer room, Winterset, unable to find Lady Mary, and supposing
her to have joined Lady Rellerton, disposed of his negus, then
approached the two visitors to pay his respects to the young prince,
whom he discovered to be a stripling of seventeen, arrogant looking,
but pretty as a girl. Standing beside the Marquis de Mirepoix--a man of
quiet bearing--he was surrounded by a group of the great, among whom Mr.
Nash naturally counted himself. The Beau was felicitating himself that
the foreigners had not arrived a week earlier, in which case he and Bath
would have been detected in a piece of gross ignorance concerning the
French nobility--making much of de Mirepoix's ex-barber.

"'Tis a lucky thing that fellow was got out of the way," he ejaculated,
under cover.

"Thank me for it," rejoined Winterset.

An attendant begged Mr. Nash's notice. The head bailiff sent word that
Beaucaire had long since entered the building by a side door. It was
supposed Mr. Nash had known of it, and the Frenchman was not arrested,
as Mr. Molyneux was in his company, and said he would be answerable for
him. Consternation was so plain on the Beau's trained face that the Duke
leaned toward him anxiously.

"The villain's in, and Molyneux hath gone mad!"

Mr. Bantison, who had been fiercely elbowing his way toward them, joined
heads with them. "You may well say he is in," he exclaimed "and if you
want to know where, why, in yonder card-room. I saw him through the
half-open door."

"What's to be done?" asked the Beau.

"Send the bailiffs--"

"Fie, fie! A file of bailiffs? The scandal!"

"Then listen to me," said the Duke. "I'll select half-a-dozen gentlemen,
explain the matter, and we'll put him in the center of us and take him
out to the bailiffs. 'Twill appear nothing. Do you remain here and
keep the attention of Beaujolais and de Mirepoix. Come, Bantison, fetch
Townbrake and Harry Rakell yonder; I'll bring the others."

Three minutes later, his Grace of Winterset flung wide the card-room
door, and, after his friends had entered, closed it.

"Ah!" remarked M. Beaucaire quietly. "Six more large men."

The Duke, seeing Lady Mary, started; but the angry signs of her
interview had not left her face, and reassured him. He offered his hand
to conduct her to the door. "May I have the honor?"

"If this is to be known, 'twill be better if I leave after; I should be
observed if I went now."

"As you will, madam," he answered, not displeased. "And now, you
impudent villain," he began, turning to M. Beaucaire, but to fall back
astounded. "'Od's blood, the dog hath murdered and robbed some royal
prince!" He forgot Lady Mary's presence in his excitement. "Lay hands on
him!" he shouted. "Tear those orders from him!"

Molyneux threw himself between. "One word!" he cried. "One word before
you offer an outrage you will repent all your lives!"

"Or let M. de Winterset come alone," laughed M. Beaucaire.

"Do you expect me to fight a cut-throat barber, and with bare hands?"

"I think one does not expec' monsieur to fight anybody. Would I fight
you, you think? That was why I had my servants, that evening we play.
I would gladly fight almos' any one in the won'; but I did not wish to
soil my hand with a--"

"Stuff his lying mouth with his orders!" shouted the Duke.

But Molyneux still held the gentlemen back. "One moment," he cried.

"M. de Winterset," said Beaucaire, "of what are you afraid? You
calculate well. Beaucaire might have been belief--an impostor that you
yourself expose'? Never! But I was not goin' reveal that secret. You
have not absolve me of my promise."

"Tell what you like," answered the Duke. "Tell all the wild lies
you have time for. You have five minutes to make up your mind to go
quietly."

"Now you absolve me, then? Ha, ha! Oh, yes! Mademoiselle," he bowed to
Lady Mary, "I have the honor to reques' you leave the room. You shall
miss no details if these frien's of yours kill me, on the honor of a
French gentleman."

"A French what?" laughed Bantison.

"Do you dare keep up the pretense?" cried Lord Town brake. "Know, you
villain barber, that your master, the Marquis de Mirepoix, is in the
next room."

Molyneux heaved a great sigh of relief. "Shall I--" He turned to M.
Beaucaire.

The young man laughed, and said: "Tell him come here at once.

"Impudent to the last!" cried Bantison, as Molyneux hurried from the
room.

"Now you goin' to see M. Beaucaire's master," said Beaucaire to Lady
Mary. "'Tis true what I say, the other night. I cross from Prance in his
suite; my passport say as his barber. Then to pass the ennui of exile, I
come to Bath and play for what one will. It kill the time. But when the
people hear I have been a servant they come only secretly; and there
is one of them--he has absolve' me of a promise not to speak--of him I
learn something he cannot wish to be tol'. I make some trouble to learn
this thing. Why I should do this? Well--that is my own rizzon. So I make
this man help me in a masque, the unmasking it was, for, as there is no
one to know me, I throw off my black wig and become myself--and so I
am 'Chateaurien,' Castle Nowhere. Then this man I use', this Winterset,
he--"

"I have great need to deny these accusations?" said the Duke.

"Nay," said Lady Mary wearily.

"Shall I tell you why I mus' be 'Victor' and 'Beaucaire' and
'Chateaurien,' and not myself?"

"To escape from the bailiffs for debts for razors and soap," gibed Lord
Townbrake.

"No, monsieur. In France I have got a cousin who is a man with a very
bad temper at some time', and he will never enjoy his relatives to do
what he does not wish--"

He was interrupted by a loud commotion from without. The door was flung
open, and the young Count of Beaujolais bounded in and threw his arms
about the neck of M. Beaucaire.

"Philippe!" he cried. "My brother, I have come to take you back with
me."

M. de Mirepoix followed him, bowing as a courtier, in deference; but M.
Beaucaire took both his hands heartily. Molyneux came after, with Mr.
Nash, and closed the door.

"My warmest felicitations," said the Marquis. "There is no longer need
for your incognito."

"Thou best of masters!" said Beaucaire, touching him fondly on the
shoulder. "I know. Your courier came safely. And so I am forgiven! But
I forget." He turned to the lady. She had begun to tremble exceedingly.
"Faires' of all the English fair," he said, as the gentlemen bowed low
to her deep courtesy, "I beg the honor to presen' to Lady Mary Carlisle,
M. le Comte de Beaujolais. M. de Mirepoix has already the honor. Lady
Mary has been very kind to me, my frien's; you mus' help me make my
acknowledgment. Mademoiselle and gentlemen, will you give me that favour
to detain you one instan'?"

"Henri," he turned to the young Beaujolais, "I wish you had shared my
masque--I have been so gay!" The surface of his tone was merry, but
there was an undercurrent, weary--sad, to speak of what was the mood,
not the manner. He made the effect of addressing every one present, but
he looked steadily at Lady Mary. Her eyes were fixed upon him, with a
silent and frightened fascination, and she trembled more and more. "I am
a great actor, Henri. These gentlemen are yet scarce convince' I am not
a lackey! And I mus' tell you that I was jus' now to be expelled for
having been a barber!"

"Oh, no!" the ambassador cried out. "He would not be content with me;
he would wander over a strange country."

"Ha, ha, my Mirepoix! And what is better, one evening I am oblige'
to fight some frien's of M. de Winterset there, and some ladies and
cavaliers look on, and they still think me a servant. Oh, I am a great
actor! 'Tis true there is not a peasant in France who would not have
then known one 'born'; but they are wonderful, this English people,
holding by an idea once it is in their heads--a mos' worthy quality. But
my good Molyneux here, he had speak to me with courtesy, jus' because
I am a man an' jus' because he is always kind. (I have learn' that
his great-grandfather was a Frenchman.) So I sen' to him and tell him
ev'rything, and he gain admittance for me here to-night to await my
frien's.

"I was speaking to messieurs about my cousin, who will meddle in the
affair' of his relatives. Well, that gentleman, he make a marriage for
me with a good and accomplish' lady, very noble and very beautiful--and
amiable." (The young count at his elbow started slightly at this, but
immediately appeared to wrap himself in a mantle of solemn thought.)
"Unfortunately, when my cousin arrange' so, I was a dolt, a little
blockhead; I swear to marry for myself and when I please, or never if
I like. That lady is all things charming and gentle, and, in truth, she
is--very much attach' to me--why should I not say it? I am so proud of
it. She is very faithful and forgiving and sweet; she would be the
same, I think, if I--were even--a lackey. But I? I was a dolt, a little
unsensible brute; I did not value such thing' then; I was too yo'ng,
las' June. So I say to my cousin, 'No, I make my own choosing!' 'Little
fool,' he answer, 'she is the one for you. Am I not wiser than you?' And
he was very angry, and, as he has influence in France, word come' that
he will get me put in Vincennes, so I mus' run away quick till his anger
is gone. My good frien' Mirepoix is jus' leaving for London; he take'
many risk' for my sake; his hairdresser die before he start', so I
travel as that poor barber. But my cousin is a man to be afraid of when
he is angry, even in England, and I mus' not get my Mirepoix in trouble.
I mus' not be discover' till my cousin is ready to laugh about it all
and make it a joke. And there may be spies; so I change my name again,
and come to Bath to amuse my retreat with a little gaming--I am always
fond of that. But three day' ago M. le Marquis send me a courier to say
that my brother, who know where I had run away, is come from France to
say that my cousin is appease'; he need me for his little theatre, the
play cannot go on. I do not need to espouse mademoiselle. All shall be
forgiven if I return, and my brother and M. de Mirepoix will meet me in
Bath to felicitate.

"There is one more thing to say, that is all. I have said I learn' a
secret, and use it to make a man introduce me if I will not tell. He has
absolve' me of that promise. My frien's, I had not the wish to ruin that
man. I was not receive'; Meestaire Nash had reboff me; I had no other
way excep' to use this fellow. So I say, 'Take me to Lady Malbourne's
ball as "Chateaurien."' I throw off my wig, and shave, and behol', I am
M. le Duc de Castle Nowhere. Ha, ha! You see?"

The young man's manner suddenly changed. He became haughty, menacing.
He stretched out his arm, and pointed at Winterset. "Now I am no
'Beaucaire,' messieurs. I am a French gentleman. The man who introduce'
me at the price of his honor, and then betray' me to redeem it, is that
coward, that card-cheat there!"

Winterset made a horrible effort to laugh. The gentlemen who surrounded
him fell away as from pestilence. "A French gentleman!" he sneered
savagely, and yet fearfully. "I don't know who you are. Hide behind as
many toys and ribbons as you like; I'll know the name of the man who
dares bring such a charge!"

"Sir!" cried de Mirepoix sharply, advancing a step towards him; but he
checked himself at once. He made a low bow of state, first to the young
Frenchman, then to Lady Mary and the company. "Permit me, Lady Mary
and gentlemen," he said, "to assume the honor of presenting you to His
Highness, Prince Louis-Philippe de Valois, Duke of Orleans, Duke of
Chartres, Duke of Nemours, Duke of Montpeti'sier, First Prince of
the Blood Royal, First Peer of France, Lieutenant-General of French
Infantry, Governor of Dauphine, Knight of the Golden Fleece, Grand
Master of the Order of Notre Dame, of Mount Carmel, and of St. Lazarus
in Jerusalem; and cousin to His most Christian Majesty, Louis the
Fifteenth, King of France."

"Those are a few of my brother's names," whispered Henri of Beaujolais
to Molyneux. "Old Mirepoix has the long breath, but it take' a strong
man two day' to say all of them. I can suppose this Winterset know' now
who bring the charge!"

"Castle Nowhere!" gasped Beau Nash, falling back upon the burly prop of
Mr. Bantison's shoulder.

"The Duke of Orleans will receive a message from me within the hour!"
said Winterset, as he made his way to the door. His face was black with
rage and shame.

"I tol' you that I would not soil my hand with you," answered the young
man. "If you send a message no gentleman will bring it. Whoever shall
bear it will receive a little beating from Francois."

He stepped to Lady Mary's side. Her head was bent low, her face averted.
She seemed to breathe with difficulty, and leaned heavily upon a chair.
"Monseigneur," she faltered in a half whisper, "can you--forgive me? It
is a bitter--mistake-I have made. Forgive."

"Forgive?" he answered, and his voice was as broken as hers; but he went
on, more firmly: "It is--nothing--less than nothing. There is--only jus'
one--in the--whole worl' who would not have treat' me the way that you
treat' me. It is to her that I am goin' to make reparation. You know
something, Henri? I am not goin' back only because the king forgive'
me. I am goin' to please him; I am goin' to espouse mademoiselle, our
cousin. My frien's, I ask your felicitations."

"And the king does not compel him!" exclaimed young Henri.

"Henri, you want to fight me?" cried his brother sharply. "Don' you
think the King of France is a wiser man than me?"

He offered his hand to Lady Mary. "Mademoiselle is fatigue'. Will she
honor me?"

He walked with her to the door. Her hand fluttering faintly in his.
From somewhere about the garments of one of them a little cloud of faded
rose-leaves fell, and lay strewn on the floor behind them. He opened the
door, and the lights shone on a multitude of eager faces turned toward
it. There was a great hum of voices, and, over all, the fiddles wove a
wandering air, a sweet French song of the voyageur.

He bowed very low, as, with fixed and glistening eyes, Lady Mary
Carlisle, the Beauty of Bath, passed slowly by him and went out of the
room.

========================================
