========================================

MRS WARREN'S PROFESSION


by George Bernard Shaw


1894


With The Author's Apology (1902)




THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY


Mrs Warren's Profession has been performed at last, after a delay of
only eight years; and I have once more shared with Ibsen the triumphant
amusement of startling all but the strongest-headed of the London
theatre critics clean out of the practice of their profession. No
author who has ever known the exultation of sending the Press into an
hysterical tumult of protest, of moral panic, of involuntary and frantic
confession of sin, of a horror of conscience in which the power of
distinguishing between the work of art on the stage and the real life
of the spectator is confused and overwhelmed, will ever care for the
stereotyped compliments which every successful farce or melodrama
elicits from the newspapers. Give me that critic who rushed from my play
to declare furiously that Sir George Crofts ought to be kicked. What a
triumph for the actor, thus to reduce a jaded London journalist to
the condition of the simple sailor in the Wapping gallery, who shouts
execrations at Iago and warnings to Othello not to believe him! But
dearer still than such simplicity is that sense of the sudden earthquake
shock to the foundations of morality which sends a pallid crowd of
critics into the street shrieking that the pillars of society are
cracking and the ruin of the State is at hand. Even the Ibsen champions
of ten years ago remonstrate with me just as the veterans of those brave
days remonstrated with them. Mr Grein, the hardy iconoclast who first
launched my plays on the stage alongside Ghosts and The Wild Duck,
exclaimed that I have shattered his ideals. Actually his ideals! What
would Dr Relling say? And Mr William Archer himself disowns me because I
"cannot touch pitch without wallowing in it". Truly my play must be more
needed than I knew; and yet I thought I knew how little the others know.

Do not suppose, however, that the consternation of the Press reflects
any consternation among the general public. Anybody can upset the
theatre critics, in a turn of the wrist, by substituting for the
romantic commonplaces of the stage the moral commonplaces of the pulpit,
platform, or the library. Play Mrs Warren's Profession to an audience
of clerical members of the Christian Social Union and of women well
experienced in Rescue, Temperance, and Girls' Club work, and no moral
panic will arise; every man and woman present will know that as long
as poverty makes virtue hideous and the spare pocket-money of rich
bachelordom makes vice dazzling, their daily hand-to-hand fight against
prostitution with prayer and persuasion, shelters and scanty alms,
will be a losing one. There was a time when they were able to urge that
though "the white-lead factory where Anne Jane was poisoned" may be a
far more terrible place than Mrs Warren's house, yet hell is still more
dreadful. Nowadays they no longer believe in hell; and the girls among
whom they are working know that they do not believe in it, and would
laugh at them if they did. So well have the rescuers learnt that Mrs
Warren's defence of herself and indictment of society is the thing that
most needs saying, that those who know me personally reproach me, not
for writing this play, but for wasting my energies on "pleasant
plays" for the amusement of frivolous people, when I can build up such
excellent stage sermons on their own work. Mrs Warren's Profession is
the one play of mine which I could submit to a censorship without doubt
of the result; only, it must not be the censorship of the minor theatre
critic, nor of an innocent court official like the Lord Chamberlain's
Examiner, much less of people who consciously profit by Mrs Warren's
profession, or who personally make use of it, or who hold the widely
whispered view that it is an indispensable safety-valve for the
protection of domestic virtue, or, above all, who are smitten with a
sentimental affection for our fallen sister, and would "take her up
tenderly, lift her with care, fashioned so slenderly, young, and SO
fair." Nor am I prepared to accept the verdict of the medical gentlemen
who would compulsorily sanitate and register Mrs Warren, whilst leaving
Mrs Warren's patrons, especially her military patrons, free to destroy
her health and anybody else's without fear of reprisals. But I should be
quite content to have my play judged by, say, a joint committee of
the Central Vigilance Society and the Salvation Army. And the sterner
moralists the members of the committee were, the better.

Some of the journalists I have shocked reason so unripely that they will
gather nothing from this but a confused notion that I am accusing the
National Vigilance Association and the Salvation Army of complicity in
my own scandalous immorality. It will seem to them that people who would
stand this play would stand anything. They are quite mistaken. Such
an audience as I have described would be revolted by many of our
fashionable plays. They would leave the theatre convinced that the
Plymouth Brother who still regards the playhouse as one of the gates of
hell is perhaps the safest adviser on the subject of which he knows so
little. If I do not draw the same conclusion, it is not because I am one
of those who claim that art is exempt from moral obligations, and deny
that the writing or performance of a play is a moral act, to be treated
on exactly the same footing as theft or murder if it produces equally
mischievous consequences. I am convinced that fine art is the subtlest,
the most seductive, the most effective instrument of moral propaganda in
the world, excepting only the example of personal conduct; and I waive
even this exception in favor of the art of the stage, because it works
by exhibiting examples of personal conduct made intelligible and moving
to crowds of unobservant, unreflecting people to whom real life means
nothing. I have pointed out again and again that the influence of the
theatre in England is growing so great that whilst private conduct,
religion, law, science, politics, and morals are becoming more and
more theatrical, the theatre itself remains impervious to common
sense, religion, science, politics, and morals. That is why I fight the
theatre, not with pamphlets and sermons and treatises, but with plays;
and so effective do I find the dramatic method that I have no doubt I
shall at last persuade even London to take its conscience and its brains
with it when it goes to the theatre, instead of leaving them at home
with its prayer-book as it does at present. Consequently, I am the
last man in the world to deny that if the net effect of performing Mrs
Warren's Profession were an increase in the number of persons entering
that profession, its performance should be dealt with accordingly.

Now let us consider how such recruiting can be encouraged by the
theatre. Nothing is easier. Let the King's Reader of Plays, backed by
the Press, make an unwritten but perfectly well understood regulation
that members of Mrs Warren's profession shall be tolerated on the stage
only when they are beautiful, exquisitely dressed, and sumptuously
lodged and fed; also that they shall, at the end of the play, die of
consumption to the sympathetic tears of the whole audience, or step
into the next room to commit suicide, or at least be turned out by their
protectors and passed on to be "redeemed" by old and faithful lovers who
have adored them in spite of their levities. Naturally, the poorer girls
in the gallery will believe in the beauty, in the exquisite dresses, and
the luxurious living, and will see that there is no real necessity for
the consumption, the suicide, or the ejectment: mere pious forms, all
of them, to save the Censor's face. Even if these purely official
catastrophes carried any conviction, the majority of English girls
remain so poor, so dependent, so well aware that the drudgeries of such
honest work as is within their reach are likely enough to lead them
eventually to lung disease, premature death, and domestic desertion or
brutality, that they would still see reason to prefer the primrose path
to the strait path of virtue, since both, vice at worst and virtue at
best, lead to the same end in poverty and overwork. It is true that the
Board School mistress will tell you that only girls of a certain kind
will reason in this way. But alas! that certain kind turns out on
inquiry to be simply the pretty, dainty kind: that is, the only kind
that gets the chance of acting on such reasoning. Read the first report
of the Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes [Bluebook C
4402, 8d., 1889]; read the Report on Home Industries (sacred word,
Home!) issued by the Women's Industrial Council [Home Industries of
Women in London, 1897, 1s., 12 Buckingham Street, W. C.]; and ask
yourself whether, if the lot in life therein described were your lot
in life, you would not prefer the lot of Cleopatra, of Theodora, of the
Lady of the Camellias, of Mrs Tanqueray, of Zaza, of Iris. If you can
go deep enough into things to be able to say no, how many ignorant
half-starved girls will believe you are speaking sincerely? To them the
lot of Iris is heavenly in comparison with their own. Yet our King, like
his predecessors, says to the dramatist, "Thus, and thus only, shall
you present Mrs Warren's profession on the stage, or you shall starve.
Witness Shaw, who told the untempting truth about it, and whom We, by
the Grace of God, accordingly disallow and suppress, and do what in Us
lies to silence." Fortunately, Shaw cannot be silenced. "The harlot's
cry from street to street" is louder than the voices of all the kings.
I am not dependent on the theatre, and cannot be starved into making
my play a standing advertisement of the attractive side of Mrs Warren's
business.

Here I must guard myself against a misunderstanding. It is not the fault
of their authors that the long string of wanton's tragedies, from Antony
and Cleopatra to Iris, are snares to poor girls, and are objected to
on that account by many earnest men and women who consider Mrs Warren's
Profession an excellent sermon. Mr Pinero is in no way bound to suppress
the fact that his Iris is a person to be envied by millions of better
women. If he made his play false to life by inventing fictitious
disadvantages for her, he would be acting as unscrupulously as any tract
writer. If society chooses to provide for its Irises better than for
its working women, it must not expect honest playwrights to manufacture
spurious evidence to save its credit. The mischief lies in the
deliberate suppression of the other side of the case: the refusal to
allow Mrs Warren to expose the drudgery and repulsiveness of plying for
hire among coarse, tedious drunkards; the determination not to let the
Parisian girl in Brieux's Les Avaries come on the stage and drive into
people's minds what her diseases mean for her and for themselves. All
that, says the King's Reader in effect, is horrifying, loathsome.

Precisely: what does he expect it to be? would he have us represent it
as beautiful and gratifying? The answer to this question, I fear, must
be a blunt Yes; for it seems impossible to root out of an Englishman's
mind the notion that vice is delightful, and that abstention from it
is privation. At all events, as long as the tempting side of it is kept
towards the public, and softened by plenty of sentiment and sympathy, it
is welcomed by our Censor, whereas the slightest attempt to place it in
the light of the policeman's lantern or the Salvation Army shelter
is checkmated at once as not merely disgusting, but, if you please,
unnecessary.

Everybody will, I hope, admit that this state of things is intolerable;
that the subject of Mrs Warren's profession must be either tapu
altogether, or else exhibited with the warning side as freely displayed
as the tempting side. But many persons will vote for a complete tapu,
and an impartial sweep from the boards of Mrs Warren and Gretchen and
the rest; in short, for banishing the sexual instincts from the stage
altogether. Those who think this impossible can hardly have considered
the number and importance of the subjects which are actually banished
from the stage. Many plays, among them Lear, Hamlet, Macbeth,
Coriolanus, Julius Caesar, have no sex complications: the thread of
their action can be followed by children who could not understand a
single scene of Mrs Warren's Profession or Iris. None of our plays rouse
the sympathy of the audience by an exhibition of the pains of maternity,
as Chinese plays constantly do. Each nation has its own particular set
of tapus in addition to the common human stock; and though each of
these tapus limits the scope of the dramatist, it does not make drama
impossible. If the Examiner were to refuse to license plays with female
characters in them, he would only be doing to the stage what our tribal
customs already do to the pulpit and the bar. I have myself written a
rather entertaining play with only one woman in it, and she is quite
heartwhole; and I could just as easily write a play without a woman in
it at all. I will even go so far as to promise the Mr Redford my support
if he will introduce this limitation for part of the year, say during
Lent, so as to make a close season for that dullest of stock dramatic
subjects, adultery, and force our managers and authors to find out what
all great dramatists find out spontaneously: to wit, that people who
sacrifice every other consideration to love are as hopelessly unheroic
on the stage as lunatics or dipsomaniacs. Hector is the world's hero;
not Paris nor Antony.

But though I do not question the possibility of a drama in which love
should be as effectively ignored as cholera is at present, there is not
the slightest chance of that way out of the difficulty being taken by
the Mr Redford. If he attempted it there would be a revolt in which he
would be swept away in spite of my singlehanded efforts to defend him.
A complete tapu is politically impossible. A complete toleration is
equally impossible to Mr Redford, because his occupation would be gone
if there were no tapu to enforce. He is therefore compelled to maintain
the present compromise of a partial tapu, applied, to the best of his
judgement, with a careful respect to persons and to public opinion. And
a very sensible English solution of the difficulty, too, most readers
will say. I should not dispute it if dramatic poets really were what
English public opinion generally assumes them to be during their
lifetime: that is, a licentiously irregular group to be kept in order
in a rough and ready way by a magistrate who will stand no nonsense
from them. But I cannot admit that the class represented by Eschylus,
Sophocles, Aristophanes, Euripides, Shakespear, Goethe, Ibsen, and
Tolstoy, not to mention our own contemporary playwrights, is as much in
place in Mr Redford's office as a pickpocket is in Bow Street. Further,
it is not true that the Censorship, though it certainly suppresses Ibsen
and Tolstoy, and would suppress Shakespear but for the absurd rule that
a play once licensed is always licensed (so that Wycherly is permitted
and Shelley prohibited), also suppresses unscrupulous playwrights. I
challenge Mr Redford to mention any extremity of sexual misconduct which
any manager in his senses would risk presenting on the London stage that
has not been presented under his license and that of his predecessor.
The compromise, in fact, works out in practice in favor of loose plays
as against earnest ones.

To carry conviction on this point, I will take the extreme course of
narrating the plots of two plays witnessed within the last ten years
by myself at London West End theatres, one licensed by the late Queen
Victoria's Reader of Plays, the other by the present Reader to the King.
Both plots conform to the strictest rules of the period when La Dame aux
Camellias was still a forbidden play, and when The Second Mrs Tanqueray
would have been tolerated only on condition that she carefully explained
to the audience that when she met Captain Ardale she sinned "but in
intention."

Play number one. A prince is compelled by his parents to marry the
daughter of a neighboring king, but loves another maiden. The scene
represents a hall in the king's palace at night. The wedding has taken
place that day; and the closed door of the nuptial chamber is in view of
the audience. Inside, the princess awaits her bridegroom. A duenna is in
attendance. The bridegroom enters. His sole desire is to escape from a
marriage which is hateful to him. An idea strikes him. He will assault
the duenna, and get ignominiously expelled from the palace by his
indignant father-in-law. To his horror, when he proceeds to carry out
this stratagem, the duenna, far from raising an alarm, is flattered,
delighted, and compliant. The assaulter becomes the assaulted. He flings
her angrily to the ground, where she remains placidly. He flies. The
father enters; dismisses the duenna; and listens at the keyhole of
his daughter's nuptial chamber, uttering various pleasantries, and
declaring, with a shiver, that a sound of kissing, which he supposes to
proceed from within, makes him feel young again.

In deprecation of the scandalized astonishment with which such a story
as this will be read, I can only say that it was not presented on the
stage until its propriety had been certified by the chief officer of the
Queen of England's household.

Story number two. A German officer finds himself in an inn with a French
lady who has wounded his national vanity. He resolves to humble her by
committing a rape upon her. He announces his purpose. She remonstrates,
implores, flies to the doors and finds them locked, calls for help
and finds none at hand, runs screaming from side to side, and, after
a harrowing scene, is overpowered and faints. Nothing further being
possible on the stage without actual felony, the officer then relents
and leaves her. When she recovers, she believes that he has carried out
his threat; and during the rest of the play she is represented as vainly
vowing vengeance upon him, whilst she is really falling in love with
him under the influence of his imaginary crime against her. Finally she
consents to marry him; and the curtain falls on their happiness.

This story was certified by the present King's Reader, acting for the
Lord Chamberlain, as void in its general tendency of "anything immoral
or otherwise improper for the stage." But let nobody conclude therefore
that Mr Redford is a monster, whose policy it is to deprave the theatre.
As a matter of fact, both the above stories are strictly in order from
the official point of view. The incidents of sex which they contain,
though carried in both to the extreme point at which another step would
be dealt with, not by the King's Reader, but by the police, do not
involve adultery, nor any allusion to Mrs Warren's profession, nor to
the fact that the children of any polyandrous group will, when they grow
up, inevitably be confronted, as those of Mrs Warren's group are in my
play, with the insoluble problem of their own possible consanguinity.
In short, by depending wholly on the coarse humors and the physical
fascination of sex, they comply with all the formulable requirements of
the Censorship, whereas plays in which these humors and fascinations are
discarded, and the social problems created by sex seriously faced and
dealt with, inevitably ignore the official formula and are suppressed.
If the old rule against the exhibition of illicit sex relations on stage
were revived, and the subject absolutely barred, the only result would
be that Antony and Cleopatra, Othello (because of the Bianca episode),
Troilus and Cressida, Henry IV, Measure for Measure, Timon of Athens,
La Dame aux Camellias, The Profligate, The Second Mrs Tanqueray, The
Notorious Mrs Ebbsmith, The Gay Lord Quex, Mrs Dane's Defence, and
Iris would be swept from the stage, and placed under the same ban as
Tolstoy's Dominion of Darkness and Mrs Warren's Profession, whilst such
plays as the two described above would have a monopoly of the theatre as
far as sexual interest is concerned.

What is more, the repulsiveness of the worst of the certified plays
would protect the Censorship against effective exposure and criticism.
Not long ago an American Review of high standing asked me for an article
on the Censorship of the English stage. I replied that such an article
would involve passages too disagreeable for publication in a magazine
for general family reading. The editor persisted nevertheless; but
not until he had declared his readiness to face this, and had pledged
himself to insert the article unaltered (the particularity of the pledge
extending even to a specification of the exact number of words in the
article) did I consent to the proposal. What was the result?

The editor, confronted with the two stories given above, threw his
pledge to the winds, and, instead of returning the article, printed
it with the illustrative examples omitted, and nothing left but the
argument from political principles against the Censorship. In doing this
he fired my broadside after withdrawing the cannon balls; for neither
the Censor nor any other Englishman, except perhaps Mr Leslie Stephen
and a few other veterans of the dwindling old guard of Benthamism, cares
a dump about political principle. The ordinary Briton thinks that if
every other Briton is not kept under some form of tutelage, the more
childish the better, he will abuse his freedom viciously. As far as its
principle is concerned, the Censorship is the most popular institution
in England; and the playwright who criticizes it is slighted as a
blackguard agitating for impunity. Consequently nothing can really shake
the confidence of the public in the Lord Chamberlain's department except
a remorseless and unbowdlerized narration of the licentious fictions
which slip through its net, and are hallmarked by it with the approval
of the Throne. But since these narrations cannot be made public without
great difficulty, owing to the obligation an editor is under not to
deal unexpectedly with matters that are not _virginibus puerisque_, the
chances are heavily in favor of the Censor escaping all remonstrance.
With the exception of such comments as I was able to make in my own
critical articles in The World and The Saturday Review when the pieces
I have described were first produced, and a few ignorant protests by
churchmen against much better plays which they confessed they had not
seen nor read, nothing has been said in the press that could seriously
disturb the easygoing notion that the stage would be much worse than it
admittedly is but for the vigilance of the King's Reader. The truth is,
that no manager would dare produce on his own responsibility the pieces
he can now get royal certificates for at two guineas per piece.

I hasten to add that I believe these evils to be inherent in the
nature of all censorship, and not merely a consequence of the form the
institution takes in London. No doubt there is a staggering absurdity
in appointing an ordinary clerk to see that the leaders of European
literature do not corrupt the morals of the nation, and to restrain Sir
Henry Irving, as a rogue and a vagabond, from presuming to impersonate
Samson or David on the stage, though any other sort of artist may daub
these scriptural figures on a signboard or carve them on a tombstone
without hindrance. If the General Medical Council, the Royal College of
Physicians, the Royal Academy of Arts, the Incorporated Law Society, and
Convocation were abolished, and their functions handed over to the Mr
Redford, the Concert of Europe would presumably declare England mad, and
treat her accordingly. Yet, though neither medicine nor painting nor
law nor the Church moulds the character of the nation as potently as the
theatre does, nothing can come on the stage unless its dimensions admit
of its passing through Mr Redford's mind! Pray do not think that I
question Mr Redford's honesty. I am quite sure that he sincerely thinks
me a blackguard, and my play a grossly improper one, because, like
Tolstoy's Dominion of Darkness, it produces, as they are both meant to
produce, a very strong and very painful impression of evil. I do not
doubt for a moment that the rapine play which I have described, and
which he licensed, was quite incapable in manuscript of producing
any particular effect on his mind at all, and that when he was once
satisfied that the ill-conducted hero was a German and not an English
officer, he passed the play without studying its moral tendencies. Even
if he had undertaken that study, there is no more reason to suppose
that he is a competent moralist than there is to suppose that I am a
competent mathematician. But truly it does not matter whether he is a
moralist or not. Let nobody dream for a moment that what is wrong with
the Censorship is the shortcoming of the gentleman who happens at any
moment to be acting as Censor. Replace him to-morrow by an Academy of
Letters and an Academy of Dramatic Poetry, and the new and enlarged
filter will still exclude original and epoch-making work, whilst passing
conventional, old-fashioned, and vulgar work without question. The
conclave which compiles the index of the Roman Catholic Church is the
most august, ancient, learned, famous, and authoritative censorship in
Europe. Is it more enlightened, more liberal, more tolerant that the
comparatively infinitesimal office of the Lord Chamberlain? On the
contrary, it has reduced itself to a degree of absurdity which makes a
Catholic university a contradiction in terms. All censorships exist
to prevent anyone from challenging current conceptions and existing
institutions. All progress is initiated by challenging current concepts,
and executed by supplanting existing institutions. Consequently the
first condition of progress is the removal of censorships. There is the
whole case against censorships in a nutshell.

It will be asked whether theatrical managers are to be allowed to
produce what they like, without regard to the public interest. But that
is not the alternative. The managers of our London music-halls are not
subject to any censorship. They produce their entertainments on their
own responsibility, and have no two-guinea certificates to plead if
their houses are conducted viciously. They know that if they lose their
character, the County Council will simply refuse to renew their license
at the end of the year; and nothing in the history of popular art
is more amazing than the improvement in music-halls that this simple
arrangement has produced within a few years. Place the theatres on the
same footing, and we shall promptly have a similar revolution: a whole
class of frankly blackguardly plays, in which unscrupulous low comedians
attract crowds to gaze at bevies of girls who have nothing to exhibit
but their prettiness, will vanish like the obscene songs which were
supposed to enliven the squalid dulness, incredible to the younger
generation, of the music-halls fifteen years ago. On the other hand,
plays which treat sex questions as problems for thought instead of as
aphrodisiacs will be freely performed. Gentlemen of Mr Redford's way of
thinking will have plenty of opportunity of protesting against them
in Council; but the result will be that the Mr Redford will find his
natural level; Ibsen and Tolstoy theirs; so no harm will be done.

This question of the Censorship reminds me that I have to apologize
to those who went to the recent performance of Mrs Warren's Profession
expecting to find it what I have just called an aphrodisiac. That was
not my fault; it was Mr Redford's. After the specimens I have given of
the tolerance of his department, it was natural enough for thoughtless
people to infer that a play which overstepped his indulgence must be a
very exciting play indeed. Accordingly, I find one critic so explicit as
to the nature of his disappointment as to say candidly that "such airy
talk as there is upon the matter is utterly unworthy of acceptance as
being a representation of what people with blood in them think or do on
such occasions." Thus am I crushed between the upper millstone of the Mr
Redford, who thinks me a libertine, and the nether popular critic, who
thinks me a prude. Critics of all grades and ages, middle-aged fathers
of families no less than ardent young enthusiasts, are equally indignant
with me. They revile me as lacking in passion, in feeling, in manhood.
Some of them even sum the matter up by denying me any dramatic power: a
melancholy betrayal of what dramatic power has come to mean on our stage
under the Censorship! Can I be expected to refrain from laughing at
the spectacle of a number of respectable gentlemen lamenting because a
playwright lures them to the theatre by a promise to excite their senses
in a very special and sensational manner, and then, having successfully
trapped them in exceptional numbers, proceeds to ignore their senses and
ruthlessly improve their minds? But I protest again that the lure was
not mine. The play had been in print for four years; and I have spared
no pains to make known that my plays are built to induce, not voluptuous
reverie but intellectual interest, not romantic rhapsody but humane
concern. Accordingly, I do not find those critics who are gifted with
intellectual appetite and political conscience complaining of want of
dramatic power. Rather do they protest, not altogether unjustly, against
a few relapses into staginess and caricature which betray the young
playwright and the old playgoer in this early work of mine.

As to the voluptuaries, I can assure them that the playwright, whether
he be myself or another, will always disappoint them. The drama can do
little to delight the senses: all the apparent instances to the contrary
are instances of the personal fascination of the performers. The drama
of pure feeling is no longer in the hands of the playwright: it has been
conquered by the musician, after whose enchantments all the verbal arts
seem cold and tame. Romeo and Juliet with the loveliest Juliet is dry,
tedious, and rhetorical in comparison with Wagner's Tristan, even though
Isolde be both fourteen stone and forty, as she often is in Germany.
Indeed, it needed no Wagner to convince the public of this. The
voluptuous sentimentality of Gounod's Faust and Bizet's Carmen has
captured the common playgoer; and there is, flatly, no future now for
any drama without music except the drama of thought. The attempt to
produce a genus of opera without music (and this absurdity is what
our fashionable theatres have been driving at for a long time without
knowing it) is far less hopeful than my own determination to accept
problem as the normal materiel of the drama.

That this determination will throw me into a long conflict with our
theatre critics, and with the few playgoers who go to the theatre as
often as the critics, I well know; but I am too well equipped for the
strife to be deterred by it, or to bear malice towards the losing side.
In trying to produce the sensuous effects of opera, the fashionable
drama has become so flaccid in its sentimentality, and the intellect
of its frequenters so atrophied by disuse, that the reintroduction
of problem, with its remorseless logic and iron framework of fact,
inevitably produces at first an overwhelming impression of coldness and
inhuman rationalism. But this will soon pass away. When the intellectual
muscle and moral nerve of the critics has been developed in the struggle
with modern problem plays, the pettish luxuriousness of the clever ones,
and the sulky sense of disadvantaged weakness in the sentimental ones,
will clear away; and it will be seen that only in the problem play is
there any real drama, because drama is no mere setting up of the camera
to nature: it is the presentation in parable of the conflict between
Man's will and his environment: in a word, of problem. The vapidness of
such drama as the pseudo-operatic plays contain lies in the fact that
in them animal passion, sentimentally diluted, is shewn in conflict, not
with real circumstances, but with a set of conventions and assumptions
half of which do not exist off the stage, whilst the other half can
either be evaded by a pretence of compliance or defied with complete
impunity by any reasonably strong-minded person. Nobody can feel that
such conventions are really compulsory; and consequently nobody can
believe in the stage pathos that accepts them as an inexorable fate, or
in the genuineness of the people who indulge in such pathos. Sitting
at such plays, we do not believe: we make-believe. And the habit of
make-believe becomes at last so rooted that criticism of the theatre
insensibly ceases to be criticism at all, and becomes more and more a
chronicle of the fashionable enterprises of the only realities left on
the stage: that is, the performers in their own persons. In this
phase the playwright who attempts to revive genuine drama produces the
disagreeable impression of the pedant who attempts to start a serious
discussion at a fashionable at-home. Later on, when he has driven the
tea services out and made the people who had come to use the theatre as
a drawing-room understand that it is they and not the dramatist who are
the intruders, he has to face the accusation that his plays ignore human
feeling, an illusion produced by that very resistance of fact and law to
human feeling which creates drama. It is the _deus ex machina_ who, by
suspending that resistance, makes the fall of the curtain an immediate
necessity, since drama ends exactly where resistance ends. Yet the
introduction of this resistance produces so strong an impression of
heartlessness nowadays that a distinguished critic has summed up the
impression made on him by Mrs Warren's Profession, by declaring that
"the difference between the spirit of Tolstoy and the spirit of Mr
Shaw is the difference between the spirit of Christ and the spirit of
Euclid." But the epigram would be as good if Tolstoy's name were put in
place of mine and D'Annunzio's in place of Tolstoy. At the same time
I accept the enormous compliment to my reasoning powers with sincere
complacency; and I promise my flatterer that when he is sufficiently
accustomed to and therefore undazzled by problem on the stage to be able
to attend to the familiar factor of humanity in it as well as to the
unfamiliar one of a real environment, he will both see and feel that
Mrs Warren's Profession is no mere theorem, but a play of instincts
and temperaments in conflict with each other and with a flinty social
problem that never yields an inch to mere sentiment.

I go further than this. I declare that the real secret of the
cynicism and inhumanity of which shallower critics accuse me is the
unexpectedness with which my characters behave like human beings,
instead of conforming to the romantic logic of the stage. The axioms and
postulates of that dreary mimanthropometry are so well known that it is
almost impossible for its slaves to write tolerable last acts to
their plays, so conventionally do their conclusions follow from their
premises. Because I have thrown this logic ruthlessly overboard, I am
accused of ignoring, not stage logic, but, of all things, human feeling.
People with completely theatrified imaginations tell me that no girl
would treat her mother as Vivie Warren does, meaning that no stage
heroine would in a popular sentimental play. They say this just as they
might say that no two straight lines would enclose a space. They do not
see how completely inverted their vision has become even when I throw
its preposterousness in their faces, as I repeatedly do in this very
play. Praed, the sentimental artist (fool that I was not to make him a
theatre critic instead of an architect!) burlesques them by expecting
all through the piece that the feelings of others will be logically
deducible from their family relationships and from his "conventionally
unconventional" social code. The sarcasm is lost on the critics: they,
saturated with the same logic, only think him the sole sensible person
on the stage. Thus it comes about that the more completely the dramatist
is emancipated from the illusion that men and women are primarily
reasonable beings, and the more powerfully he insists on the ruthless
indifference of their great dramatic antagonist, the external world, to
their whims and emotions, the surer he is to be denounced as blind to
the very distinction on which his whole work is built. Far from ignoring
idiosyncrasy, will, passion, impulse, whim, as factors in human action,
I have placed them so nakedly on the stage that the elderly citizen,
accustomed to see them clothed with the veil of manufactured logic about
duty, and to disguise even his own impulses from himself in this way,
finds the picture as unnatural as Carlyle's suggested painting of
parliament sitting without its clothes.

I now come to those critics who, intellectually baffled by the problem
in Mrs Warren's Profession, have made a virtue of running away from it.
I will illustrate their method by quotation from Dickens, taken from the
fifth chapter of Our Mutual Friend:

"Hem!" began Wegg. "This, Mr Boffin and Lady, is the first chapter of
the first wollume of the Decline and Fall off----" here he looked hard
at the book, and stopped.

"What's the matter, Wegg?"

"Why, it comes into my mind, do you know, sir," said Wegg with an air of
insinuating frankness (having first again looked hard at the book), "that
you made a little mistake this morning, which I had meant to set you
right in; only something put it out of my head. I think you said Rooshan
Empire, sir?"

"It is Rooshan; ain't it, Wegg?"

"No, sir. Roman. Roman."

"What's the difference, Wegg?"

"The difference, sir?" Mr Wegg was faltering and in danger of breaking
down, when a bright thought flashed upon him. "The difference, sir?
There you place me in a difficulty, Mr Boffin. Suffice it to observe,
that the difference is best postponed to some other occasion when Mrs
Boffin does not honor us with her company. In Mrs Boffin's presence,
sir, we had better drop it."

Mr Wegg thus came out of his disadvantage with quite a chivalrous air,
and not only that, but by dint of repeating with a manly delicacy,
"In Mrs Boffin's presence, sir, we had better drop it!" turned the
disadvantage on Boffin, who felt that he had committed himself in a very
painful manner.

I am willing to let Mr Wegg drop it on these terms, provided I am
allowed to mention here that Mrs Warren's Profession is a play for
women; that it was written for women; that it has been performed and
produced mainly through the determination of women that it should be
performed and produced; that the enthusiasm of women made its first
performance excitingly successful; and that not one of these women had
any inducement to support it except their belief in the timeliness and
the power of the lesson the play teaches. Those who were "surprised to
see ladies present" were men; and when they proceeded to explain that
the journals they represented could not possibly demoralize the public
by describing such a play, their editors cruelly devoted the space saved
by their delicacy to an elaborate and respectful account of the progress
of a young lord's attempt to break the bank at Monte Carlo. A few days
sooner Mrs Warren would have been crowded out of their papers by an
exceptionally abominable police case. I do not suggest that the police
case should have been suppressed; but neither do I believe that regard
for public morality had anything to do with their failure to grapple
with the performance by the Stage Society. And, after all, there was no
need to fall back on Silas Wegg's subterfuge. Several critics saved the
faces of their papers easily enough by the simple expedient of saying
all they had to say in the tone of a shocked governess lecturing a
naughty child. To them I might plead, in Mrs Warren's words, "Well,
it's only good manners to be ashamed, dearie;" but it surprises me,
recollecting as I do the effect produced by Miss Fanny Brough's delivery
of that line, that gentlemen who shivered like violets in a zephyr as
it swept through them, should so completely miss the full width of its
application as to go home and straightway make a public exhibition of
mock modesty.

My old Independent Theatre manager, Mr Grein, besides that reproach to
me for shattering his ideals, complains that Mrs Warren is not wicked
enough, and names several romancers who would have clothed her black
soul with all the terrors of tragedy. I have no doubt they would; but
if you please, my dear Grein, that is just what I did not want to do.
Nothing would please our sanctimonious British public more than to throw
the whole guilt of Mrs Warren's profession on Mrs Warren herself. Now
the whole aim of my play is to throw that guilt on the British public
itself. You may remember that when you produced my first play, Widowers'
Houses, exactly the same misunderstanding arose. When the virtuous young
gentleman rose up in wrath against the slum landlord, the slum
landlord very effectively shewed him that slums are the product, not
of individual Harpagons, but of the indifference of virtuous young
gentlemen to the condition of the city they live in, provided they
live at the west end of it on money earned by someone else's labor. The
notion that prostitution is created by the wickedness of Mrs Warren
is as silly as the notion--prevalent, nevertheless, to some extent in
Temperance circles--that drunkenness is created by the wickedness of
the publican. Mrs Warren is not a whit a worse woman than the reputable
daughter who cannot endure her. Her indifference to the ultimate social
consequences of her means of making money, and her discovery of that
means by the ordinary method of taking the line of least resistance to
getting it, are too common in English society to call for any special
remark. Her vitality, her thrift, her energy, her outspokenness, her
wise care of her daughter, and the managing capacity which has enabled
her and her sister to climb from the fried fish shop down by the Mint
to the establishments of which she boasts, are all high English social
virtues. Her defence of herself is so overwhelming that it provokes the
St James Gazette to declare that "the tendency of the play is wholly
evil" because "it contains one of the boldest and most specious defences
of an immoral life for poor women that has ever been penned." Happily
the St James Gazette here speaks in its haste. Mrs Warren's defence of
herself is not only bold and specious, but valid and unanswerable.
But it is no defence at all of the vice which she organizes. It is
no defence of an immoral life to say that the alternative offered
by society collectively to poor women is a miserable life, starved,
overworked, fetid, ailing, ugly. Though it is quite natural and RIGHT
for Mrs Warren to choose what is, according to her lights, the least
immoral alternative, it is none the less infamous of society to offer
such alternatives. For the alternatives offered are not morality and
immorality, but two sorts of immorality. The man who cannot see
that starvation, overwork, dirt, and disease are as anti-social as
prostitution--that they are the vices and crimes of a nation, and
not merely its misfortunes--is (to put it as politely as possible) a
hopelessly Private Person.

The notion that Mrs Warren must be a fiend is only an example of the
violence and passion which the slightest reference to sex arouses in
undisciplined minds, and which makes it seem natural for our lawgivers
to punish silly and negligible indecencies with a ferocity unknown in
dealing with, for example, ruinous financial swindling. Had my play been
titled Mr Warren's Profession, and Mr Warren been a bookmaker, nobody
would have expected me to make him a villain as well. Yet gambling is
a vice, and bookmaking an institution, for which there is absolutely
nothing to be said. The moral and economic evil done by trying to get
other people's money without working for it (and this is the essence of
gambling) is not only enormous but uncompensated. There are no two sides
to the question of gambling, no circumstances which force us to tolerate
it lest its suppression lead to worse things, no consensus of opinion
among responsible classes, such as magistrates and military commanders,
that it is a necessity, no Athenian records of gambling made splendid by
the talents of its professors, no contention that instead of violating
morals it only violates a legal institution which is in many respects
oppressive and unnatural, no possible plea that the instinct on which it
is founded is a vital one. Prostitution can confuse the issue with all
these excuses: gambling has none of them. Consequently, if Mrs Warren
must needs be a demon, a bookmaker must be a cacodemon. Well, does
anybody who knows the sporting world really believe that bookmakers are
worse than their neighbors? On the contrary, they have to be a good deal
better; for in that world nearly everybody whose social rank does not
exclude such an occupation would be a bookmaker if he could; but the
strength of character for handling large sums of money and for strict
settlements and unflinching payment of losses is so rare that successful
bookmakers are rare too. It may seem that at least public spirit
cannot be one of a bookmaker's virtues; but I can testify from personal
experience that excellent public work is done with money subscribed
by bookmakers. It is true that there are abysses in bookmaking: for
example, welshing. Mr Grein hints that there are abysses in Mrs Warren's
profession also. So there are in every profession: the error lies in
supposing that every member of them sounds these depths. I sit on a
public body which prosecutes Mrs Warren zealously; and I can assure Mr
Grein that she is often leniently dealt with because she has conducted
her business "respectably" and held herself above its vilest branches.
The degrees in infamy are as numerous and as scrupulously observed as
the degrees in the peerage: the moralist's notion that there are depths
at which the moral atmosphere ceases is as delusive as the rich man's
notion that there are no social jealousies or snobberies among the very
poor. No: had I drawn Mrs Warren as a fiend in human form, the very
people who now rebuke me for flattering her would probably be the
first to deride me for deducing her character logically from occupation
instead of observing it accurately in society.

One critic is so enslaved by this sort of logic that he calls my
portraiture of the Reverend Samuel Gardner an attack on religion.

According to this view Subaltern Iago is an attack on the army, Sir
John Falstaff an attack on knighthood, and King Claudius an attack on
royalty. Here again the clamor for naturalness and human feeling, raised
by so many critics when they are confronted by the real thing on the
stage, is really a clamor for the most mechanical and superficial sort
of logic. The dramatic reason for making the clergyman what Mrs Warren
calls "an old stick-in-the-mud," whose son, in spite of much capacity
and charm, is a cynically worthless member of society, is to set up a
mordant contrast between him and the woman of infamous profession, with
her well brought-up, straightforward, hardworking daughter. The critics
who have missed the contrast have doubtless observed often enough that
many clergymen are in the Church through no genuine calling, but simply
because, in circles which can command preferment, it is the refuge
of "the fool of the family"; and that clergymen's sons are often
conspicuous reactionists against the restraints imposed on them in
childhood by their father's profession. These critics must know, too,
from history if not from experience, that women as unscrupulous as Mrs
Warren have distinguished themselves as administrators and rulers, both
commercially and politically. But both observation and knowledge are
left behind when journalists go to the theatre. Once in their stalls,
they assume that it is "natural" for clergymen to be saintly, for
soldiers to be heroic, for lawyers to be hard-hearted, for sailors to
be simple and generous, for doctors to perform miracles with little
bottles, and for Mrs Warren to be a beast and a demon. All this is not
only not natural, but not dramatic. A man's profession only enters into
the drama of his life when it comes into conflict with his nature. The
result of this conflict is tragic in Mrs Warren's case, and comic in the
clergyman's case (at least we are savage enough to laugh at it); but
in both cases it is illogical, and in both cases natural. I repeat,
the critics who accuse me of sacrificing nature to logic are so
sophisticated by their profession that to them logic is nature, and
nature absurdity.

Many friendly critics are too little skilled in social questions and
moral discussions to be able to conceive that respectable gentlemen like
themselves, who would instantly call the police to remove Mrs Warren if
she ventured to canvass them personally, could possibly be in any way
responsible for her proceedings. They remonstrate sincerely, asking me
what good such painful exposures can possibly do. They might as well ask
what good Lord Shaftesbury did by devoting his life to the exposure
of evils (by no means yet remedied) compared to which the worst things
brought into view or even into surmise by this play are trifles.
The good of mentioning them is that you make people so extremely
uncomfortable about them that they finally stop blaming "human nature"
for them, and begin to support measures for their reform.

Can anything be more absurd than the copy of The Echo which contains a
notice of the performance of my play? It is edited by a gentleman who,
having devoted his life to work of the Shaftesbury type, exposes social
evils and clamors for their reform in every column except one; and that
one is occupied by the declaration of the paper's kindly theatre critic,
that the performance left him "wondering what useful purpose the play
was intended to serve." The balance has to be redressed by the more
fashionable papers, which usually combine capable art criticism with
West-End solecism on politics and sociology. It is very noteworthy,
however, on comparing the press explosion produced by Mrs Warren's
Profession in 1902 with that produced by Widowers' Houses about ten
years earlier, that whereas in 1892 the facts were frantically denied
and the persons of the drama flouted as monsters of wickedness, in
1902 the facts are admitted and the characters recognized, though it is
suggested that this is exactly why no gentleman should mention them in
public. Only one writer has ventured to imply this time that the poverty
mentioned by Mrs Warren has since been quietly relieved, and need
not have been dragged back to the footlights. I compliment him on his
splendid mendacity, in which he is unsupported, save by a little plea in
a theatrical paper which is innocent enough to think that ten guineas a
year with board and lodging is an impossibly low wage for a barmaid. It
goes on to cite Mr Charles Booth as having testified that there are
many laborers' wives who are happy and contented on eighteen shillings
a week. But I can go further than that myself. I have seen an Oxford
agricultural laborer's wife looking cheerful on eight shillings a week;
but that does not console me for the fact that agriculture in England
is a ruined industry. If poverty does not matter as long as it is
contented, then crime does not matter as long as it is unscrupulous. The
truth is that it is only then that it does matter most desperately.
Many persons are more comfortable when they are dirty than when they are
clean; but that does not recommend dirt as a national policy.

Here I must for the present break off my arduous work of educating the
Press. We shall resume our studies later on; but just now I am tired of
playing the preceptor; and the eager thirst of my pupils for improvement
does not console me for the slowness of their progress. Besides, I must
reserve space to gratify my own vanity and do justice to the six artists
who acted my play, by placing on record the hitherto unchronicled
success of the first representation. It is not often that an author,
after a couple of hours of those rare alternations of excitement and
intensely attentive silence which only occur in the theatre when actors
and audience are reacting on one another to the utmost, is able to step
on the stage and apply the strong word genius to the representation with
the certainty of eliciting an instant and overwhelming assent from the
audience. That was my good fortune on the afternoon of Sunday, the fifth
of January last. I was certainly extremely fortunate in my interpreters
in the enterprise, and that not alone in respect of their artistic
talent; for had it not been for their superhuman patience, their
imperturbable good humor and good fellowship, there could have been no
performance. The terror of the Censor's power gave us trouble enough to
break up any ordinary commercial enterprise. Managers promised and even
engaged their theatres to us after the most explicit warnings that the
play was unlicensed, and at the last moment suddenly realized that Mr
Redford had their livelihoods in the hollow of his hand, and backed
out. Over and over again the date and place were fixed and the tickets
printed, only to be canceled, until at last the desperate and overworked
manager of the Stage Society could only laugh, as criminals broken on
the wheel used to laugh at the second stroke. We rehearsed under great
difficulties. Christmas pieces and plays for the new year were being
produced in all directions; and my six actor colleagues were busy
people, with engagements in these pieces in addition to their current
professional work every night. On several raw winter days stages for
rehearsal were unattainable even by the most distinguished applicants;
and we shared corridors and saloons with them whilst the stage was
given over to children in training for Boxing night. At last we had to
rehearse at an hour at which no actor or actress has been out of bed
within the memory of man; and we sardonically congratulated one another
every morning on our rosy matutinal looks and the improvement wrought
by our early rising in our health and characters. And all this, please
observe, for a society without treasury or commercial prestige, for
a play which was being denounced in advance as unmentionable, for an
author without influence at the fashionable theatres! I victoriously
challenge the West End managers to get as much done for interested
motives, if they can.

Three causes made the production the most notable that has fallen to my
lot. First, the veto of the Censor, which put the supporters of the play
on their mettle. Second, the chivalry of the Stage Society, which, in
spite of my urgent advice to the contrary, and my demonstration of the
difficulties, dangers, and expenses the enterprise would cost, put my
discouragements to shame and resolved to give battle at all costs to
the attempt of the Censorship to suppress the play. Third, the artistic
spirit of the actors, who made the play their own and carried it through
triumphantly in spite of a series of disappointments and annoyances much
more trying to the dramatic temperament than mere difficulties.

The acting, too, required courage and character as well as skill and
intelligence. The veto of the Censor introduced quite a novel element of
moral responsibility into the undertaking. And the characters were very
unusual on the English stage. The younger heroine is, like her mother,
an Englishwoman to the backbone, and not, like the heroines of our
fashionable drama, a prima donna of Italian origin. Consequently she
was sure to be denounced as unnatural and undramatic by the critics.
The most vicious man in the play is not in the least a stage villain;
indeed, he regards his own moral character with the sincere complacency
of a hero of melodrama. The amiable devotee of romance and beauty is
shewn at an age which brings out the futilization which these worships
are apt to produce if they are made the staple of life instead of
the sauce. The attitude of the clever young people to their elders is
faithfully represented as one of pitiless ridicule and unsympathetic
criticism, and forms a spectacle incredible to those who, when young,
were not cleverer than their nearest elders, and painful to those
sentimental parents who shrink from the cruelty of youth, which pardons
nothing because it knows nothing. In short, the characters and their
relations are of a kind that the routineer critic has not yet learned
to place; so that their misunderstanding was a foregone conclusion.
Nevertheless, there was no hesitation behind the curtain. When it went
up at last, a stage much too small for the company was revealed to an
auditorium much too small for the audience. But the players, though it
was impossible for them to forget their own discomfort, at once made the
spectators forget theirs. It certainly was a model audience, responsive
from the first line to the last; and it got no less than it deserved in
return.

I grieve to add that the second performance, given for the edification
of the London Press and of those members of the Stage Society who cannot
attend the Sunday performances, was a less inspiriting one than the
first. A solid phalanx of theatre-weary journalists in an afternoon
humor, most of them committed to irreconcilable disparagement of problem
plays, and all of them bound by etiquette to be as undemonstrative
as possible, is not exactly the sort of audience that rises at the
performers and cures them of the inevitable reaction after an excitingly
successful first night. The artist nature is a sensitive and therefore
a vindictive one; and masterful players have a way with recalcitrant
audiences of rubbing a play into them instead of delighting them with
it. I should describe the second performance of Mrs Warren's Profession,
especially as to its earlier stages, as decidedly a rubbed-in one. The
rubbing was no doubt salutary; but it must have hurt some of the thinner
skins. The charm of the lighter passages fled; and the strong scenes,
though they again carried everything before them, yet discharged that
duty in a grim fashion, doing execution on the enemy rather than moving
them to repentance and confession. Still, to those who had not seen the
first performance, the effect was sufficiently impressive; and they
had the advantage of witnessing a fresh development in Mrs Warren, who,
artistically jealous, as I took it, of the overwhelming effect of the
end of the second act on the previous day, threw herself into the fourth
act in quite a new way, and achieved the apparently impossible feat of
surpassing herself. The compliments paid to Miss Fanny Brough by
the critics, eulogistic as they are, are the compliments of men
three-fourths duped as Partridge was duped by Garrick. By much of her
acting they were so completely taken in that they did not recognize it
as acting at all. Indeed, none of the six players quite escaped this
consequence of their own thoroughness. There was a distinct tendency
among the less experienced critics to complain of their sentiments and
behavior. Naturally, the author does not share that grievance.

PICCARD'S COTTAGE, JANUARY 1902.





MRS WARREN'S PROFESSION


[Mrs Warren's Profession was performed for the first time in the theatre
of the New Lyric Club, London, on the 5th and 6th January 1902, with
Madge McIntosh as Vivie, Julius Knight as Praed, Fanny Brough as Mrs
Warren, Charles Goodhart as Crofts, Harley Granville-Barker as Frank,
and Cosmo Stuart as the Reverend Samuel Gardner.]




ACT I


[Summer afternoon in a cottage garden on the eastern slope of a hill a
little south of Haslemere in Surrey. Looking up the hill, the cottage is
seen in the left hand corner of the garden, with its thatched roof and
porch, and a large latticed window to the left of the porch. A paling
completely shuts in the garden, except for a gate on the right. The
common rises uphill beyond the paling to the sky line. Some folded
canvas garden chairs are leaning against the side bench in the porch. A
lady's bicycle is propped against the wall, under the window. A little
to the right of the porch a hammock is slung from two posts. A big
canvas umbrella, stuck in the ground, keeps the sun off the hammock,
in which a young lady is reading and making notes, her head towards
the cottage and her feet towards the gate. In front of the hammock,
and within reach of her hand, is a common kitchen chair, with a pile of
serious-looking books and a supply of writing paper on it.]

[A gentleman walking on the common comes into sight from behind the
cottage. He is hardly past middle age, with something of the artist
about him, unconventionally but carefully dressed, and clean-shaven
except for a moustache, with an eager susceptible face and very amiable
and considerate manners. He has silky black hair, with waves of grey and
white in it. His eyebrows are white, his moustache black. He seems not
certain of his way. He looks over the palings; takes stock of the place;
and sees the young lady.]

THE GENTLEMAN [taking off his hat] I beg your pardon. Can you direct me
to Hindhead View--Mrs Alison's?

THE YOUNG LADY [glancing up from her book] This is Mrs Alison's. [She
resumes her work].

THE GENTLEMAN. Indeed! Perhaps--may I ask are you Miss Vivie Warren?

THE YOUNG LADY [sharply, as she turns on her elbow to get a good look at
him] Yes.

THE GENTLEMAN [daunted and conciliatory] I'm afraid I appear intrusive.
My name is Praed. [Vivie at once throws her books upon the chair, and
gets out of the hammock]. Oh, pray don't let me disturb you.

VIVIE [striding to the gate and opening it for him] Come in, Mr Praed.
[He comes in]. Glad to see you. [She proffers her hand and takes his
with a resolute and hearty grip. She is an attractive specimen of the
sensible, able, highly-educated young middle-class Englishwoman. Age 22.
Prompt, strong, confident, self-possessed. Plain business-like dress,
but not dowdy. She wears a chatelaine at her belt, with a fountain pen
and a paper knife among its pendants].

PRAED. Very kind of you indeed, Miss Warren. [She shuts the gate with a
vigorous slam. He passes in to the middle of the garden, exercising his
fingers, which are slightly numbed by her greeting]. Has your mother
arrived?

VIVIE [quickly, evidently scenting aggression] Is she coming?

PRAED [surprised] Didn't you expect us?

VIVIE. No.

PRAED. Now, goodness me, I hope I've not mistaken the day. That would be
just like me, you know. Your mother arranged that she was to come down
from London and that I was to come over from Horsham to be introduced to
you.

VIVIE [not at all pleased] Did she? Hm! My mother has rather a trick of
taking me by surprise--to see how I behave myself while she's away, I
suppose. I fancy I shall take my mother very much by surprise one of
these days, if she makes arrangements that concern me without consulting
me beforehand. She hasnt come.

PRAED [embarrassed] I'm really very sorry.

VIVIE [throwing off her displeasure] It's not your fault, Mr Praed, is
it? And I'm very glad you've come. You are the only one of my mother's
friends I have ever asked her to bring to see me.

PRAED [relieved and delighted] Oh, now this is really very good of you,
Miss Warren!

VIVIE. Will you come indoors; or would you rather sit out here and talk?

PRAED. It will be nicer out here, don't you think?

VIVIE. Then I'll go and get you a chair. [She goes to the porch for a
garden chair].

PRAED [following her] Oh, pray, pray! Allow me. [He lays hands on the
chair].

VIVIE [letting him take it] Take care of your fingers; theyre rather
dodgy things, those chairs. [She goes across to the chair with the books
on it; pitches them into the hammock; and brings the chair forward with
one swing].

PRAED [who has just unfolded his chair] Oh, now do let me take that
hard chair. I like hard chairs.

VIVIE. So do I. Sit down, Mr Praed. [This invitation she gives with a
genial peremptoriness, his anxiety to please her clearly striking her as
a sign of weakness of character on his part. But he does not immediately
obey].

PRAED. By the way, though, hadnt we better go to the station to meet
your mother?

VIVIE [coolly] Why? She knows the way.

PRAED [disconcerted] Er--I suppose she does [he sits down].

VIVIE. Do you know, you are just like what I expected. I hope you are
disposed to be friends with me.

PRAED [again beaming] Thank you, my _dear_ Miss Warren; thank you. Dear
me! I'm so glad your mother hasnt spoilt you!

VIVIE. How?

PRAED. Well, in making you too conventional. You know, my dear Miss
Warren, I am a born anarchist. I hate authority. It spoils the relations
between parent and child; even between mother and daughter. Now I was
always afraid that your mother would strain her authority to make you
very conventional. It's such a relief to find that she hasnt.

VIVIE. Oh! have I been behaving unconventionally?

PRAED. Oh no: oh dear no. At least, not conventionally unconventionally,
you understand. [She nods and sits down. He goes on, with a cordial
outburst] But it was so charming of you to say that you were disposed
to be friends with me! You modern young ladies are splendid: perfectly
splendid!

VIVIE [dubiously] Eh? [watching him with dawning disappointment as to
the quality of his brains and character].

PRAED. When I was your age, young men and women were afraid of each
other: there was no good fellowship. Nothing real. Only gallantry copied
out of novels, and as vulgar and affected as it could be. Maidenly
reserve! gentlemanly chivalry! always saying no when you meant yes!
simple purgatory for shy and sincere souls.

VIVIE. Yes, I imagine there must have been a frightful waste of time.
Especially women's time.

PRAED. Oh, waste of life, waste of everything. But things are improving.
Do you know, I have been in a positive state of excitement about meeting
you ever since your magnificent achievements at Cambridge: a thing
unheard of in my day. It was perfectly splendid, your tieing with the
third wrangler. Just the right place, you know. The first wrangler
is always a dreamy, morbid fellow, in whom the thing is pushed to the
length of a disease.

VIVIE. It doesn't pay. I wouldn't do it again for the same money.

PRAED [aghast] The same money!

VIVIE. Yes. Fifty pounds. Perhaps you don't know how it was. Mrs Latham,
my tutor at Newnham, told my mother that I could distinguish myself in
the mathematical tripos if I went in for it in earnest. The papers were
full just then of Phillipa Summers beating the senior wrangler. You
remember about it, of course.

PRAED [shakes his head energetically] !!!

VIVIE. Well, anyhow, she did; and nothing would please my mother but
that I should do the same thing. I said flatly that it was not worth
my while to face the grind since I was not going in for teaching; but I
offered to try for fourth wrangler or thereabouts for fifty pounds. She
closed with me at that, after a little grumbling; and I was better than
my bargain. But I wouldn't do it again for that. Two hundred pounds would
have been nearer the mark.

PRAED [much damped] Lord bless me! Thats a very practical way of looking
at it.

VIVIE. Did you expect to find me an unpractical person?

PRAED. But surely it's practical to consider not only the work these
honors cost, but also the culture they bring.

VIVIE. Culture! My dear Mr Praed: do you know what the mathematical
tripos means? It means grind, grind, grind for six to eight hours a day
at mathematics, and nothing but mathematics.

I'm supposed to know something about science; but I know nothing except
the mathematics it involves. I can make calculations for engineers,
electricians, insurance companies, and so on; but I know next to
nothing about engineering or electricity or insurance. I don't even know
arithmetic well. Outside mathematics, lawn-tennis, eating, sleeping,
cycling, and walking, I'm a more ignorant barbarian than any woman could
possibly be who hadn't gone in for the tripos.

PRAED [revolted] What a monstrous, wicked, rascally system! I knew it!
I felt at once that it meant destroying all that makes womanhood
beautiful!

VIVIE. I don't object to it on that score in the least. I shall turn it
to very good account, I assure you.

PRAED. Pooh! In what way?

VIVIE. I shall set up chambers in the City, and work at actuarial
calculations and conveyancing. Under cover of that I shall do some law,
with one eye on the Stock Exchange all the time. I've come down here by
myself to read law: not for a holiday, as my mother imagines. I hate
holidays.

PRAED. You make my blood run cold. Are you to have no romance, no beauty
in your life?

VIVIE. I don't care for either, I assure you.

PRAED. You can't mean that.

VIVIE. Oh yes I do. I like working and getting paid for it. When I'm
tired of working, I like a comfortable chair, a cigar, a little whisky,
and a novel with a good detective story in it.

PRAED [rising in a frenzy of repudiation] I don't believe it. I am an
artist; and I can't believe it: I refuse to believe it. It's only that
you havn't discovered yet what a wonderful world art can open up to you.

VIVIE. Yes I have. Last May I spent six weeks in London with Honoria
Fraser. Mamma thought we were doing a round of sightseeing together; but
I was really at Honoria's chambers in Chancery Lane every day, working
away at actuarial calculations for her, and helping her as well as a
greenhorn could. In the evenings we smoked and talked, and never dreamt
of going out except for exercise. And I never enjoyed myself more in my
life.

I cleared all my expenses and got initiated into the business without a
fee in the bargain.

PRAED. But bless my heart and soul, Miss Warren, do you call that
discovering art?

VIVIE. Wait a bit. That wasn't the beginning. I went up to town on an
invitation from some artistic people in Fitzjohn's Avenue: one of the
girls was a Newnham chum. They took me to the National Gallery--

PRAED [approving] Ah!! [He sits down, much relieved].

VIVIE [continuing]--to the Opera--

PRAED [still more pleased] Good!

VIVIE.--and to a concert where the band played all the evening:
Beethoven and Wagner and so on. I wouldn't go through that experience
again for anything you could offer me. I held out for civility's sake
until the third day; and then I said, plump out, that I couldn't stand
any more of it, and went off to Chancery Lane. N o w you know the sort
of perfectly splendid modern young lady I am. How do you think I shall
get on with my mother?

PRAED [startled] Well, I hope--er--

VIVIE. It's not so much what you hope as what you believe, that I want
to know.

PRAED. Well, frankly, I am afraid your mother will be a little
disappointed. Not from any shortcoming on your part, you know: I don't
mean that. But you are so different from her ideal.

VIVIE. Her what?!

PRAED. Her ideal.

VIVIE. Do you mean her ideal of ME?

PRAED. Yes.

VIVIE. What on earth is it like?

PRAED. Well, you must have observed, Miss Warren, that people who are
dissatisfied with their own bringing-up generally think that the world
would be all right if everybody were to be brought up quite differently.
Now your mother's life has been--er--I suppose you know--

VIVIE. Don't suppose anything, Mr Praed. I hardly know my mother. Since
I was a child I have lived in England, at school or at college, or with
people paid to take charge of me. I have been boarded out all my life.
My mother has lived in Brussels or Vienna and never let me go to her.
I only see her when she visits England for a few days. I don't complain:
it's been very pleasant; for people have been very good to me; and there
has always been plenty of money to make things smooth. But don't imagine
I know anything about my mother. I know far less than you do.

PRAED [very ill at ease] In that case--[He stops, quite at a loss. Then,
with a forced attempt at gaiety] But what nonsense we are talking! Of
course you and your mother will get on capitally. [He rises, and looks
abroad at the view]. What a charming little place you have here!

VIVIE [unmoved] Rather a violent change of subject, Mr Praed. Why won't
my mother's life bear being talked about?

PRAED. Oh, you mustn't say that. Isn't it natural that I should have a
certain delicacy in talking to my old friend's daughter about her behind
her back? You and she will have plenty of opportunity of talking about
it when she comes.

VIVIE. No: she won't talk about it either. [Rising] However, I daresay
you have good reasons for telling me nothing. Only, mind this, Mr
Praed, I expect there will be a battle royal when my mother hears of my
Chancery Lane project.

PRAED [ruefully] I'm afraid there will.

VIVIE. Well, I shall win because I want nothing but my fare to London
to start there to-morrow earning my own living by devilling for Honoria.
Besides, I have no mysteries to keep up; and it seems she has. I shall
use that advantage over her if necessary.

PRAED [greatly shocked] Oh no! No, pray. Youd not do such a thing.

VIVIE. Then tell me why not.

PRAED. I really cannot. I appeal to your good feeling. [She smiles at
his sentimentality]. Besides, you may be too bold. Your mother is not to
be trifled with when she's angry.

VIVIE. You can't frighten me, Mr Praed. In that month at Chancery Lane I
had opportunities of taking the measure of one or two women v e r y like
my mother. You may back me to win. But if I hit harder in my ignorance
than I need, remember it is you who refuse to enlighten me. Now, let us
drop the subject. [She takes her chair and replaces it near the hammock
with the same vigorous swing as before].

PRAED [taking a desperate resolution] One word, Miss Warren. I had
better tell you. It's very difficult; but--

[Mrs Warren and Sir George Crofts arrive at the gate. Mrs Warren is
between 40 and 50, formerly pretty, showily dressed in a brilliant
hat and a gay blouse fitting tightly over her bust and flanked by
fashionable sleeves. Rather spoilt and domineering, and decidedly
vulgar, but, on the whole, a genial and fairly presentable old
blackguard of a woman.]

[Crofts is a tall powerfully-built man of about 50, fashionably dressed
in the style of a young man. Nasal voice, reedier than might be expected
from his strong frame. Clean-shaven bulldog jaws, large flat ears, and
thick neck: gentlemanly combination of the most brutal types of city
man, sporting man, and man about town.]

VIVIE. Here they are. [Coming to them as they enter the garden] How do,
mater? Mr Praed's been here this half hour, waiting for you.

MRS WARREN. Well, if you've been waiting, Praddy, it's your own fault:
I thought youd have had the gumption to know I was coming by the 3.10
train. Vivie: put your hat on, dear: youll get sunburnt. Oh, I forgot to
introduce you. Sir George Crofts: my little Vivie.

[Crofts advances to Vivie with his most courtly manner. She nods, but
makes no motion to shake hands.]

CROFTS. May I shake hands with a young lady whom I have known by
reputation very long as the daughter of one of my oldest friends?

VIVIE [who has been looking him up and down sharply] If you like.

[She takes his tenderly proferred hand and gives it a squeeze that makes
him open his eyes; then turns away, and says to her mother] Will you
come in, or shall I get a couple more chairs? [She goes into the porch
for the chairs].

MRS WARREN. Well, George, what do you think of her?

CROFTS [ruefully] She has a powerful fist. Did you shake hands with her,
Praed?

PRAED. Yes: it will pass off presently.

CROFTS. I hope so. [Vivie reappears with two more chairs. He hurries to
her assistance]. Allow me.

MRS WARREN [patronizingly] Let Sir George help you with the chairs,
dear.

VIVIE [pitching them into his arms] Here you are. [She dusts her hands
and turns to Mrs Warren]. Youd like some tea, wouldn't you?

MRS WARREN [sitting in Praed's chair and fanning herself] I'm dying for
a drop to drink.

VIVIE. I'll see about it. [She goes into the cottage].

[Sir George has by this time managed to unfold a chair and plant it by
Mrs Warren, on her left. He throws the other on the grass and sits down,
looking dejected and rather foolish, with the handle of his stick in
his mouth. Praed, still very uneasy, fidgets around the garden on their
right.]

MRS WARREN [to Praed, looking at Crofts] Just look at him, Praddy: he
looks cheerful, don't he? He's been worrying my life out these three
years to have that little girl of mine shewn to him; and now that Ive
done it, he's quite out of countenance. [Briskly] Come! sit up, George;
and take your stick out of your mouth. [Crofts sulkily obeys].

PRAED. I think, you know--if you don't mind my saying so--that we had
better get out of the habit of thinking of her as a little girl. You see
she has really distinguished herself; and I'm not sure, from what I have
seen of her, that she is not older than any of us.

MRS WARREN [greatly amused] Only listen to him, George! Older than any
of us! Well she _has_ been stuffing you nicely with her importance.

PRAED. But young people are particularly sensitive about being treated
in that way.

MRS WARREN. Yes; and young people have to get all that nonsense taken
out of them, and good deal more besides. Don't you interfere, Praddy: I
know how to treat my own child as well as you do. [Praed, with a grave
shake of his head, walks up the garden with his hands behind his back.
Mrs Warren pretends to laugh, but looks after him with perceptible
concern. Then, she whispers to Crofts] Whats the matter with him? What
does he take it like that for?

CROFTS [morosely] Youre afraid of Praed.

MRS WARREN. What! Me! Afraid of dear old Praddy! Why, a fly wouldn't be
afraid of him.

CROFTS. _You're_ afraid of him.

MRS WARREN [angry] I'll trouble you to mind your own business, and not
try any of your sulks on me. I'm not afraid of y o u, anyhow. If you
can't make yourself agreeable, youd better go home. [She gets up, and,
turning her back on him, finds herself face to face with Praed]. Come,
Praddy, I know it was only your tender-heartedness. Youre afraid I'll
bully her.

PRAED. My dear Kitty: you think I'm offended. Don't imagine that: pray
don't. But you know I often notice things that escape you; and though you
never take my advice, you sometimes admit afterwards that you ought to
have taken it.

MRS WARREN. Well, what do you notice now?

PRAED. Only that Vivie is a grown woman. Pray, Kitty, treat her with
every respect.

MRS WARREN [with genuine amazement] Respect! Treat my own daughter with
respect! What next, pray!

VIVIE [appearing at the cottage door and calling to Mrs Warren] Mother:
will you come to my room before tea?

MRS WARREN. Yes, dearie. [She laughs indulgently at Praed's gravity, and
pats him on the cheek as she passes him on her way to the porch]. Don't
be cross, Praddy. [She follows Vivie into the cottage].

CROFTS [furtively] I say, Praed.

PRAED. Yes.

CROFTS. I want to ask you a rather particular question.

PRAED. Certainly. [He takes Mrs Warren's chair and sits close to
Crofts].

CROFTS. Thats right: they might hear us from the window. Look here: did
Kitty every tell you who that girl's father is?

PRAED. Never.

CROFTS. Have you any suspicion of who it might be?

PRAED. None.

CROFTS [not believing him] I know, of course, that you perhaps might
feel bound not to tell if she had said anything to you. But it's very
awkward to be uncertain about it now that we shall be meeting the girl
every day. We don't exactly know how we ought to feel towards her.

PRAED. What difference can that make? We take her on her own merits.
What does it matter who her father was?

CROFTS [suspiciously] Then you know who he was?

PRAED [with a touch of temper] I said no just now. Did you not hear me?

CROFTS. Look here, Praed. I ask you as a particular favor. If you _do_
know [movement of protest from Praed]--I only say, if you know,
you might at least set my mind at rest about her. The fact is, I fell
attracted.

PRAED [sternly] What do you mean?

CROFTS. Oh, don't be alarmed: it's quite an innocent feeling. Thats what
puzzles me about it. Why, for all I know, _I_ might be her father.

PRAED. You! Impossible!

CROFTS [catching him up cunningly] You know for certain that I'm not?

PRAED. I know nothing about it, I tell you, any more than you. But
really, Crofts--oh no, it's out of the question. Theres not the least
resemblance.

CROFTS. As to that, theres no resemblance between her and her mother
that I can see. I suppose she's not y o u r daughter, is she?

PRAED [rising indignantly] Really, Crofts--!

CROFTS. No offence, Praed. Quite allowable as between two men of the
world.

PRAED [recovering himself with an effort and speaking gently and
gravely] Now listen to me, my dear Crofts. [He sits down again].

I have nothing to do with that side of Mrs Warren's life, and never had.
She has never spoken to me about it; and of course I have never spoken
to her about it. Your delicacy will tell you that a handsome woman needs
some friends who are not--well, not on that footing with her. The effect
of her own beauty would become a torment to her if she could not escape
from it occasionally. You are probably on much more confidential terms
with Kitty than I am. Surely you can ask her the question yourself.

CROFTS. I h a v e asked her, often enough. But she's so determined to
keep the child all to herself that she would deny that it ever had a
father if she could. [Rising] I'm thoroughly uncomfortable about it,
Praed.

PRAED [rising also] Well, as you are, at all events, old enough to be
her father, I don't mind agreeing that we both regard Miss Vivie in a
parental way, as a young girl who we are bound to protect and help. What
do you say?

CROFTS [aggressively] I'm no older than you, if you come to that.

PRAED. Yes you are, my dear fellow: you were born old. I was born a boy:
Ive never been able to feel the assurance of a grown-up man in my life.
[He folds his chair and carries it to the porch].

MRS WARREN [calling from within the cottage] Prad-dee! George!
Tea-ea-ea-ea!

CROFTS [hastily] She's calling us. [He hurries in].

[Praed shakes his head bodingly, and is following Crofts when he is
hailed by a young gentleman who has just appeared on the common, and is
making for the gate. He is pleasant, pretty, smartly dressed, cleverly
good-for-nothing, not long turned 20, with a charming voice and
agreeably disrespectful manners. He carries a light sporting magazine
rifle.]

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN. Hallo! Praed!

PRAED. Why, Frank Gardner! [Frank comes in and shakes hands cordially].
What on earth are you doing here?

FRANK. Staying with my father.

PRAED. The Roman father?

FRANK. He's rector here. I'm living with my people this autumn for the
sake of economy. Things came to a crisis in July: the Roman father had
to pay my debts. He's stony broke in consequence; and so am I. What are
you up to in these parts? do you know the people here?

PRAED. Yes: I'm spending the day with a Miss Warren.

FRANK [enthusiastically] What! Do you know Vivie? Isn't she a jolly girl?
I'm teaching her to shoot with this [putting down the rifle]. I'm so
glad she knows you: youre just the sort of fellow she ought to know.
[He smiles, and raises the charming voice almost to a singing tone as he
exclaims] It's e v e r so jolly to find you here, Praed.

PRAED. I'm an old friend of her mother. Mrs Warren brought me over to
make her daughter's acquaintance.

FRANK. The mother! Is _she_ here?

PRAED. Yes: inside, at tea.

MRS WARREN [calling from within] Prad-dee-ee-ee-eee! The tea-cake'll be
cold.

PRAED [calling] Yes, Mrs Warren. In a moment. I've just met a friend
here.

MRS WARREN. A what?

PRAED [louder] A friend.

MRS WARREN. Bring him in.

PRAED. All right. [To Frank] Will you accept the invitation?

FRANK [incredulous, but immensely amused] Is that Vivie's mother?

PRAED. Yes.

FRANK. By Jove! What a lark! Do you think she'll like me?

PRAED. I've no doubt youll make yourself popular, as usual. Come in and
try [moving towards the house].

FRANK. Stop a bit. [Seriously] I want to take you into my confidence.

PRAED. Pray don't. It's only some fresh folly, like the barmaid at
Redhill.

FRANK. It's ever so much more serious than that. You say you've only just
met Vivie for the first time?

PRAED. Yes.

FRANK [rhapsodically] Then you can have no idea what a girl she is. Such
character! Such sense! And her cleverness! Oh, my eye, Praed, but I can
tell you she is clever! And--need I add?--she loves me.

CROFTS [putting his head out of the window] I say, Praed: what are you
about? Do come along. [He disappears].

FRANK. Hallo! Sort of chap that would take a prize at a dog show, ain't
he? Who's he?

PRAED. Sir George Crofts, an old friend of Mrs Warren's. I think we had
better come in.

[On their way to the porch they are interrupted by a call from the gate.
Turning, they see an elderly clergyman looking over it.]

THE CLERGYMAN [calling] Frank!

FRANK. Hallo! [To Praed] The Roman father. [To the clergyman] Yes,
gov'nor: all right: presently. [To Praed] Look here, Praed: youd better
go in to tea. I'll join you directly.

PRAED. Very good. [He goes into the cottage].

[The clergyman remains outside the gate, with his hands on the top of
it. The Rev. Samuel Gardner, a beneficed clergyman of the Established
Church, is over 50. Externally he is pretentious, booming, noisy,
important. Really he is that obsolescent phenomenon the fool of the
family dumped on the Church by his father the patron, clamorously
asserting himself as father and clergyman without being able to command
respect in either capacity.]

REV. S. Well, sir. Who are your friends here, if I may ask?

FRANK. Oh, it's all right, gov'nor! Come in.

REV. S. No, sir; not until I know whose garden I am entering.

FRANK. It's all right. It's Miss Warren's.

REV. S. I have not seen her at church since she came.

FRANK. Of course not: she's a third wrangler. Ever so intellectual. Took
a higher degree than you did; so why should she go to hear you preach?

REV. S. Don't be disrespectful, sir.

FRANK. Oh, it don't matter: nobody hears us. Come in. [He opens the gate,
unceremoniously pulling his father with it into the garden]. I want to
introduce you to her. Do you remember the advice you gave me last July,
gov'nor?

REV. S. [severely] Yes. I advised you to conquer your idleness and
flippancy, and to work your way into an honorable profession and live on
it and not upon me.

FRANK. No: thats what you thought of afterwards. What you actually said
was that since I had neither brains nor money, I'd better turn my good
looks to account by marrying someone with both. Well, look here. Miss
Warren has brains: you can't deny that.

REV. S. Brains are not everything.

FRANK. No, of course not: theres the money--

REV. S. [interrupting him austerely] I was not thinking of money, sir. I
was speaking of higher things. Social position, for instance.

FRANK. I don't care a rap about that.

REV. S. But I do, sir.

FRANK. Well, nobody wants y o u to marry her. Anyhow, she has what
amounts to a high Cambridge degree; and she seems to have as much money
as she wants.

REV. S. [sinking into a feeble vein of humor] I greatly doubt whether
she has as much money as y o u will want.

FRANK. Oh, come: I havn't been so very extravagant. I live ever so
quietly; I don't drink; I don't bet much; and I never go regularly to the
razzle-dazzle as you did when you were my age.

REV. S. [booming hollowly] Silence, sir.

FRANK. Well, you told me yourself, when I was making every such an ass
of myself about the barmaid at Redhill, that you once offered a woman
fifty pounds for the letters you wrote to her when--

REV. S. [terrified] Sh-sh-sh, Frank, for Heaven's sake! [He looks round
apprehensively Seeing no one within earshot he plucks up courage to boom
again, but more subduedly]. You are taking an ungentlemanly advantage of
what I confided to you for your own good, to save you from an error you
would have repented all your life long. Take warning by your father's
follies, sir; and don't make them an excuse for your own.

FRANK. Did you ever hear the story of the Duke of Wellington and his
letters?

REV. S. No, sir; and I don't want to hear it.

FRANK. The old Iron Duke didn't throw away fifty pounds: not he. He
just wrote: "Dear Jenny: publish and be damned! Yours affectionately,
Wellington." Thats what you should have done.

REV. S. [piteously] Frank, my boy: when I wrote those letters I put
myself into that woman's power. When I told you about them I put myself,
to some extent, I am sorry to say, in your power. She refused my money
with these words, which I shall never forget. "Knowledge is power" she
said; "and I never sell power."

Thats more than twenty years ago; and she has never made use of her
power or caused me a moment's uneasiness. You are behaving worse to me
than she did, Frank.

FRANK. Oh yes I dare say! Did you ever preach at her the way you preach
at me every day?

REV. S. [wounded almost to tears] I leave you, sir. You are
incorrigible. [He turns towards the gate].

FRANK [utterly unmoved] Tell them I shan't be home to tea, will you,
gov'nor, like a good fellow? [He moves towards the cottage door and is
met by Praed and Vivie coming out].

VIVIE [to Frank] Is that your father, Frank? I do so want to meet him.

FRANK. Certainly. [Calling after his father] Gov'nor. Youre wanted. [The
parson turns at the gate, fumbling nervously at his hat. Praed crosses
the garden to the opposite side, beaming in anticipation of civilities].
My father: Miss Warren.

VIVIE [going to the clergyman and shaking his hand] Very glad to see
you here, Mr Gardner. [Calling to the cottage] Mother: come along: youre
wanted.

[Mrs Warren appears on the threshold, and is immediately transfixed,
recognizing the clergyman.]

VIVIE [continuing] Let me introduce--

MRS WARREN [swooping on the Reverend Samuel] Why it's Sam Gardner, gone
into the Church! Well, I never! Don't you know us, Sam? This is George
Crofts, as large as life and twice as natural. Don't you remember me?

REV. S. [very red] I really--er--

MRS WARREN. Of course you do. Why, I have a whole album of your letters
still: I came across them only the other day.

REV. S. [miserably confused] Miss Vavasour, I believe.

MRS WARREN [correcting him quickly in a loud whisper] Tch! Nonsense! Mrs
Warren: don't you see my daughter there?




ACT II


[Inside the cottage after nightfall. Looking eastward from within
instead of westward from without, the latticed window, with its curtains
drawn, is now seen in the middle of the front wall of the cottage, with
the porch door to the left of it. In the left-hand side wall is the door
leading to the kitchen. Farther back against the same wall is a dresser
with a candle and matches on it, and Frank's rifle standing beside them,
with the barrel resting in the plate-rack. In the centre a table stands
with a lighted lamp on it. Vivie's books and writing materials are on a
table to the right of the window, against the wall. The fireplace is on
the right, with a settle: there is no fire. Two of the chairs are set
right and left of the table.]

[The cottage door opens, shewing a fine starlit night without; and Mrs
Warren, her shoulders wrapped in a shawl borrowed from Vivie, enters,
followed by Frank, who throws his cap on the window seat. She has had
enough of walking, and gives a gasp of relief as she unpins her hat;
takes it off; sticks the pin through the crown; and puts it on the
table.]

MRS WARREN. O Lord! I don't know which is the worst of the country, the
walking or the sitting at home with nothing to do. I could do with a
whisky and soda now very well, if only they had such a things in this
place.

FRANK. Perhaps Vivie's got some.

MRS WARREN. Nonsense! What would a young girl like her be doing with
such things! Never mind: it don't matter. I wonder how she passes her
time here! I'd a good deal rather be in Vienna.

FRANK. Let me take you there. [He helps her to take off her shawl,
gallantly giving her shoulders a very perceptible squeeze as he does
so].

MRS WARREN. Ah! would you? I'm beginning to think youre a chip of the
old block.

FRANK. Like the gov'nor, eh? [He hangs the shawl on the nearest chair,
and sits down].

MRS WARREN. Never you mind. What do you know about such things?

Youre only a boy. [She goes to the hearth to be farther from
temptation].

FRANK. Do come to Vienna with me? It'd be ever such larks.

MRS WARREN. No, thank you. Vienna is no place for you--at least not
until youre a little older. [She nods at him to emphasize this piece of
advice. He makes a mock-piteous face, belied by his laughing eyes.
She looks at him; then comes back to him]. Now, look here, little boy
[taking his face in her hands and turning it up to her]: I know you
through and through by your likeness to your father, better than you
know yourself. Don't you go taking any silly ideas into your head about
me. Do you hear?

FRANK [gallantly wooing her with his voice] Can't help it, my dear Mrs
Warren: it runs in the family.

[She pretends to box his ears; then looks at the pretty laughing
upturned face of a moment, tempted. At last she kisses him, and
immediately turns away, out of patience with herself.]

MRS WARREN. There! I shouldn't have done that. I _am_ wicked. Never you
mind, my dear: it's only a motherly kiss. Go and make love to Vivie.

FRANK. So I have.

MRS WARREN [turning on him with a sharp note of alarm in her voice]
What!

FRANK. Vivie and I are ever such chums.

MRS WARREN. What do you mean? Now see here: I won't have any young scamp
tampering with my little girl. Do you hear? I won't have it.

FRANK [quite unabashed] My dear Mrs Warren: don't you be alarmed. My
intentions are honorable: ever so honorable; and your little girl is
jolly well able to take care of herself. She don't need looking after
half so much as her mother. She ain't so handsome, you know.

MRS WARREN [taken aback by his assurance] Well, you have got a nice
healthy two inches of cheek all over you. I don't know where you got it.
Not from your father, anyhow.

CROFTS [in the garden] The gipsies, I suppose?

REV. S. [replying] The broomsquires are far worse.

MRS WARREN [to Frank] S-sh! Remember! you've had your warning.

[Crofts and the Reverend Samuel Gardner come in from the garden, the
clergyman continuing his conversation as he enters.]

REV. S. The perjury at the Winchester assizes is deplorable.

MRS WARREN. Well? what became of you two? And wheres Praddy and Vivie?

CROFTS [putting his hat on the settle and his stick in the chimney
corner] They went up the hill. We went to the village. I wanted a drink.
[He sits down on the settle, putting his legs up along the seat].

MRS WARREN. Well, she oughtn't to go off like that without telling me.
[To Frank] Get your father a chair, Frank: where are your manners?
[Frank springs up and gracefully offers his father his chair; then takes
another from the wall and sits down at the table, in the middle, with
his father on his right and Mrs Warren on his left]. George: where are
you going to stay to-night? You can't stay here. And whats Praddy going
to do?

CROFTS. Gardner'll put me up.

MRS WARREN. Oh, no doubt you've taken care of yourself! But what about
Praddy?

CROFTS. Don't know. I suppose he can sleep at the inn.

MRS WARREN. Havn't you room for him, Sam?

REV. S. Well--er--you see, as rector here, I am not free to do as I
like. Er--what is Mr Praed's social position?

MRS WARREN. Oh, he's all right: he's an architect. What an old
stick-in-the-mud you are, Sam!

FRANK. Yes, it's all right, gov'nor. He built that place down in Wales
for the Duke. Caernarvon Castle they call it. You must have heard of it.
[He winks with lightning smartness at Mrs Warren, and regards his father
blandly].

REV. S. Oh, in that case, of course we shall only be too happy. I
suppose he knows the Duke personally.

FRANK. Oh, ever so intimately! We can stick him in Georgina's old room.

MRS WARREN. Well, thats settled. Now if those two would only come in and
let us have supper. Theyve no right to stay out after dark like this.

CROFTS [aggressively] What harm are they doing you?

MRS WARREN. Well, harm or not, I don't like it.

FRANK. Better not wait for them, Mrs Warren. Praed will stay out as
long as possible. He has never known before what it is to stray over the
heath on a summer night with my Vivie.

CROFTS [sitting up in some consternation] I say, you know! Come!

REV. S. [rising, startled out of his professional manner into real force
and sincerity] Frank, once and for all, it's out of the question. Mrs
Warren will tell you that it's not to be thought of.

CROFTS. Of course not.

FRANK [with enchanting placidity] Is that so, Mrs Warren?

MRS WARREN [reflectively] Well, Sam, I don't know. If the girl wants to
get married, no good can come of keeping her unmarried.

REV. S. [astounded] But married to _him!_--your daughter to my son! Only
think: it's impossible.

CROFTS. Of course it's impossible. Don't be a fool, Kitty.

MRS WARREN [nettled] Why not? Isn't my daughter good enough for your son?

REV. S. But surely, my dear Mrs Warren, you know the reasons--

MRS WARREN [defiantly] I know no reasons. If you know any, you can tell
them to the lad, or to the girl, or to your congregation, if you like.

REV. S. [collapsing helplessly into his chair] You know very well that I
couldn't tell anyone the reasons. But my boy will believe me when I tell
him there a r e reasons.

FRANK. Quite right, Dad: he will. But has your boy's conduct ever been
influenced by your reasons?

CROFTS. You can't marry her; and thats all about it. [He gets up
and stands on the hearth, with his back to the fireplace, frowning
determinedly].

MRS WARREN [turning on him sharply] What have you got to do with it,
pray?

FRANK [with his prettiest lyrical cadence] Precisely what I was going to
ask, myself, in my own graceful fashion.

CROFTS [to Mrs Warren] I suppose you don't want to marry the girl to a
man younger than herself and without either a profession or twopence to
keep her on. Ask Sam, if you don't believe me. [To the parson] How much
more money are you going to give him?

REV. S. Not another penny. He has had his patrimony; and he spent the
last of it in July. [Mrs Warren's face falls].

CROFTS [watching her] There! I told you. [He resumes his place on
the settle and puts his legs on the seat again, as if the matter were
finally disposed of].

FRANK [plaintively] This is ever so mercenary. Do you suppose Miss
Warren's going to marry for money? If we love one another--

MRS WARREN. Thank you. Your love's a pretty cheap commodity, my lad.
If you have no means of keeping a wife, that settles it; you can't have
Vivie.

FRANK [much amused] What do y o u say, gov'nor, eh?

REV. S. I agree with Mrs Warren.

FRANK. And good old Crofts has already expressed his opinion.

CROFTS [turning angrily on his elbow] Look here: I want none of your
cheek.

FRANK [pointedly] I'm e v e r so sorry to surprise you, Crofts; but you
allowed yourself the liberty of speaking to me like a father a moment
ago. One father is enough, thank you.

CROFTS [contemptuously] Yah! [He turns away again].

FRANK [rising] Mrs Warren: I cannot give my Vivie up, even for your
sake.

MRS WARREN [muttering] Young scamp!

FRANK [continuing] And as you no doubt intend to hold out other
prospects to her, I shall lose no time in placing my case before her.
[They stare at him; and he begins to declaim gracefully] He either fears
his fate too much, Or his deserts are small, That dares not put it to
the touch, To gain or lose it all.

[The cottage doors open whilst he is reciting; and Vivie and Praed
come in. He breaks off. Praed puts his hat on the dresser. There is an
immediate improvement in the company's behavior. Crofts takes down his
legs from the settle and pulls himself together as Praed joins him at
the fireplace. Mrs Warren loses her ease of manner and takes refuge in
querulousness.]

MRS WARREN. Wherever have you been, Vivie?

VIVIE [taking off her hat and throwing it carelessly on the table] On
the hill.

MRS WARREN. Well, you shouldn't go off like that without letting me know.
How could I tell what had become of you? And night coming on too!

VIVIE [going to the door of the kitchen and opening it, ignoring her
mother] Now, about supper? [All rise except Mrs Warren] We shall be
rather crowded in here, I'm afraid.

MRS WARREN. Did you hear what I said, Vivie?

VIVIE [quietly] Yes, mother. [Reverting to the supper difficulty] How
many are we? [Counting] One, two, three, four, five, six. Well, two will
have to wait until the rest are done: Mrs Alison has only plates and
knives for four.

PRAED. Oh, it doesn't matter about me. I--

VIVIE. You have had a long walk and are hungry, Mr Praed: you shall have
your supper at once. I can wait myself. I want one person to wait with
me. Frank: are you hungry?

FRANK. Not the least in the world. Completely off my peck, in fact.

MRS WARREN [to Crofts] Neither are you, George. You can wait.

CROFTS. Oh, hang it, I've eaten nothing since tea-time. Can't Sam do it?

FRANK. Would you starve my poor father?

REV. S. [testily] Allow me to speak for myself, sir. I am perfectly
willing to wait.

VIVIE [decisively] There's no need. Only two are wanted. [She opens
the door of the kitchen]. Will you take my mother in, Mr Gardner. [The
parson takes Mrs Warren; and they pass into the kitchen. Praed and
Crofts follow. All except Praed clearly disapprove of the arrangement,
but do not know how to resist it. Vivie stands at the door looking in
at them]. Can you squeeze past to that corner, Mr Praed: it's rather a
tight fit. Take care of your coat against the white-wash: that right.
Now, are you all comfortable?

PRAED [within] Quite, thank you.

MRS WARREN [within] Leave the door open, dearie. [Vivie frowns; but
Frank checks her with a gesture, and steals to the cottage door, which
he softly sets wide open]. Oh Lor, what a draught! Youd better shut it,
dear.

[Vivie shuts it with a slam, and then, noting with disgust that her
mother's hat and shawl are lying about, takes them tidily to the window
seat, whilst Frank noiselessly shuts the cottage door.]

FRANK [exulting] Aha! Got rid of em. Well, Vivvums: what do you think of
my governor?

VIVIE [preoccupied and serious] I've hardly spoken to him. He doesn't
strike me as a particularly able person.

FRANK. Well, you know, the old man is not altogether such a fool as he
looks. You see, he was shoved into the Church, rather; and in trying to
live up to it he makes a much bigger ass of himself than he really is. I
don't dislike him as much as you might expect. He means well. How do you
think youll get on with him?

VIVIE [rather grimly] I don't think my future life will be much concerned
with him, or with any of that old circle of my mother's, except perhaps
Praed. [She sits down on the settle] What do you think of my mother?

FRANK. Really and truly?

VIVIE. Yes, really and truly.

FRANK. Well, she's ever so jolly. But she's rather a caution, isn't she?
And Crofts! Oh, my eye, Crofts! [He sits beside her].

VIVIE. What a lot, Frank!

FRANK. What a crew!

VIVIE [with intense contempt for them] If I thought that _I_ was like
that--that I was going to be a waster, shifting along from one meal to
another with no purpose, and no character, and no grit in me, I'd open
an artery and bleed to death without one moment's hesitation.

FRANK. Oh no, you wouldn't. Why should they take any grind when they can
afford not to? I wish I had their luck. No: what I object to is their
form. It isn't the thing: it's slovenly, ever so slovenly.

VIVIE. Do you think your form will be any better when youre as old as
Crofts, if you don't work?

FRANK. Of course I do. Ever so much better. Vivvums mustn't lecture: her
little boy's incorrigible. [He attempts to take her face caressingly in
his hands].

VIVIE [striking his hands down sharply] Off with you: Vivvums is not in
a humor for petting her little boy this evening. [She rises and comes
forward to the other side of the room].

FRANK [following her] How unkind!

VIVIE [stamping at him] Be serious. I'm serious.

FRANK. Good. Let us talk learnedly, Miss Warren: do you know that all
the most advanced thinkers are agreed that half the diseases of modern
civilization are due to starvation of the affections of the young. Now,
_I_--

VIVIE [cutting him short] You are very tiresome. [She opens the inner
door] Have you room for Frank there? He's complaining of starvation.

MRS WARREN [within] Of course there is [clatter of knives and glasses
as she moves the things on the table]. Here! theres room now beside me.
Come along, Mr Frank.

FRANK. Her little boy will be ever so even with his Vivvums for this.
[He passes into the kitchen].

MRS WARREN [within] Here, Vivie: come on you too, child. You must be
famished. [She enters, followed by Crofts, who holds the door open with
marked deference. She goes out without looking at him; and he shuts the
door after her]. Why George, you can't be done: you've eaten nothing. Is
there anything wrong with you?

CROFTS. Oh, all I wanted was a drink. [He thrusts his hands in his
pockets, and begins prowling about the room, restless and sulky].

MRS WARREN. Well, I like enough to eat. But a little of that cold
beef and cheese and lettuce goes a long way. [With a sigh of only half
repletion she sits down lazily on the settle].

CROFTS. What do you go encouraging that young pup for?

MRS WARREN [on the alert at once] Now see here, George: what are you
up to about that girl? I've been watching your way of looking at her.
Remember: I know you and what your looks mean.

CROFTS. Theres no harm in looking at her, is there?

MRS WARREN. I'd put you out and pack you back to London pretty soon if
I saw any of your nonsense. My girl's little finger is more to me than
your whole body and soul. [Crofts receives this with a sneering grin.
Mrs Warren, flushing a little at her failure to impose on him in the
character of a theatrically devoted mother, adds in a lower key] Make
your mind easy: the young pup has no more chance than you have.

CROFTS. Mayn't a man take an interest in a girl?

MRS WARREN. Not a man like you.

CROFTS. How old is she?

MRS WARREN. Never you mind how old she is.

CROFTS. Why do you make such a secret of it?

MRS WARREN. Because I choose.

CROFTS. Well, I'm not fifty yet; and my property is as good as it ever
was--

MRS [interrupting him] Yes; because youre as stingy as youre vicious.

CROFTS [continuing] And a baronet isn't to be picked up every day.

No other man in my position would put up with you for a mother-in-law.
Why shouldn't she marry me?

MRS WARREN. You!

CROFTS. We three could live together quite comfortably. I'd die before
her and leave her a bouncing widow with plenty of money. Why not? It's
been growing in my mind all the time I've been walking with that fool
inside there.

MRS WARREN [revolted] Yes; it's the sort of thing that _would_ grow in
your mind.

[He halts in his prowling; and the two look at one another, she
steadfastly, with a sort of awe behind her contemptuous disgust: he
stealthily, with a carnal gleam in his eye and a loose grin.]

CROFTS [suddenly becoming anxious and urgent as he sees no sign of
sympathy in her] Look here, Kitty: youre a sensible woman: you needn't
put on any moral airs. I'll ask no more questions; and you need answer
none. I'll settle the whole property on her; and if you want a checque
for yourself on the wedding day, you can name any figure you like--in
reason.

MRS WARREN. So it's come to that with you, George, like all the other
worn-out old creatures!

CROFTS [savagely] Damn you!

[Before she can retort the door of the kitchen is opened; and the
voices of the others are heard returning. Crofts, unable to recover his
presence of mind, hurries out of the cottage. The clergyman appears at
the kitchen door.]

REV. S. [looking round] Where is Sir George?

MRS WARREN. Gone out to have a pipe. [The clergyman takes his hat from
the table, and joins Mrs Warren at the fireside. Meanwhile, Vivie comes
in, followed by Frank, who collapses into the nearest chair with an air
of extreme exhaustion. Mrs Warren looks round at Vivie and says, with
her affectation of maternal patronage even more forced than usual] Well,
dearie: have you had a good supper?

VIVIE. You know what Mrs Alison's suppers are. [She turns to Frank and
pets him] Poor Frank! was all the beef gone? did it get nothing but
bread and cheese and ginger beer? [Seriously, as if she had done quite
enough trifling for one evening] Her butter is really awful. I must get
some down from the stores.

FRANK. Do, in Heaven's name!

[Vivie goes to the writing-table and makes a memorandum to order the
butter. Praed comes in from the kitchen, putting up his handkerchief,
which he has been using as a napkin.]

REV. S. Frank, my boy: it is time for us to be thinking of home.

Your mother does not know yet that we have visitors.

PRAED. I'm afraid we're giving trouble.

FRANK [rising] Not the least in the world: my mother will be delighted
to see you. She's a genuinely intellectual artistic woman; and she sees
nobody here from one year's end to another except the gov'nor; so you
can imagine how jolly dull it pans out for her. [To his father] Y o u
r e not intellectual or artistic: are you pater? So take Praed home at
once; and I'll stay here and entertain Mrs Warren. Youll pick up Crofts
in the garden. He'll be excellent company for the bull-pup.

PRAED [taking his hat from the dresser, and coming close to Frank] Come
with us, Frank. Mrs Warren has not seen Miss Vivie for a long time; and
we have prevented them from having a moment together yet.

FRANK [quite softened, and looking at Praed with romantic admiration]
Of course. I forgot. Ever so thanks for reminding me. Perfect gentleman,
Praddy. Always were. My ideal through life. [He rises to go, but
pauses a moment between the two older men, and puts his hand on Praed's
shoulder]. Ah, if you had only been my father instead of this unworthy
old man! [He puts his other hand on his father's shoulder].

REV. S. [blustering] Silence, sir, silence: you are profane.

MRS WARREN [laughing heartily] You should keep him in better order, Sam.
Good-night. Here: take George his hat and stick with my compliments.

REV. S. [taking them] Good-night. [They shake hands. As he passes Vivie
he shakes hands with her also and bids her good-night. Then, in booming
command, to Frank] Come along, sir, at once. [He goes out].

MRS WARREN. Byebye, Praddy.

PRAED. Byebye, Kitty.

[They shake hands affectionately and go out together, she accompanying
him to the garden gate.]

FRANK [to Vivie] Kissums?

VIVIE [fiercely] No. I hate you. [She takes a couple of books and some
paper from the writing-table, and sits down with them at the middle
table, at the end next the fireplace].

FRANK [grimacing] Sorry. [He goes for his cap and rifle. Mrs Warren
returns. He takes her hand] Good-night, dear Mrs Warren. [He kisses her
hand. She snatches it away, her lips tightening, and looks more than
half disposed to box his ears. He laughs mischievously and runs off,
clapping-to the door behind him].

MRS WARREN [resigning herself to an evening of boredom now that the men
are gone] Did you ever in your life hear anyone rattle on so? Isn't he a
tease? [She sits at the table]. Now that I think of it, dearie, don't you
go encouraging him. I'm sure he's a regular good-for-nothing.

VIVIE [rising to fetch more books] I'm afraid so. Poor Frank! I shall
have to get rid of him; but I shall feel sorry for him, though he's
not worth it. That man Crofts does not seem to me to be good for much
either: is he? [She throws the books on the table rather roughly].

MRS WARREN [galled by Vivie's indifference] What do you know of men,
child, to talk that way of them? Youll have to make up your mind to see
a good deal of Sir George Crofts, as he's a friend of mine.

VIVIE [quite unmoved] Why? [She sits down and opens a book]. Do you
expect that we shall be much together? You and I, I mean?

MRS WARREN [staring at her] Of course: until youre married. Youre not
going back to college again.

VIVIE. Do you think my way of life would suit you? I doubt it.

MRS WARREN. Y o u r way of life! What do you mean?

VIVIE [cutting a page of her book with the paper knife on her
chatelaine] Has it really never occurred to you, mother, that I have a
way of life like other people?

MRS WARREN. What nonsense is this youre trying to talk? Do you want to
shew your independence, now that youre a great little person at school?
Don't be a fool, child.

VIVIE [indulgently] Thats all you have to say on the subject, is it,
mother?

MRS WARREN [puzzled, then angry] Don't you keep on asking me questions
like that. [Violently] Hold your tongue. [Vivie works on, losing no
time, and saying nothing]. You and your way of life, indeed! What next?
[She looks at Vivie again. No reply].

Your way of life will be what I please, so it will. [Another pause].
Ive been noticing these airs in you ever since you got that tripos or
whatever you call it. If you think I'm going to put up with them, youre
mistaken; and the sooner you find it out, the better. [Muttering] All I
have to say on the subject, indeed! [Again raising her voice angrily] Do
you know who youre speaking to, Miss?

VIVIE [looking across at her without raising her head from her book] No.
Who are you? What are you?

MRS WARREN [rising breathless] You young imp!

VIVIE. Everybody knows my reputation, my social standing, and the
profession I intend to pursue. I know nothing about you. What is that
way of life which you invite me to share with you and Sir George Crofts,
pray?

MRS WARREN. Take care. I shall do something I'll be sorry for after, and
you too.

VIVIE [putting aside her books with cool decision] Well, let us drop the
subject until you are better able to face it. [Looking critically at her
mother] You want some good walks and a little lawn tennis to set you up.
You are shockingly out of condition: you were not able to manage twenty
yards uphill today without stopping to pant; and your wrists are mere
rolls of fat. Look at mine. [She holds out her wrists].

MRS WARREN [after looking at her helplessly, begins to whimper] Vivie--

VIVIE [springing up sharply] Now pray don't begin to cry. Anything but
that. I really cannot stand whimpering. I will go out of the room if you
do.

MRS WARREN [piteously] Oh, my darling, how can you be so hard on me?
Have I no rights over you as your mother?

VIVIE. A r e you my mother?

MRS WARREN. _Am_ I your mother? Oh, Vivie!

VIVIE. Then where are our relatives? my father? our family friends? You
claim the rights of a mother: the right to call me fool and child; to
speak to me as no woman in authority over me at college dare speak to
me; to dictate my way of life; and to force on me the acquaintance of
a brute whom anyone can see to be the most vicious sort of London man
about town. Before I give myself the trouble to resist such claims, I
may as well find out whether they have any real existence.

MRS WARREN [distracted, throwing herself on her knees] Oh no, no.

Stop, stop. I _am_ your mother: I swear it. Oh, you can't mean to turn on
me--my own child! it's not natural. You believe me, don't you? Say you
believe me.

VIVIE. Who was my father?

MRS WARREN. You don't know what youre asking. I can't tell you.

VIVIE [determinedly] Oh yes you can, if you like. I have a right to
know; and you know very well that I have that right. You can refuse
to tell me if you please; but if you do, you will see the last of me
tomorrow morning.

MRS WARREN. Oh, it's too horrible to hear you talk like that. You
wouldn't--you _couldn't_ leave me.

VIVIE [ruthlessly] Yes, without a moment's hesitation, if you trifle
with me about this. [Shivering with disgust] How can I feel sure that I
may not have the contaminated blood of that brutal waster in my veins?

MRS WARREN. No, no. On my oath it's not he, nor any of the rest that you
have ever met. I'm certain of that, at least.

[Vivie's eyes fasten sternly on her mother as the significance of this
flashes on her.]

VIVIE [slowly] You are certain of that, at _least_. Ah! You mean that
that is all you are certain of. [Thoughtfully] I see. [Mrs Warren buries
her face in her hands]. Don't do that, mother: you know you don't feel
it a bit. [Mrs Warren takes down her hands and looks up deplorably
at Vivie, who takes out her watch and says] Well, that is enough for
tonight. At what hour would you like breakfast? Is half-past eight too
early for you?

MRS WARREN [wildly] My God, what sort of woman are you?

VIVIE [coolly] The sort the world is mostly made of, I should hope.
Otherwise I don't understand how it gets its business done.

Come [taking her mother by the wrist and pulling her up pretty
resolutely]: pull yourself together. Thats right.

MRS WARREN [querulously] Youre very rough with me, Vivie.

VIVIE. Nonsense. What about bed? It's past ten.

MRS WARREN [passionately] Whats the use of my going to bed? Do you think
I could sleep?

VIVIE. Why not? I shall.

MRS WARREN. You! you've no heart. [She suddenly breaks out vehemently in
her natural tongue--the dialect of a woman of the people--with all her
affectations of maternal authority and conventional manners gone, and an
overwhelming inspiration of true conviction and scorn in her] Oh, I wont
bear it: I won't put up with the injustice of it. What right have you to
set yourself up above me like this? You boast of what you are to me--to
_me_, who gave you a chance of being what you are. What chance had I?
Shame on you for a bad daughter and a stuck-up prude!

VIVIE [sitting down with a shrug, no longer confident; for her replies,
which have sounded sensible and strong to her so far, now begin to ring
rather woodenly and even priggishly against the new tone of her mother]
Don't think for a moment I set myself above you in any way. You attacked
me with the conventional authority of a mother: I defended myself with
the conventional superiority of a respectable woman. Frankly, I am not
going to stand any of your nonsense; and when you drop it I shall not
expect you to stand any of mine. I shall always respect your right to
your own opinions and your own way of life.

MRS WARREN. My own opinions and my own way of life! Listen to her
talking! Do you think I was brought up like you? able to pick and choose
my own way of life? Do you think I did what I did because I liked it, or
thought it right, or wouldn't rather have gone to college and been a lady
if I'd had the chance?

VIVIE. Everybody has some choice, mother. The poorest girl alive may
not be able to choose between being Queen of England or Principal
of Newnham; but she can choose between ragpicking and flowerselling,
according to her taste. People are always blaming circumstances for what
they are. I don't believe in circumstances. The people who get on in
this world are the people who get up and look for the circumstances they
want, and, if they can't find them, make them.

MRS WARREN. Oh, it's easy to talk, isn't it? Here! would you like to know
what _my_ circumstances were?

VIVIE. Yes: you had better tell me. Won't you sit down?

MRS WARREN. Oh, I'll sit down: don't you be afraid. [She plants her chair
farther forward with brazen energy, and sits down. Vivie is impressed in
spite of herself]. D'you know what your gran'mother was?

VIVIE. No.

MRS WARREN. No, you don't. I do. She called herself a widow and had a
fried-fish shop down by the Mint, and kept herself and four daughters
out of it. Two of us were sisters: that was me and Liz; and we were both
good-looking and well made. I suppose our father was a well-fed man:
mother pretended he was a gentleman; but I don't know. The other two
were only half sisters: undersized, ugly, starved looking, hard working,
honest poor creatures: Liz and I would have half-murdered them if
mother hadn't half-murdered us to keep our hands off them. They were the
respectable ones. Well, what did they get by their respectability? I'll
tell you. One of them worked in a whitelead factory twelve hours a day
for nine shillings a week until she died of lead poisoning. She only
expected to get her hands a little paralyzed; but she died. The other
was always held up to us as a model because she married a Government
laborer in the Deptford victualling yard, and kept his room and the
three children neat and tidy on eighteen shillings a week--until he took
to drink. That was worth being respectable for, wasn't it?

VIVIE [now thoughtfully attentive] Did you and your sister think so?

MRS WARREN. Liz didn't, I can tell you: she had more spirit. We both went
to a church school--that was part of the ladylike airs we gave ourselves
to be superior to the children that knew nothing and went nowhere--and
we stayed there until Liz went out one night and never came back. I
know the schoolmistress thought I'd soon follow her example; for
the clergyman was always warning me that Lizzie'd end by jumping off
Waterloo Bridge. Poor fool: that was all he knew about it! But I was
more afraid of the whitelead factory than I was of the river; and so
would you have been in my place. That clergyman got me a situation as
a scullery maid in a temperance restaurant where they sent out for
anything you liked. Then I was a waitress; and then I went to the bar
at Waterloo station: fourteen hours a day serving drinks and washing
glasses for four shillings a week and my board. That was considered a
great promotion for me. Well, one cold, wretched night, when I was so
tired I could hardly keep myself awake, who should come up for a half of
Scotch but Lizzie, in a long fur cloak, elegant and comfortable, with a
lot of sovereigns in her purse.

VIVIE [grimly] My aunt Lizzie!

MRS WARREN. Yes; and a very good aunt to have, too. She's living down
at Winchester now, close to the cathedral, one of the most respectable
ladies there. Chaperones girls at the country ball, if you please.
No river for Liz, thank you! You remind me of Liz a little: she was a
first-rate business woman--saved money from the beginning--never let
herself look too like what she was--never lost her head or threw away a
chance. When she saw I'd grown up good-looking she said to me across the
bar "What are you doing there, you little fool? wearing out your health
and your appearance for other people's profit!" Liz was saving money
then to take a house for herself in Brussels; and she thought we two
could save faster than one. So she lent me some money and gave me a
start; and I saved steadily and first paid her back, and then went into
business with her as a partner. Why shouldn't I have done it? The house
in Brussels was real high class: a much better place for a woman to be
in than the factory where Anne Jane got poisoned. None of the girls were
ever treated as I was treated in the scullery of that temperance place,
or at the Waterloo bar, or at home. Would you have had me stay in them
and become a worn out old drudge before I was forty?

VIVIE [intensely interested by this time] No; but why did you choose
that business? Saving money and good management will succeed in any
business.

MRS WARREN. Yes, saving money. But where can a woman get the money to
save in any other business? Could y o u save out of four shillings a
week and keep yourself dressed as well? Not you. Of course, if youre
a plain woman and can't earn anything more; or if you have a turn for
music, or the stage, or newspaper-writing: thats different. But neither
Liz nor I had any turn for such things at all: all we had was our
appearance and our turn for pleasing men. Do you think we were such
fools as to let other people trade in our good looks by employing us
as shopgirls, or barmaids, or waitresses, when we could trade in them
ourselves and get all the profits instead of starvation wages? Not
likely.

VIVIE. You were certainly quite justified--from the business point of
view.

MRS WARREN. Yes; or any other point of view. What is any respectable
girl brought up to do but to catch some rich man's fancy and get the
benefit of his money by marrying him?--as if a marriage ceremony
could make any difference in the right or wrong of the thing! Oh, the
hypocrisy of the world makes me sick! Liz and I had to work and save and
calculate just like other people; elseways we should be as poor as any
good-for-nothing drunken waster of a woman that thinks her luck will
last for ever. [With great energy] I despise such people: theyve
no character; and if theres a thing I hate in a woman, it's want of
character.

VIVIE. Come now, mother: frankly! Isn't it part of what you call
character in a woman that she should greatly dislike such a way of
making money?

MRS WARREN. Why, of course. Everybody dislikes having to work and make
money; but they have to do it all the same. I'm sure I've often pitied
a poor girl, tired out and in low spirits, having to try to please some
man that she doesn't care two straws for--some half-drunken fool that
thinks he's making himself agreeable when he's teasing and worrying and
disgusting a woman so that hardly any money could pay her for putting up
with it. But she has to bear with disagreeables and take the rough with
the smooth, just like a nurse in a hospital or anyone else. It's not
work that any woman would do for pleasure, goodness knows; though to
hear the pious people talk you would suppose it was a bed of roses.

VIVIE. Still, you consider it worth while. It pays.

MRS WARREN. Of course it's worth while to a poor girl, if she can resist
temptation and is good-looking and well conducted and sensible. It's far
better than any other employment open to her.

I always thought that it oughtn't to be. It _can't_ be right, Vivie, that
there shouldn't be better opportunities for women. I stick to that: it's
wrong. But it's so, right or wrong; and a girl must make the best of it.
But of course it's not worth while for a lady. If you took to it youd be
a fool; but I should have been a fool if I'd taken to anything else.

VIVIE [more and more deeply moved] Mother: suppose we were both as poor
as you were in those wretched old days, are you quite sure that you
wouldn't advise me to try the Waterloo bar, or marry a laborer, or even
go into the factory?

MRS WARREN [indignantly] Of course not. What sort of mother do you take
me for! How could you keep your self-respect in such starvation
and slavery? And whats a woman worth? whats life worth? without
self-respect! Why am I independent and able to give my daughter
a first-rate education, when other women that had just as good
opportunities are in the gutter? Because I always knew how to respect
myself and control myself. Why is Liz looked up to in a cathedral town?
The same reason. Where would we be now if we'd minded the clergyman's
foolishness? Scrubbing floors for one and sixpence a day and nothing to
look forward to but the workhouse infirmary. Don't you be led astray by
people who don't know the world, my girl. The only way for a woman to
provide for herself decently is for her to be good to some man that can
afford to be good to her. If she's in his own station of life, let her
make him marry her; but if she's far beneath him she can't expect it: why
should she? it wouldn't be for her own happiness. Ask any lady in London
society that has daughters; and she'll tell you the same, except that I
tell you straight and she'll tell you crooked. Thats all the difference.

VIVIE [fascinated, gazing at her] My dear mother: you are a wonderful
woman: you are stronger than all England. And are you really and truly
not one wee bit doubtful--or--or--ashamed?

MRS WARREN. Well, of course, dearie, it's only good manners to be
ashamed of it: it's expected from a woman. Women have to pretend to
feel a great deal that they don't feel. Liz used to be angry with me for
plumping out the truth about it. She used to say that when every woman
could learn enough from what was going on in the world before her eyes,
there was no need to talk about it to her. But then Liz was such a
perfect lady! She had the true instinct of it; while I was always a bit
of a vulgarian. I used to be so pleased when you sent me your photos
to see that you were growing up like Liz: you've just her ladylike,
determined way. But I can't stand saying one thing when everyone knows
I mean another. Whats the use in such hypocrisy? If people arrange the
world that way for women, theres no good pretending it's arranged the
other way. No: I never was a bit ashamed really. I consider I had a
right to be proud of how we managed everything so respectably, and never
had a word against us, and how the girls were so well taken care of.
Some of them did very well: one of them married an ambassador. But of
course now I daren't talk about such things: whatever would they think
of us! [She yawns]. Oh dear! I do believe I'm getting sleepy after all.
[She stretches herself lazily, thoroughly relieved by her explosion, and
placidly ready for her night's rest].

VIVIE. I believe it is I who will not be able to sleep now. [She goes
to the dresser and lights the candle. Then she extinguishes the lamp,
darkening the room a good deal]. Better let in some fresh air before
locking up. [She opens the cottage door, and finds that it is broad
moonlight]. What a beautiful night! Look! [She draws the curtains of the
window. The landscape is seen bathed in the radiance of the harvest moon
rising over Blackdown].

MRS WARREN [with a perfunctory glance at the scene] Yes, dear; but take
care you don't catch your death of cold from the night air.

VIVIE [contemptuously] Nonsense.

MRS WARREN [querulously] Oh yes: everything I say is nonsense, according
to you.

VIVIE [turning to her quickly] No: really that is not so, mother.

You have got completely the better of me tonight, though I intended it
to be the other way. Let us be good friends now.

MRS WARREN [shaking her head a little ruefully] So it _has_ been the
other way. But I suppose I must give in to it. I always got the worst of
it from Liz; and now I suppose it'll be the same with you.

VIVIE. Well, never mind. Come: good-night, dear old mother. [She takes
her mother in her arms].

MRS WARREN [fondly] I brought you up well, didn't I, dearie?

VIVIE. You did.

MRS WARREN. And youll be good to your poor old mother for it, won't you?

VIVIE. I will, dear. [Kissing her] Good-night.

MRS WARREN [with unction] Blessings on my own dearie darling! a mother's
blessing!

[She embraces her daughter protectingly, instinctively looking upward
for divine sanction.]




ACT III


[In the Rectory garden next morning, with the sun shining from a
cloudless sky. The garden wall has a five-barred wooden gate, wide
enough to admit a carriage, in the middle. Beside the gate hangs a bell
on a coiled spring, communicating with a pull outside. The carriage
drive comes down the middle of the garden and then swerves to its left,
where it ends in a little gravelled circus opposite the Rectory porch.
Beyond the gate is seen the dusty high road, parallel with the wall,
bounded on the farther side by a strip of turf and an unfenced pine
wood. On the lawn, between the house and the drive, is a clipped yew
tree, with a garden bench in its shade. On the opposite side the garden
is shut in by a box hedge; and there is a little sundial on the turf,
with an iron chair near it. A little path leads through the box hedge,
behind the sundial.]

[Frank, seated on the chair near the sundial, on which he has placed the
morning paper, is reading The Standard. His father comes from the house,
red-eyed and shivery, and meets Frank's eye with misgiving.]

FRANK [looking at his watch] Half-past eleven. Nice hour for a rector to
come down to breakfast!

REV. S. Don't mock, Frank: don't mock. I am a little--er--[Shivering]--

FRANK. Off color?

REV. S. [repudiating the expression] No, sir: _unwell_ this morning.
Where's your mother?

FRANK. Don't be alarmed: she's not here. Gone to town by the 11.13
with Bessie. She left several messages for you. Do you feel equal to
receiving them now, or shall I wait til you've breakfasted?

REV. S. I h a v e breakfasted, sir. I am surprised at your mother
going to town when we have people staying with us. They'll think it very
strange.

FRANK. Possibly she has considered that. At all events, if Crofts is
going to stay here, and you are going to sit up every night with him
until four, recalling the incidents of your fiery youth, it is clearly
my mother's duty, as a prudent housekeeper, to go up to the stores and
order a barrel of whisky and a few hundred siphons.

REV. S. I did not observe that Sir George drank excessively.

FRANK. You were not in a condition to, gov'nor.

REV. S. Do you mean to say that _I_--?

FRANK [calmly] I never saw a beneficed clergyman less sober. The
anecdotes you told about your past career were so awful that I really
don't think Praed would have passed the night under your roof if it hadnt
been for the way my mother and he took to one another.

REV. S. Nonsense, sir. I am Sir George Crofts' host. I must talk to him
about something; and he has only one subject. Where is Mr Praed now?

FRANK. He is driving my mother and Bessie to the station.

REV. S. Is Crofts up yet?

FRANK. Oh, long ago. He hasn't turned a hair: he's in much better
practice than you. Has kept it up ever since, probably. He's taken
himself off somewhere to smoke.

[Frank resumes his paper. The parson turns disconsolately towards the
gate; then comes back irresolutely.]

REV. S. Er--Frank.

FRANK. Yes.

REV. S. Do you think the Warrens will expect to be asked here after
yesterday afternoon?

FRANK. Theyve been asked already.

REV. S. [appalled] What!!!

FRANK. Crofts informed us at breakfast that you told him to bring Mrs
Warren and Vivie over here to-day, and to invite them to make this house
their home. My mother then found she must go to town by the 11.13 train.

REV. S. [with despairing vehemence] I never gave any such invitation. I
never thought of such a thing.

FRANK [compassionately] How do you know, gov'nor, what you said and
thought last night?

PRAED [coming in through the hedge] Good morning.

REV. S. Good morning. I must apologize for not having met you at
breakfast. I have a touch of--of--

FRANK. Clergyman's sore throat, Praed. Fortunately not chronic.

PRAED [changing the subject] Well I must say your house is in a charming
spot here. Really most charming.

REV. S. Yes: it is indeed. Frank will take you for a walk, Mr Praed,
if you like. I'll ask you to excuse me: I must take the opportunity
to write my sermon while Mrs Gardner is away and you are all amusing
yourselves. You won't mind, will you?

PRAED. Certainly not. Don't stand on the slightest ceremony with me.

REV. S. Thank you. I'll--er--er--[He stammers his way to the porch and
vanishes into the house].

PRAED. Curious thing it must be writing a sermon every week.

FRANK. Ever so curious, if he did it. He buys em. He's gone for some
soda water.

PRAED. My dear boy: I wish you would be more respectful to your father.
You know you can be so nice when you like.

FRANK. My dear Praddy: you forget that I have to live with the governor.
When two people live together--it don't matter whether theyre father and
son or husband and wife or brother and sister--they can't keep up the
polite humbug thats so easy for ten minutes on an afternoon call.
Now the governor, who unites to many admirable domestic qualities the
irresoluteness of a sheep and the pompousness and aggressiveness of a
jackass--

PRAED. No, pray, pray, my dear Frank, remember! He is your father.

FRANK. I give him due credit for that. [Rising and flinging down his
paper] But just imagine his telling Crofts to bring the Warrens over
here! He must have been ever so drunk. You know, my dear Praddy, my
mother wouldn't stand Mrs Warren for a moment. Vivie mustn't come here
until she's gone back to town.

PRAED. But your mother doesn't know anything about Mrs Warren, does she?
[He picks up the paper and sits down to read it].

FRANK. I don't know. Her journey to town looks as if she did. Not that
my mother would mind in the ordinary way: she has stuck like a brick to
lots of women who had got into trouble. But they were all nice women.
Thats what makes the real difference. Mrs Warren, no doubt, has her
merits; but she's ever so rowdy; and my mother simply wouldn't put up
with her. So--hallo! [This exclamation is provoked by the reappearance
of the clergyman, who comes out of the house in haste and dismay].

REV. S. Frank: Mrs Warren and her daughter are coming across the heath
with Crofts: I saw them from the study windows. What _am_ I to say about
your mother?

FRANK. Stick on your hat and go out and say how delighted you are to see
them; and that Frank's in the garden; and that mother and Bessie have
been called to the bedside of a sick relative, and were ever so
sorry they couldn't stop; and that you hope Mrs Warren slept well;
and--and--say any blessed thing except the truth, and leave the rest to
Providence.

REV. S. But how are we to get rid of them afterwards?

FRANK. Theres no time to think of that now. Here! [He bounds into the
house].

REV. S. He's so impetuous. I don't know what to do with him, Mr Praed.

FRANK [returning with a clerical felt hat, which he claps on his
father's head]. Now: off with you. [Rushing him through the gate].
Praed and I'll wait here, to give the thing an unpremeditated air. [The
clergyman, dazed but obedient, hurries off].

FRANK. We must get the old girl back to town somehow, Praed. Come!
Honestly, dear Praddy, do you like seeing them together?

PRAED. Oh, why not?

FRANK [his teeth on edge] Don't it make your flesh creep ever so little?
that wicked old devil, up to every villainy under the sun, I'll swear,
and Vivie--ugh!

PRAED. Hush, pray. Theyre coming.

[The clergyman and Crofts are seen coming along the road, followed by
Mrs Warren and Vivie walking affectionately together.]

FRANK. Look: she actually has her arm round the old woman's waist. It's
her right arm: she began it. She's gone sentimental, by God! Ugh! ugh!
Now do you feel the creeps? [The clergyman opens the gate: and Mrs
Warren and Vivie pass him and stand in the middle of the garden looking
at the house. Frank, in an ecstasy of dissimulation, turns gaily to Mrs
Warren, exclaiming] Ever so delighted to see you, Mrs Warren. This quiet
old rectory garden becomes you perfectly.

MRS WARREN. Well, I never! Did you hear that, George? He says I look
well in a quiet old rectory garden.

REV. S. [still holding the gate for Crofts, who loafs through it,
heavily bored] You look well everywhere, Mrs Warren.

FRANK. Bravo, gov'nor! Now look here: lets have a treat before lunch.
First lets see the church. Everyone has to do that. It's a regular old
thirteenth century church, you know: the gov'nor's ever so fond of it,
because he got up a restoration fund and had it completely rebuilt six
years ago. Praed will be able to shew its points.

PRAED [rising] Certainly, if the restoration has left any to shew.

REV. S. [mooning hospitably at them] I shall be pleased, I'm sure, if
Sir George and Mrs Warren really care about it.

MRS WARREN. Oh, come along and get it over.

CROFTS [turning back toward the gate] I've no objection.

REV. S. Not that way. We go through the fields, if you don't mind. Round
here. [He leads the way by the little path through the box hedge].

CROFTS. Oh, all right. [He goes with the parson].

[Praed follows with Mrs Warren. Vivie does not stir: she watches them
until they have gone, with all the lines of purpose in her face marking
it strongly.]

FRANK. Ain't you coming?

VIVIE. No. I want to give you a warning, Frank. You were making fun of
my mother just now when you said that about the rectory garden. That is
barred in the future. Please treat my mother with as much respect as you
treat your own.

FRANK. My dear Viv: she wouldn't appreciate it: the two cases require
different treatment. But what on earth has happened to you? Last night
we were perfectly agreed as to your mother and her set. This morning I
find you attitudinizing sentimentally with your arm around your parent's
waist.

VIVIE [flushing] Attitudinizing!

FRANK. That was how it struck me. First time I ever saw you do a
second-rate thing.

VIVIE [controlling herself] Yes, Frank: there has been a change: but I
don't think it a change for the worse. Yesterday I was a little prig.

FRANK. And today?

VIVIE [wincing; then looking at him steadily] Today I know my mother
better than you do.

FRANK. Heaven forbid!

VIVIE. What do you mean?

FRANK. Viv: theres a freemasonry among thoroughly immoral people that
you know nothing of. You've too much character. _That's_ the bond
between your mother and me: that's why I know her better than youll ever
know her.

VIVIE. You are wrong: you know nothing about her. If you knew the
circumstances against which my mother had to struggle--

FRANK [adroitly finishing the sentence for her] I should know why she is
what she is, shouldn't I? What difference would that make?

Circumstances or no circumstances, Viv, you won't be able to stand your
mother.

VIVIE [very angry] Why not?

FRANK. Because she's an old wretch, Viv. If you ever put your arm around
her waist in my presence again, I'll shoot myself there and then as a
protest against an exhibition which revolts me.

VIVIE. Must I choose between dropping your acquaintance and dropping my
mother's?

FRANK [gracefully] That would put the old lady at ever such a
disadvantage. No, Viv: your infatuated little boy will have to stick to
you in any case. But he's all the more anxious that you shouldn't make
mistakes. It's no use, Viv: your mother's impossible. She may be a good
sort; but she's a bad lot, a very bad lot.

VIVIE [hotly] Frank--! [He stands his ground. She turns away and
sits down on the bench under the yew tree, struggling to recover her
self-command. Then she says] Is she to be deserted by the world because
she's what you call a bad lot? Has she no right to live?

FRANK. No fear of that, Viv: _she_ won't ever be deserted. [He sits on
the bench beside her].

VIVIE. But I am to desert her, I suppose.

FRANK [babyishly, lulling her and making love to her with his voice]
Mustn't go live with her. Little family group of mother and daughter
wouldn't be a success. Spoil o u r little group.

VIVIE [falling under the spell] What little group?

FRANK. The babes in the wood: Vivie and little Frank. [He nestles
against her like a weary child]. Lets go and get covered up with leaves.

VIVIE [rhythmically, rocking him like a nurse] Fast asleep, hand in
hand, under the trees.

FRANK. The wise little girl with her silly little boy.

VIVIE. The dear little boy with his dowdy little girl.

FRANK. Ever so peaceful, and relieved from the imbecility of the little
boy's father and the questionableness of the little girl's--

VIVIE [smothering the word against her breast] Sh-sh-sh-sh! little girl
wants to forget all about her mother. [They are silent for some moments,
rocking one another. Then Vivie wakes up with a shock, exclaiming] What
a pair of fools we are! Come: sit up. Gracious! your hair. [She smooths
it]. I wonder do all grown up people play in that childish way when
nobody is looking.

I never did it when I was a child.

FRANK. Neither did I. You are my first playmate. [He catches her hand to
kiss it, but checks himself to look around first. Very unexpectedly, he
sees Crofts emerging from the box hedge]. Oh damn!

VIVIE. Why damn, dear?

FRANK [whispering] Sh! Here's this brute Crofts. [He sits farther away
from her with an unconcerned air].

CROFTS. Could I have a few words with you, Miss Vivie?

VIVIE. Certainly.

CROFTS [to Frank] Youll excuse me, Gardner. Theyre waiting for you in
the church, if you don't mind.

FRANK [rising] Anything to oblige you, Crofts--except church. If you
should happen to want me, Vivvums, ring the gate bell. [He goes into the
house with unruffled suavity].

CROFTS [watching him with a crafty air as he disappears, and speaking to
Vivie with an assumption of being on privileged terms with her] Pleasant
young fellow that, Miss Vivie. Pity he has no money, isn't it?

VIVIE. Do you think so?

CROFTS. Well, whats he to do? No profession. No property. Whats he good
for?

VIVIE. I realize his disadvantages, Sir George.

CROFTS [a little taken aback at being so precisely interpreted] Oh, it's
not that. But while we're in this world we're in it; and money's money.
[Vivie does not answer]. Nice day, isn't it?

VIVIE [with scarcely veiled contempt for this effort at conversation]
Very.

CROFTS [with brutal good humor, as if he liked her pluck] Well thats not
what I came to say. [Sitting down beside her] Now listen, Miss Vivie.
I'm quite aware that I'm not a young lady's man.

VIVIE. Indeed, Sir George?

CROFTS. No; and to tell you the honest truth I don't want to be either.
But when I say a thing I mean it; and when I feel a sentiment I feel it
in earnest; and what I value I pay hard money for. Thats the sort of man
I am.

VIVIE. It does you great credit, I'm sure.

CROFTS. Oh, I don't mean to praise myself. I have my faults, Heaven
knows: no man is more sensible of that than I am. I know I'm not
perfect: thats one of the advantages of being a middle-aged man; for
I'm not a young man, and I know it. But my code is a simple one, and, I
think, a good one. Honor between man and man; fidelity between man and
woman; and no can't about this religion or that religion, but an honest
belief that things are making for good on the whole.

VIVIE [with biting irony] "A power, not ourselves, that makes for
righteousness," eh?

CROFTS [taking her seriously] Oh certainly. Not ourselves, of course. Y
o u understand what I mean. Well, now as to practical matters. You may
have an idea that I've flung my money about; but I havn't: I'm richer
today than when I first came into the property. I've used my knowledge of
the world to invest my money in ways that other men have overlooked; and
whatever else I may be, I'm a safe man from the money point of view.

VIVIE. It's very kind of you to tell me all this.

CROFTS. Oh well, come, Miss Vivie: you needn't pretend you don't see what
I'm driving at. I want to settle down with a Lady Crofts. I suppose you
think me very blunt, eh?

VIVIE. Not at all: I am very much obliged to you for being so definite
and business-like. I quite appreciate the offer: the money, the
position, _Lady Crofts_, and so on. But I think I will say no, if you
don't mind, I'd rather not. [She rises, and strolls across to the
sundial to get out of his immediate neighborhood].

CROFTS [not at all discouraged, and taking advantage of the additional
room left him on the seat to spread himself comfortably, as if a few
preliminary refusals were part of the inevitable routine of courtship]
I'm in no hurry. It was only just to let you know in case young Gardner
should try to trap you. Leave the question open.

VIVIE [sharply] My no is final. I won't go back from it.

[Crofts is not impressed. He grins; leans forward with his elbows on his
knees to prod with his stick at some unfortunate insect in the grass;
and looks cunningly at her. She turns away impatiently.]

CROFTS. I'm a good deal older than you. Twenty-five years: quarter of
a century. I shan't live for ever; and I'll take care that you shall be
well off when I'm gone.

VIVIE. I am proof against even that inducement, Sir George. Don't you
think youd better take your answer? There is not the slightest chance of
my altering it.

CROFTS [rising, after a final slash at a daisy, and coming nearer to
her] Well, no matter. I could tell you some things that would change
your mind fast enough; but I wont, because I'd rather win you by honest
affection. I was a good friend to your mother: ask her whether I wasn't.
She'd never have make the money that paid for your education if it hadnt
been for my advice and help, not to mention the money I advanced her.
There are not many men who would have stood by her as I have. I put not
less than forty thousand pounds into it, from first to last.

VIVIE [staring at him] Do you mean to say that you were my mother's
business partner?

CROFTS. Yes. Now just think of all the trouble and the explanations
it would save if we were to keep the whole thing in the family, so to
speak. Ask your mother whether she'd like to have to explain all her
affairs to a perfect stranger.

VIVIE. I see no difficulty, since I understand that the business is
wound up, and the money invested.

CROFTS [stopping short, amazed] Wound up! Wind up a business thats
paying 35 per cent in the worst years! Not likely. Who told you that?

VIVIE [her color quite gone] Do you mean that it is still--? [She stops
abruptly, and puts her hand on the sundial to support herself. Then she
gets quickly to the iron chair and sits down].

What business are you talking about?

CROFTS. Well, the fact is it's not what would considered exactly a
high-class business in my set--the country set, you know--o u r set it
will be if you think better of my offer. Not that theres any mystery
about it: don't think that. Of course you know by your mother's being
in it that it's perfectly straight and honest. I've known her for many
years; and I can say of her that she'd cut off her hands sooner than
touch anything that was not what it ought to be. I'll tell you all about
it if you like. I don't know whether you've found in travelling how hard
it is to find a really comfortable private hotel.

VIVIE [sickened, averting her face] Yes: go on.

CROFTS. Well, thats all it is. Your mother has got a genius for managing
such things. We've got two in Brussels, one in Ostend, one in Vienna,
and two in Budapest. Of course there are others besides ourselves in
it; but we hold most of the capital; and your mother's indispensable
as managing director. You've noticed, I daresay, that she travels a good
deal. But you see you can't mention such things in society. Once let out
the word hotel and everybody thinks you keep a public-house. You wouldn't
like people to say that of your mother, would you? Thats why we're so
reserved about it. By the way, youll keep it to yourself, won't you?
Since it's been a secret so long, it had better remain so.

VIVIE. And this is the business you invite me to join you in?

CROFTS. Oh no. My wife shan't be troubled with business. Youll not be in
it more than you've always been.

VIVIE. _I_ always been! What do you mean?

CROFTS. Only that you've always lived on it. It paid for your education
and the dress you have on your back. Don't turn up your nose at business,
Miss Vivie: where would your Newnhams and Girtons be without it?

VIVIE [rising, almost beside herself] Take care. I know what this
business is.

CROFTS [starting, with a suppressed oath] Who told you?

VIVIE. Your partner. My mother.

CROFTS [black with rage] The old--

VIVIE. Just so.

[He swallows the epithet and stands for a moment swearing and raging
foully to himself. But he knows that his cue is to be sympathetic. He
takes refuge in generous indignation.]

CROFTS. She ought to have had more consideration for you. _I'd_ never
have told you.

VIVIE. I think you would probably have told me when we were married: it
would have been a convenient weapon to break me in with.

CROFTS [quite sincerely] I never intended that. On my word as a
gentleman I didn't.

[Vivie wonders at him. Her sense of the irony of his protest cools and
braces her. She replies with contemptuous self-possession.]

VIVIE. It does not matter. I suppose you understand that when we leave
here today our acquaintance ceases.

CROFTS. Why? Is it for helping your mother?

VIVIE. My mother was a very poor woman who had no reasonable choice but
to do as she did. You were a rich gentleman; and you did the same for
the sake of 35 per cent. You are a pretty common sort of scoundrel, I
think. That is my opinion of you.

CROFTS [after a stare: not at all displeased, and much more at his ease
on these frank terms than on their former ceremonious ones] Ha! ha! ha!
ha! Go it, little missie, go it: it doesn't hurt me and it amuses you.
Why the devil shouldn't I invest my money that way? I take the interest
on my capital like other people: I hope you don't think I dirty my own
hands with the work.

Come! you wouldn't refuse the acquaintance of my mother's cousin the Duke
of Belgravia because some of the rents he gets are earned in queer ways.
You wouldn't cut the Archbishop of Canterbury, I suppose, because the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners have a few publicans and sinners among
their tenants. Do you remember your Crofts scholarship at Newnham? Well,
that was founded by my brother the M.P. He gets his 22 per cent out of
a factory with 600 girls in it, and not one of them getting wages enough
to live on. How d'ye suppose they manage when they have no family to
fall back on? Ask your mother. And do you expect me to turn my back on
35 per cent when all the rest are pocketing what they can, like sensible
men? No such fool! If youre going to pick and choose your acquaintances
on moral principles, youd better clear out of this country, unless you
want to cut yourself out of all decent society.

VIVIE [conscience stricken] You might go on to point out that I myself
never asked where the money I spent came from. I believe I am just as
bad as you.

CROFTS [greatly reassured] Of course you are; and a very good thing too!
What harm does it do after all? [Rallying her jocularly] So you don't
think me such a scoundrel now you come to think it over. Eh?

VIVIE. I have shared profits with you: and I admitted you just now to
the familiarity of knowing what I think of you.

CROFTS [with serious friendliness] To be sure you did. You won't find
me a bad sort: I don't go in for being superfine intellectually; but Ive
plenty of honest human feeling; and the old Crofts breed comes out in
a sort of instinctive hatred of anything low, in which I'm sure youll
sympathize with me. Believe me, Miss Vivie, the world isn't such a bad
place as the croakers make out. As long as you don't fly openly in the
face of society, society doesn't ask any inconvenient questions; and
it makes precious short work of the cads who do. There are no secrets
better kept than the secrets everybody guesses. In the class of people
I can introduce you to, no lady or gentleman would so far forget
themselves as to discuss my business affairs or your mothers. No man can
offer you a safer position.

VIVIE [studying him curiously] I suppose you really think youre getting
on famously with me.

CROFTS. Well, I hope I may flatter myself that you think better of me
than you did at first.

VIVIE [quietly] I hardly find you worth thinking about at all now. When
I think of the society that tolerates you, and the laws that protect
you! when I think of how helpless nine out of ten young girls would
be in the hands of you and my mother! the unmentionable woman and her
capitalist bully--

CROFTS [livid] Damn you!

VIVIE. You need not. I feel among the damned already.

[She raises the latch of the gate to open it and go out. He follows her
and puts his hand heavily on the top bar to prevent its opening.]

CROFTS [panting with fury] Do you think I'll put up with this from you,
you young devil?

VIVIE [unmoved] Be quiet. Some one will answer the bell. [Without
flinching a step she strikes the bell with the back of her hand. It
clangs harshly; and he starts back involuntarily. Almost immediately
Frank appears at the porch with his rifle].

FRANK [with cheerful politeness] Will you have the rifle, Viv; or shall
I operate?

VIVIE. Frank: have you been listening?

FRANK [coming down into the garden] Only for the bell, I assure you; so
that you shouldn't have to wait. I think I shewed great insight into your
character, Crofts.

CROFTS. For two pins I'd take that gun from you and break it across your
head.

FRANK [stalking him cautiously] Pray don't. I'm ever so careless in
handling firearms. Sure to be a fatal accident, with a reprimand from
the coroner's jury for my negligence.

VIVIE. Put the rifle away, Frank: it's quite unnecessary.

FRANK. Quite right, Viv. Much more sportsmanlike to catch him in a
trap. [Crofts, understanding the insult, makes a threatening movement].
Crofts: there are fifteen cartridges in the magazine here; and I am a
dead shot at the present distance and at an object of your size.

CROFTS. Oh, you needn't be afraid. I'm not going to touch you.

FRANK. Ever so magnanimous of you under the circumstances! Thank you.

CROFTS. I'll just tell you this before I go. It may interest you, since
youre so fond of one another. Allow me, Mister Frank, to introduce you
to your half-sister, the eldest daughter of the Reverend Samuel Gardner.
Miss Vivie: you half-brother. Good morning! [He goes out through the
gate and along the road].

FRANK [after a pause of stupefaction, raising the rifle] Youll testify
before the coroner that it's an accident, Viv. [He takes aim at the
retreating figure of Crofts. Vivie seizes the muzzle and pulls it round
against her breast].

VIVIE. Fire now. You may.

FRANK [dropping his end of the rifle hastily] Stop! take care. [She lets
it go. It falls on the turf]. Oh, you've given your little boy such
a turn. Suppose it had gone off! ugh! [He sinks on the garden seat,
overcome].

VIVIE. Suppose it had: do you think it would not have been a relief to
have some sharp physical pain tearing through me?

FRANK [coaxingly] Take it ever so easy, dear Viv. Remember: even if the
rifle scared that fellow into telling the truth for the first time in
his life, that only makes us the babes in the woods in earnest. [He
holds out his arms to her]. Come and be covered up with leaves again.

VIVIE [with a cry of disgust] Ah, not that, not that. You make all my
flesh creep.

FRANK. Why, whats the matter?

VIVIE. Goodbye. [She makes for the gate].

FRANK [jumping up] Hallo! Stop! Viv! Viv! [She turns in the gateway]
Where are you going to? Where shall we find you?

VIVIE. At Honoria Fraser's chambers, 67 Chancery Lane, for the rest of
my life. [She goes off quickly in the opposite direction to that taken
by Crofts].

FRANK. But I say--wait--dash it! [He runs after her].




ACT IV


[Honoria Fraser's chambers in Chancery Lane. An office at the top of New
Stone Buildings, with a plate-glass window, distempered walls, electric
light, and a patent stove. Saturday afternoon. The chimneys of Lincoln's
Inn and the western sky beyond are seen through the window. There is a
double writing table in the middle of the room, with a cigar box, ash
pans, and a portable electric reading lamp almost snowed up in heaps of
papers and books. This table has knee holes and chairs right and left
and is very untidy. The clerk's desk, closed and tidy, with its high
stool, is against the wall, near a door communicating with the inner
rooms. In the opposite wall is the door leading to the public corridor.
Its upper panel is of opaque glass, lettered in black on the outside,
FRASER AND WARREN. A baize screen hides the corner between this door and
the window.]

[Frank, in a fashionable light-colored coaching suit, with his stick,
gloves, and white hat in his hands, is pacing up and down in the office.
Somebody tries the door with a key.]

FRANK [calling] Come in. It's not locked.

[Vivie comes in, in her hat and jacket. She stops and stares at him.]

VIVIE [sternly] What are you doing here?

FRANK. Waiting to see you. I've been here for hours. Is this the way you
attend to your business? [He puts his hat and stick on the table, and
perches himself with a vault on the clerk's stool, looking at her with
every appearance of being in a specially restless, teasing, flippant
mood].

VIVIE. I've been away exactly twenty minutes for a cup of tea. [She takes
off her hat and jacket and hangs them behind the screen]. How did you
get in?

FRANK. The staff had not left when I arrived. He's gone to play cricket
on Primrose Hill. Why don't you employ a woman, and give your sex a
chance?

VIVIE. What have you come for?

FRANK [springing off the stool and coming close to her] Viv: lets go and
enjoy the Saturday half-holiday somewhere, like the staff.

What do you say to Richmond, and then a music hall, and a jolly supper?

VIVIE. Can't afford it. I shall put in another six hours work before I go
to bed.

FRANK. Can't afford it, can't we? Aha! Look here. [He takes out a handful
of sovereigns and makes them chink]. Gold, Viv: gold!

VIVIE. Where did you get it?

FRANK. Gambling, Viv: gambling. Poker.

VIVIE. Pah! It's meaner than stealing it. No: I'm not coming. [She sits
down to work at the table, with her back to the glass door, and begins
turning over the papers].

FRANK [remonstrating piteously] But, my dear Viv, I want to talk to you
ever so seriously.

VIVIE. Very well: sit down in Honoria's chair and talk here. I like ten
minutes chat after tea. [He murmurs]. No use groaning: I'm inexorable.
[He takes the opposite seat disconsolately]. Pass that cigar box, will
you?

FRANK [pushing the cigar box across] Nasty womanly habit. Nice men don't
do it any longer.

VIVIE. Yes: they object to the smell in the office; and we've had to take
to cigarets. See! [She opens the box and takes out a cigaret, which she
lights. She offers him one; but he shakes his head with a wry face. She
settles herself comfortably in her chair, smoking]. Go ahead.

FRANK. Well, I want to know what you've done--what arrangements you've
made.

VIVIE. Everything was settled twenty minutes after I arrived here.
Honoria has found the business too much for her this year; and she was
on the point of sending for me and proposing a partnership when I walked
in and told her I hadn't a farthing in the world. So I installed myself
and packed her off for a fortnight's holiday. What happened at Haslemere
when I left?

FRANK. Nothing at all. I said youd gone to town on particular business.

VIVIE. Well?

FRANK. Well, either they were too flabbergasted to say anything, or else
Crofts had prepared your mother. Anyhow, she didn't say anything; and
Crofts didn't say anything; and Praddy only stared. After tea they got up
and went; and I've not seen them since.

VIVIE [nodding placidly with one eye on a wreath of smoke] Thats all
right.

FRANK [looking round disparagingly] Do you intend to stick in this
confounded place?

VIVIE [blowing the wreath decisively away, and sitting straight up] Yes.
These two days have given me back all my strength and self-possession. I
will never take a holiday again as long as I live.

FRANK [with a very wry face] Mps! You look quite happy. And as hard as
nails.

VIVIE [grimly] Well for me that I am!

FRANK [rising] Look here, Viv: we must have an explanation. We parted
the other day under a complete misunderstanding. [He sits on the table,
close to her].

VIVIE [putting away the cigaret] Well: clear it up.

FRANK. You remember what Crofts said.

VIVIE. Yes.

FRANK. That revelation was supposed to bring about a complete change in
the nature of our feeling for one another. It placed us on the footing
of brother and sister.

VIVIE. Yes.

FRANK. Have you ever had a brother?

VIVIE. No.

FRANK. Then you don't know what being brother and sister feels like? Now
I have lots of sisters; and the fraternal feeling is quite familiar to
me. I assure you my feeling for you is not the least in the world like
it. The girls will go _their_ way; I will go mine; and we shan't care
if we never see one another again. Thats brother and sister. But as to
you, I can't be easy if I have to pass a week without seeing you. Thats
not brother and sister. Its exactly what I felt an hour before Crofts
made his revelation. In short, dear Viv, it's love's young dream.

VIVIE [bitingly] The same feeling, Frank, that brought your father to my
mother's feet. Is that it?

FRANK [so revolted that he slips off the table for a moment] I very
strongly object, Viv, to have my feelings compared to any which the
Reverend Samuel is capable of harboring; and I object still more to a
comparison of you to your mother. [Resuming his perch] Besides, I don't
believe the story. I have taxed my father with it, and obtained from him
what I consider tantamount to a denial.

VIVIE. What did he say?

FRANK. He said he was sure there must be some mistake.

VIVIE. Do you believe him?

FRANK. I am prepared to take his word against Crofts'.

VIVIE. Does it make any difference? I mean in your imagination or
conscience; for of course it makes no real difference.

FRANK [shaking his head] None whatever to _me_.

VIVIE. Nor to me.

FRANK [staring] But this is ever so surprising! [He goes back to his
chair]. I thought our whole relations were altered in your imagination
and conscience, as you put it, the moment those words were out of that
brute's muzzle.

VIVIE. No: it was not that. I didn't believe him. I only wish I could.

FRANK. Eh?

VIVIE. I think brother and sister would be a very suitable relation for
us.

FRANK. You really mean that?

VIVIE. Yes. It's the only relation I care for, even if we could afford
any other. I mean that.

FRANK [raising his eyebrows like one on whom a new light has dawned, and
rising with quite an effusion of chivalrous sentiment] My dear Viv:
why didn't you say so before? I am ever so sorry for persecuting you. I
understand, of course.

VIVIE [puzzled] Understand what?

FRANK. Oh, I'm not a fool in the ordinary sense: only in the Scriptural
sense of doing all the things the wise man declared to be folly, after
trying them himself on the most extensive scale. I see I am no longer
Vivvums's little boy. Don't be alarmed: I shall never call you Vivvums
again--at least unless you get tired of your new little boy, whoever he
may be.

VIVIE. My new little boy!

FRANK [with conviction] Must be a new little boy. Always happens that
way. No other way, in fact.

VIVIE. None that you know of, fortunately for you.

[Someone knocks at the door.]

FRANK. My curse upon yon caller, whoe'er he be!

VIVIE. It's Praed. He's going to Italy and wants to say goodbye. I asked
him to call this afternoon. Go and let him in.

FRANK. We can continue our conversation after his departure for Italy.
I'll stay him out. [He goes to the door and opens it]. How are you,
Praddy? Delighted to see you. Come in.

[Praed, dressed for travelling, comes in, in high spirits.]

PRAED. How do you do, Miss Warren? [She presses his hand cordially,
though a certain sentimentality in his high spirits jars upon her]. I
start in an hour from Holborn Viaduct. I wish I could persuade you to
try Italy.

VIVIE. What for?

PRAED. Why, to saturate yourself with beauty and romance, of course.

[Vivie, with a shudder, turns her chair to the table, as if the work
waiting for her there were a support to her. Praed sits opposite to her.
Frank places a chair near Vivie, and drops lazily and carelessly into
it, talking at her over his shoulder.]

FRANK. No use, Praddy. Viv is a little Philistine. She is indifferent to
_my_ romance, and insensible to _my_ beauty.

VIVIE. Mr Praed: once for all, there is no beauty and no romance in life
for me. Life is what it is; and I am prepared to take it as it is.

PRAED [enthusiastically] You will not say that if you come with me to
Verona and on to Venice. You will cry with delight at living in such a
beautiful world.

FRANK. This is most eloquent, Praddy. Keep it up.

PRAED. Oh, I assure you _I_ have cried--I shall cry again, I hope--at
fifty! At your age, Miss Warren, you would not need to go so far as
Verona. Your spirits would absolutely fly up at the mere sight of
Ostend. You would be charmed with the gaiety, the vivacity, the happy
air of Brussels.

VIVIE [springing up with an exclamation of loathing] Agh!

PRAED [rising] Whats the matter?

FRANK [rising] Hallo, Viv!

VIVIE [to Praed, with deep reproach] Can you find no better example of
your beauty and romance than Brussels to talk to me about?

PRAED [puzzled] Of course it's very different from Verona. I don't
suggest for a moment that--

VIVIE [bitterly] Probably the beauty and romance come to much the same
in both places.

PRAED [completely sobered and much concerned] My dear Miss Warren:
I--[looking enquiringly at Frank] Is anything the matter?

FRANK. She thinks your enthusiasm frivolous, Praddy. She's had ever such
a serious call.

VIVIE [sharply] Hold your tongue, Frank. Don't be silly.

FRANK [sitting down] Do you call this good manners, Praed?

PRAED [anxious and considerate] Shall I take him away, Miss Warren? I
feel sure we have disturbed you at your work.

VIVIE. Sit down: I'm not ready to go back to work yet. [Praed sits]. You
both think I have an attack of nerves. Not a bit of it. But there are
two subjects I want dropped, if you don't mind.

One of them [to Frank] is love's young dream in any shape or form: the
other [to Praed] is the romance and beauty of life, especially Ostend
and the gaiety of Brussels. You are welcome to any illusions you may
have left on these subjects: I have none. If we three are to remain
friends, I must be treated as a woman of business, permanently single
[to Frank] and permanently unromantic [to Praed].

FRANK. I also shall remain permanently single until you change your
mind. Praddy: change the subject. Be eloquent about something else.

PRAED [diffidently] I'm afraid theres nothing else in the world that I
_can_ talk about. The Gospel of Art is the only one I can preach. I know
Miss Warren is a great devotee of the Gospel of Getting On; but we
can't discuss that without hurting your feelings, Frank, since you are
determined not to get on.

FRANK. Oh, don't mind my feelings. Give me some improving advice by
all means: it does me ever so much good. Have another try to make a
successful man of me, Viv. Come: lets have it all: energy, thrift,
foresight, self-respect, character. Don't you hate people who have no
character, Viv?

VIVIE [wincing] Oh, stop, stop. Let us have no more of that horrible
cant. Mr Praed: if there are really only those two gospels in the world,
we had better all kill ourselves; for the same taint is in both, through
and through.

FRANK [looking critically at her] There is a touch of poetry about you
today, Viv, which has hitherto been lacking.

PRAED [remonstrating] My dear Frank: aren't you a little unsympathetic?

VIVIE [merciless to herself] No: it's good for me. It keeps me from
being sentimental.

FRANK [bantering her] Checks your strong natural propensity that way,
don't it?

VIVIE [almost hysterically] Oh yes: go on: don't spare me. I was
sentimental for one moment in my life--beautifully sentimental--by
moonlight; and now--

FRANK [quickly] I say, Viv: take care. Don't give yourself away.

VIVIE. Oh, do you think Mr Praed does not know all about my mother?
[Turning on Praed] You had better have told me that morning, Mr Praed.
You are very old fashioned in your delicacies, after all.

PRAED. Surely it is you who are a little old fashioned in your
prejudices, Miss Warren. I feel bound to tell you, speaking as an
artist, and believing that the most intimate human relationships are
far beyond and above the scope of the law, that though I know that your
mother is an unmarried woman, I do not respect her the less on that
account. I respect her more.

FRANK [airily] Hear! hear!

VIVIE [staring at him] Is that _all_ you know?

PRAED. Certainly that is all.

VIVIE. Then you neither of you know anything. Your guesses are innocence
itself compared with the truth.

PRAED [rising, startled and indignant, and preserving his politeness
with an effort] I hope not. [More emphatically] I hope not, Miss Warren.

FRANK [whistles] Whew!

VIVIE. You are not making it easy for me to tell you, Mr Praed.

PRAED [his chivalry drooping before their conviction] If there is
anything worse--that is, anything else--are you sure you are right to
tell us, Miss Warren?

VIVIE. I am sure that if I had the courage I should spend the rest of my
life in telling everybody--stamping and branding it into them until they
all felt their part in its abomination as I feel mine. There is nothing
I despise more than the wicked convention that protects these things
by forbidding a woman to mention them. And yet I can't tell you. The two
infamous words that describe what my mother is are ringing in my ears
and struggling on my tongue; but I can't utter them: the shame of them
is too horrible for me. [She buries her face in her hands. The two men,
astonished, stare at one another and then at her. She raises her head
again desperately and snatches a sheet of paper and a pen]. Here: let me
draft you a prospectus.

FRANK. Oh, she's mad. Do you hear, Viv? mad. Come! pull yourself
together.

VIVIE. You shall see. [She writes]. "Paid up capital: not less than
forty thousand pounds standing in the name of Sir George Crofts,
Baronet, the chief shareholder. Premises at Brussels, Ostend, Vienna,
and Budapest. Managing director: Mrs Warren"; and now don't let us forget
h e r qualifications: the two words. [She writes the words and pushes
the paper to them]. There! Oh no: don't read it: don't! [She snatches it
back and tears it to pieces; then seizes her head in her hands and hides
her face on the table].

[Frank, who has watched the writing over her shoulder, and opened his
eyes very widely at it, takes a card from his pocket; scribbles the
two words on it; and silently hands it to Praed, who reads it with
amazement, and hides it hastily in his pocket.]

FRANK [whispering tenderly] Viv, dear: thats all right. I read what you
wrote: so did Praddy. We understand. And we remain, as this leaves us at
present, yours ever so devotedly.

PRAED. We do indeed, Miss Warren. I declare you are the most splendidly
courageous woman I ever met.

[This sentimental compliment braces Vivie. She throws it away from her
with an impatient shake, and forces herself to stand up, though not
without some support from the table.]

FRANK. Don't stir, Viv, if you don't want to. Take it easy.

VIVIE. Thank you. You an always depend on me for two things: not to cry
and not to faint. [She moves a few steps towards the door of the inner
room, and stops close to Praed to say] I shall need much more courage
than that when I tell my mother that we have come to a parting of the
ways. Now I must go into the next room for a moment to make myself neat
again, if you don't mind.

PRAED. Shall we go away?

VIVIE. No: I'll be back presently. Only for a moment. [She goes into the
other room, Praed opening the door for her].

PRAED. What an amazing revelation! I'm extremely disappointed in Crofts:
I am indeed.

FRANK. I'm not in the least. I feel he's perfectly accounted for at
last. But what a facer for me, Praddy! I can't marry her now.

PRAED [sternly] Frank! [The two look at one another, Frank unruffled,
Praed deeply indignant]. Let me tell you, Gardner, that if you desert
her now you will behave very despicably.

FRANK. Good old Praddy! Ever chivalrous! But you mistake: it's not the
moral aspect of the case: it's the money aspect. I really can't bring
myself to touch the old woman's money now.

PRAED. And was that what you were going to marry on?

FRANK. What else? _I_ havn't any money, nor the smallest turn for making
it. If I married Viv now she would have to support me; and I should cost
her more than I am worth.

PRAED. But surely a clever bright fellow like you can make something by
your own brains.

FRANK. Oh yes, a little. [He takes out his money again]. I made all that
yesterday in an hour and a half. But I made it in a highly speculative
business. No, dear Praddy: even if Bessie and Georgina marry
millionaires and the governor dies after cutting them off with a
shilling, I shall have only four hundred a year. And he won't die until
he's three score and ten: he hasn't originality enough. I shall be on
short allowance for the next twenty years. No short allowance for Viv,
if I can help it. I withdraw gracefully and leave the field to the
gilded youth of England. So that settled. I shan't worry her about it:
I'll just send her a little note after we're gone. She'll understand.

PRAED [grasping his hand] Good fellow, Frank! I heartily beg your
pardon. But must you never see her again?

FRANK. Never see her again! Hang it all, be reasonable. I shall come
along as often as possible, and be her brother. I can _not_ understand
the absurd consequences you romantic people expect from the most
ordinary transactions. [A knock at the door]. I wonder who this is.
Would you mind opening the door? If it's a client it will look more
respectable than if I appeared.

PRAED. Certainly. [He goes to the door and opens it. Frank sits down in
Vivie's chair to scribble a note]. My dear Kitty: come in: come in.

[Mrs Warren comes in, looking apprehensively around for Vivie. She has
done her best to make herself matronly and dignified. The brilliant hat
is replaced by a sober bonnet, and the gay blouse covered by a costly
black silk mantle. She is pitiably anxious and ill at ease: evidently
panic-stricken.]

MRS WARREN [to Frank] What! Y o u r e here, are you?

FRANK [turning in his chair from his writing, but not rising] Here, and
charmed to see you. You come like a breath of spring.

MRS WARREN. Oh, get out with your nonsense. [In a low voice] Where's
Vivie?

[Frank points expressively to the door of the inner room, but says
nothing.]

MRS WARREN [sitting down suddenly and almost beginning to cry] Praddy:
won't she see me, don't you think?

PRAED. My dear Kitty: don't distress yourself. Why should she not?

MRS WARREN. Oh, you never can see why not: youre too innocent. Mr Frank:
did she say anything to you?

FRANK [folding his note] She _must_ see you, if [very expressively] you
wait til she comes in.

MRS WARREN [frightened] Why shouldn't I wait?

[Frank looks quizzically at her; puts his note carefully on the
ink-bottle, so that Vivie cannot fail to find it when next she dips her
pen; then rises and devotes his attention entirely to her.]

FRANK. My dear Mrs Warren: suppose you were a sparrow--ever so tiny
and pretty a sparrow hopping in the roadway--and you saw a steam roller
coming in your direction, would you wait for it?

MRS WARREN. Oh, don't bother me with your sparrows. What did she run away
from Haslemere like that for?

FRANK. I'm afraid she'll tell you if you rashly await her return.

MRS WARREN. Do you want me to go away?

FRANK. No: I always want you to stay. But I _advise_ you to go away.

MRS WARREN. What! And never see her again!

FRANK. Precisely.

MRS WARREN [crying again] Praddy: don't let him be cruel to me. [She
hastily checks her tears and wipes her eyes]. She'll be so angry if she
sees I've been crying.

FRANK [with a touch of real compassion in his airy tenderness] You know
that Praddy is the soul of kindness, Mrs Warren. Praddy: what do you
say? Go or stay?

PRAED [to Mrs Warren] I really should be very sorry to cause you
unnecessary pain; but I think perhaps you had better not wait. The fact
is--[Vivie is heard at the inner door].

FRANK. Sh! Too late. She's coming.

MRS WARREN. Don't tell her I was crying. [Vivie comes in. She
stops gravely on seeing Mrs Warren, who greets her with hysterical
cheerfulness]. Well, dearie. So here you are at last.

VIVIE. I am glad you have come: I want to speak to you. You said you
were going, Frank, I think.

FRANK. Yes. Will you come with me, Mrs Warren? What do you say to a
trip to Richmond, and the theatre in the evening? There is safety in
Richmond. No steam roller there.

VIVIE. Nonsense, Frank. My mother will stay here.

MRS WARREN [scared] I don't know: perhaps I'd better go. We're disturbing
you at your work.

VIVIE [with quiet decision] Mr Praed: please take Frank away. Sit down,
mother. [Mrs Warren obeys helplessly].

PRAED. Come, Frank. Goodbye, Miss Vivie.

VIVIE [shaking hands] Goodbye. A pleasant trip.

PRAED. Thank you: thank you. I hope so.

FRANK [to Mrs Warren] Goodbye: youd ever so much better have taken my
advice. [He shakes hands with her. Then airily to Vivie] Byebye, Viv.

VIVIE. Goodbye. [He goes out gaily without shaking hands with her].

PRAED [sadly] Goodbye, Kitty.

MRS WARREN [snivelling]--oobye!

[Praed goes. Vivie, composed and extremely grave, sits down in Honoria's
chair, and waits for her mother to speak. Mrs Warren, dreading a pause,
loses no time in beginning.]

MRS WARREN. Well, Vivie, what did you go away like that for without
saying a word to me! How could you do such a thing! And what have you
done to poor George? I wanted him to come with me; but he shuffled
out of it. I could see that he was quite afraid of you. Only fancy:
he wanted me not to come. As if [trembling] I should be afraid of you,
dearie. [Vivie's gravity deepens]. But of course I told him it was all
settled and comfortable between us, and that we were on the best
of terms. [She breaks down]. Vivie: whats the meaning of this? [She
produces a commercial envelope, and fumbles at the enclosure with
trembling fingers]. I got it from the bank this morning.

VIVIE. It is my month's allowance. They sent it to me as usual the other
day. I simply sent it back to be placed to your credit, and asked them
to send you the lodgment receipt. In future I shall support myself.

MRS WARREN [not daring to understand] Wasn't it enough? Why didn't
you tell me? [With a cunning gleam in her eye] I'll double it: I was
intending to double it. Only let me know how much you want.

VIVIE. You know very well that that has nothing to do with it. From this
time I go my own way in my own business and among my own friends. And
you will go yours. [She rises]. Goodbye.

MRS WARREN [rising, appalled] Goodbye?

VIVIE. Yes: goodbye. Come: don't let us make a useless scene: you
understand perfectly well. Sir George Crofts has told me the whole
business.

MRS WARREN [angrily] Silly old--[She swallows an epithet, and then turns
white at the narrowness of her escape from uttering it].

VIVIE. Just so.

MRS WARREN. He ought to have his tongue cut out. But I thought it was
ended: you said you didn't mind.

VIVIE [steadfastly] Excuse me: I _do_ mind.

MRS WARREN. But I explained--

VIVIE. You explained how it came about. You did not tell me that it is
still going on [She sits].

[Mrs Warren, silenced for a moment, looks forlornly at Vivie, who waits,
secretly hoping that the combat is over. But the cunning expression
comes back into Mrs Warren's face; and she bends across the table, sly
and urgent, half whispering.]

MRS WARREN. Vivie: do you know how rich I am?

VIVIE. I have no doubt you are very rich.

MRS WARREN. But you don't know all that that means; youre too young. It
means a new dress every day; it means theatres and balls every night;
it means having the pick of all the gentlemen in Europe at your feet;
it means a lovely house and plenty of servants; it means the choicest of
eating and drinking; it means everything you like, everything you want,
everything you can think of. And what are you here? A mere drudge,
toiling and moiling early and late for your bare living and two cheap
dresses a year. Think over it. [Soothingly] Youre shocked, I know. I can
enter into your feelings; and I think they do you credit; but trust me,
nobody will blame you: you may take my word for that. I know what young
girls are; and I know youll think better of it when you've turned it over
in your mind.

VIVIE. So that's how it is done, is it? You must have said all that to
many a woman, to have it so pat.

MRS WARREN [passionately] What harm am I asking you to do? [Vivie turns
away contemptuously. Mrs Warren continues desperately] Vivie: listen to
me: you don't understand: you were taught wrong on purpose: you don't know
what the world is really like.

VIVIE [arrested] Taught wrong on purpose! What do you mean?

MRS WARREN. I mean that youre throwing away all your chances for
nothing. You think that people are what they pretend to be: that the way
you were taught at school and college to think right and proper is the
way things really are. But it's not: it's all only a pretence, to keep
the cowardly slavish common run of people quiet. Do you want to find
that out, like other women, at forty, when you've thrown yourself away
and lost your chances; or won't you take it in good time now from your
own mother, that loves you and swears to you that it's truth: gospel
truth? [Urgently] Vivie: the big people, the clever people, the managing
people, all know it. They do as I do, and think what I think. I know
plenty of them. I know them to speak to, to introduce you to, to make
friends of for you. I don't mean anything wrong: thats what you don't
understand: your head is full of ignorant ideas about me. What do the
people that taught you know about life or about people like me? When did
they ever meet me, or speak to me, or let anyone tell them about me? the
fools! Would they ever have done anything for you if I hadn't paid them?
Havn't I told you that I want you to be respectable? Havn't I brought you
up to be respectable? And how can you keep it up without my money and my
influence and Lizzie's friends? Can't you see that youre cutting your own
throat as well as breaking my heart in turning your back on me?

VIVIE. I recognize the Crofts philosophy of life, mother. I heard it all
from him that day at the Gardners'.

MRS WARREN. You think I want to force that played-out old sot on you! I
don't, Vivie: on my oath I don't.

VIVIE. It would not matter if you did: you would not succeed. [Mrs
Warren winces, deeply hurt by the implied indifference towards her
affectionate intention. Vivie, neither understanding this nor concerning
herself about it, goes on calmly] Mother: you don't at all know the sort
of person I am. I don't object to Crofts more than to any other coarsely
built man of his class. To tell you the truth, I rather admire him
for being strongminded enough to enjoy himself in his own way and
make plenty of money instead of living the usual shooting, hunting,
dining-out, tailoring, loafing life of his set merely because all
the rest do it. And I'm perfectly aware that if I'd been in the same
circumstances as my aunt Liz, I'd have done exactly what she did.

I don't think I'm more prejudiced or straitlaced than you: I think
I'm less. I'm certain I'm less sentimental. I know very well that
fashionable morality is all a pretence, and that if I took your money
and devoted the rest of my life to spending it fashionably, I might be
as worthless and vicious as the silliest woman could possibly be without
having a word said to me about it. But I don't want to be worthless. I
shouldn't enjoy trotting about the park to advertize my dressmaker
and carriage builder, or being bored at the opera to shew off a
shopwindowful of diamonds.

MRS WARREN [bewildered] But--

VIVIE. Wait a moment: I've not done. Tell me why you continue your
business now that you are independent of it. Your sister, you told me,
has left all that behind her. Why don't you do the same?

MRS WARREN. Oh, it's all very easy for Liz: she likes good society, and
has the air of being a lady. Imagine _me_ in a cathedral town! Why, the
very rooks in the trees would find me out even if I could stand
the dulness of it. I must have work and excitement, or I should go
melancholy mad. And what else is there for me to do? The life suits me:
I'm fit for it and not for anything else. If I didn't do it somebody else
would; so I don't do any real harm by it. And then it brings in money;
and I like making money. No: it's no use: I can't give it up--not for
anybody. But what need you know about it? I'll never mention it. I'll
keep Crofts away. I'll not trouble you much: you see I have to be
constantly running about from one place to another. Youll be quit of me
altogether when I die.

VIVIE. No: I am my mother's daughter. I am like you: I must have work,
and must make more money than I spend. But my work is not your work, and
my way is not your way. We must part. It will not make much difference
to us: instead of meeting one another for perhaps a few months in twenty
years, we shall never meet: thats all.

MRS WARREN [her voice stifled in tears] Vivie: I meant to have been more
with you: I did indeed.

VIVIE. It's no use, mother: I am not to be changed by a few cheap tears
and entreaties any more than you are, I daresay.

MRS WARREN [wildly] Oh, you call a mother's tears cheap.

VIVIE. They cost you nothing; and you ask me to give you the peace
and quietness of my whole life in exchange for them. What use would my
company be to you if you could get it? What have we two in common that
could make either of us happy together?

MRS WARREN [lapsing recklessly into her dialect] We're mother and
daughter. I want my daughter. I've a right to you. Who is to care for me
when I'm old? Plenty of girls have taken to me like daughters and cried
at leaving me; but I let them all go because I had you to look forward
to. I kept myself lonely for you. You've no right to turn on me now and
refuse to do your duty as a daughter.

VIVIE [jarred and antagonized by the echo of the slums in her mother's
voice] My duty as a daughter! I thought we should come to that
presently. Now once for all, mother, you want a daughter and Frank wants
a wife. I don't want a mother; and I don't want a husband. I have spared
neither Frank nor myself in sending him about his business. Do you think
I will spare you?

MRS WARREN [violently] Oh, I know the sort you are: no mercy for
yourself or anyone else. _I_ know. My experience has done that for me
anyhow: I can tell the pious, canting, hard, selfish woman when I meet
her. Well, keep yourself to yourself: _I_ don't want you. But listen to
this. Do you know what I would do with you if you were a baby again?
aye, as sure as there's a Heaven above us.

VIVIE. Strangle me, perhaps.

MRS WARREN. No: I'd bring you up to be a real daughter to me, and not
what you are now, with your pride and your prejudices and the college
education you stole from me: yes, stole: deny it if you can: what was it
but stealing? I'd bring you up in my own house, I would.

VIVIE [quietly] In one of your own houses.

MRS WARREN [screaming] Listen to her! listen to how she spits on her
mother's grey hairs! Oh, may you live to have your own daughter tear and
trample on you as you have trampled on me. And you will: you will. No
woman ever had luck with a mother's curse on her.

VIVIE. I wish you wouldn't rant, mother. It only hardens me. Come: I
suppose I am the only young woman you ever had in your power that you
did good to. Don't spoil it all now.

MRS WARREN. Yes, Heaven forgive me, it's true; and you are the only
one that ever turned on me. Oh, the injustice of it! the injustice! the
injustice! I always wanted to be a good woman. I tried honest work; and
I was slave-driven until I cursed the day I ever heard of honest work. I
was a good mother; and because I made my daughter a good woman she turns
me out as if I were a leper. Oh, if I only had my life to live over
again! I'd talk to that lying clergyman in the school. From this time
forth, so help me Heaven in my last hour, I'll do wrong and nothing but
wrong. And I'll prosper on it.

VIVIE. Yes: it's better to choose your line and go through with it. If
I had been you, mother, I might have done as you did; but I should not
have lived one life and believed in another. You are a conventional
woman at heart. That is why I am bidding you goodbye now. I am right, am
I not?

MRS WARREN [taken aback] Right to throw away all my money!

VIVIE. No: right to get rid of you? I should be a fool not to. Isn't that
so?

MRS WARREN [sulkily] Oh well, yes, if you come to that, I suppose you
are. But Lord help the world if everybody took to doing the right thing!
And now I'd better go than stay where I'm not wanted. [She turns to the
door].

VIVIE [kindly] Won't you shake hands?

MRS WARREN [after looking at her fiercely for a moment with a savage
impulse to strike her] No, thank you. Goodbye.

VIVIE [matter-of-factly] Goodbye. [Mrs Warren goes out, slamming
the door behind her. The strain on Vivie's face relaxes; her grave
expression breaks up into one of joyous content; her breath goes out
in a half sob, half laugh of intense relief. She goes buoyantly to her
place at the writing table; pushes the electric lamp out of the way;
pulls over a great sheaf of papers; and is in the act of dipping her pen
in the ink when she finds Frank's note. She opens it unconcernedly
and reads it quickly, giving a little laugh at some quaint turn of
expression in it]. And goodbye, Frank. [She tears the note up and tosses
the pieces into the wastepaper basket without a second thought. Then
she goes at her work with a plunge, and soon becomes absorbed in its
figures].

========================================
========================================

THE DARK LADY OF THE SONNETS

By Bernard Shaw




CONTENTS

     Preface
     How the Play came to be Written
     Thomas Tyler
     Frank Harris
     Harris "durch Mitleid wissend"
     "Sidney's Sister:  Pembroke's Mother"
     Shakespear's Social Standing
     This Side Idolatry
     Shakespear's Pessimism
     Gaiety of Genius
     Jupiter and Semele
     The Idol of the Bardolaters
     Shakespear's alleged Sycophancy and Perversion
     Shakespear and Democracy
     Shakespear and the British Public
     The Dark Lady of the Sonnets





THE DARK LADY OF THE SONNETS

1910




PREFACE TO THE DARK LADY OF THE SONNETS




How the Play came to be Written

I had better explain why, in this little _piece d'occasion_, written
for a performance in aid of the funds of the project for establishing
a National Theatre as a memorial to Shakespear, I have identified the
Dark Lady with Mistress Mary Fitton.  First, let me say that I do not
contend that the Dark Lady was Mary Fitton, because when the case in
Mary's favor (or against her, if you please to consider that the Dark
Lady was no better than she ought to have been) was complete, a
portrait of Mary came to light and turned out to be that of a fair
lady, not of a dark one.  That settles the question, if the portrait
is authentic, which I see no reason to doubt, and the lady's hair
undyed, which is perhaps less certain.  Shakespear rubbed in the
lady's complexion in his sonnets mercilessly; for in his day black
hair was as unpopular as red hair was in the early days of Queen
Victoria.  Any tinge lighter than raven black must be held fatal to
the strongest claim to be the Dark Lady.  And so, unless it can be
shewn that Shakespear's sonnets exasperated Mary Fitton into dyeing
her hair and getting painted in false colors, I must give up all
pretence that my play is historical.  The later suggestion of Mr
Acheson that the Dark Lady, far from being a maid of honor, kept a
tavern in Oxford and was the mother of Davenant the poet, is the one I
should have adopted had I wished to be up to date.  Why, then, did I
introduce the Dark Lady as Mistress Fitton?

Well, I had two reasons.  The play was not to have been written by me
at all, but by Mrs Alfred Lyttelton; and it was she who suggested a
scene of jealousy between Queen Elizabeth and the Dark Lady at the
expense of the unfortunate Bard.  Now this, if the Dark Lady was a
maid of honor, was quite easy.  If she were a tavern landlady, it
would have strained all probability.  So I stuck to Mary Fitton.  But
I had another and more personal reason.  I was, in a manner, present
at the birth of the Fitton theory.  Its parent and I had become
acquainted; and he used to consult me on obscure passages in the
sonnets, on which, as far as I can remember, I never succeeded in
throwing the faintest light, at a time when nobody else thought my
opinion, on that or any other subject, of the slightest importance.  I
thought it would be friendly to immortalize him, as the silly literary
saying is, much as Shakespear immortalized Mr W. H., as he said he
would, simply by writing about him.

Let me tell the story formally.




Thomas Tyler

Throughout the eighties at least, and probably for some years before,
the British Museum reading room was used daily by a gentleman of such
astonishing and crushing ugliness that no one who had once seen him
could ever thereafter forget him.  He was of fair complexion, rather
golden red than sandy; aged between forty-five and sixty; and dressed
in frock coat and tall hat of presentable but never new appearance.
His figure was rectangular, waistless, neckless, ankleless, of middle
height, looking shortish because, though he was not particularly
stout, there was nothing slender about him.  His ugliness was not
unamiable; it was accidental, external, excrescential.  Attached to
his face from the left ear to the point of his chin was a monstrous
goitre, which hung down to his collar bone, and was very inadequately
balanced by a smaller one on his right eyelid.  Nature's malice was so
overdone in his case that it somehow failed to produce the effect of
repulsion it seemed to have aimed at.  When you first met Thomas Tyler
you could think of nothing else but whether surgery could really do
nothing for him.  But after a very brief acquaintance you never
thought of his disfigurements at all, and talked to him as you might
to Romeo or Lovelace; only, so many people, especially women, would
not risk the preliminary ordeal, that he remained a man apart and a
bachelor all his days.  I am not to be frightened or prejudiced by a
tumor; and I struck up a cordial acquaintance with him, in the course
of which he kept me pretty closely on the track of his work at the
Museum, in which I was then, like himself, a daily reader.

He was by profession a man of letters of an uncommercial kind.  He was
a specialist in pessimism; had made a translation of Ecclesiastes of
which eight copies a year were sold; and followed up the pessimism of
Shakespear and Swift with keen interest.  He delighted in a hideous
conception which he called the theory of the cycles, according to
which the history of mankind and the universe keeps eternally
repeating itself without the slightest variation throughout all
eternity; so that he had lived and died and had his goitre before and
would live and die and have it again and again and again.  He liked to
believe that nothing that happened to him was completely novel:  he
was persuaded that he often had some recollection of its previous
occurrence in the last cycle.  He hunted out allusions to this
favorite theory in his three favorite pessimists.  He tried his hand
occasionally at deciphering ancient inscriptions, reading them as
people seem to read the stars, by discovering bears and bulls and
swords and goats where, as it seems to me, no sane human being can see
anything but stars higgledy-piggledy.  Next to the translation of
Ecclesiastes, his _magnum opus_ was his work on Shakespear's Sonnets,
in which he accepted a previous identification of Mr W. H., the "onlie
begetter" of the sonnets, with the Earl of Pembroke (William Herbert),
and promulgated his own identification of Mistress Mary Fitton with
the Dark Lady.  Whether he was right or wrong about the Dark Lady did
not matter urgently to me:  she might have been Maria Tompkins for all
I cared.  But Tyler would have it that she was Mary Fitton; and he
tracked Mary down from the first of her marriages in her teens to her
tomb in Cheshire, whither he made a pilgrimage and whence returned in
triumph with a picture of her statue, and the news that he was
convinced she was a dark lady by traces of paint still discernible.

In due course he published his edition of the Sonnets, with the
evidence he had collected.  He lent me a copy of the book, which I
never returned.  But I reviewed it in the Pall Mall Gazette on the 7th
of January 1886, and thereby let loose the Fitton theory in a wider
circle of readers than the book could reach.  Then Tyler died, sinking
unnoted like a stone in the sea.  I observed that Mr Acheson, Mrs
Davenant's champion, calls him Reverend.  It may very well be that he
got his knowledge of Hebrew in reading for the Church; and there was
always something of the clergyman or the schoolmaster in his dress and
air.  Possibly he may actually have been ordained.  But he never told
me that or anything else about his affairs; and his black pessimism
would have shot him violently out of any church at present established
in the West.  We never talked about affairs:  we talked about
Shakespear, and the Dark Lady, and Swift, and Koheleth, and the
cycles, and the mysterious moments when a feeling came over us that
this had happened to us before, and about the forgeries of the
Pentateuch which were offered for sale to the British Museum, and
about literature and things of the spirit generally.  He always came
to my desk at the Museum and spoke to me about something or other, no
doubt finding that people who were keen on this sort of conversation
were rather scarce.  He remains a vivid spot of memory in the void of
my forgetfulness, a quite considerable and dignified soul in a
grotesquely disfigured body.




Frank Harris

To the review in the Pall Mall Gazette I attribute, rightly or
wrongly, the introduction of Mary Fitton to Mr Frank Harris.  My
reason for this is that Mr Harris wrote a play about Shakespear and
Mary Fitton; and when I, as a pious duty to Tyler's ghost, reminded
the world that it was to Tyler we owed the Fitton theory, Frank
Harris, who clearly had not a notion of what had first put Mary into
his head, believed, I think, that I had invented Tyler expressly for
his discomfiture; for the stress I laid on Tyler's claims must have
seemed unaccountable and perhaps malicious on the assumption that he
was to me a mere name among the thousands of names in the British
Museum catalogue.  Therefore I make it clear that I had and have
personal reasons for remembering Tyler, and for regarding myself as in
some sort charged with the duty of reminding the world of his work.  I
am sorry for his sake that Mary's portrait is fair, and that Mr W. H.
has veered round again from Pembroke to Southampton; but even so his
work was not wasted:  it is by exhausting all the hypotheses that we
reach the verifiable one; and after all, the wrong road always leads
somewhere.

Frank Harris's play was written long before mine.  I read it in
manuscript before the Shakespear Memorial National Theatre was mooted;
and if there is anything except the Fitton theory (which is Tyler's
property) in my play which is also in Mr Harris's it was I who annexed
it from him and not he from me.  It does not matter anyhow, because
this play of mine is a brief trifle, and full of manifest
impossibilities at that; whilst Mr Harris's play is serious both in
size, intention, and quality.  But there could not in the nature of
things be much resemblance, because Frank conceives Shakespear to have
been a broken-hearted, melancholy, enormously sentimental person,
whereas I am convinced that he was very like myself:  in fact, if I
had been born in 1556 instead of in 1856, I should have taken to blank
verse and given Shakespear a harder run for his money than all the
other Elizabethans put together.  Yet the success of Frank Harris's
book on Shakespear gave me great delight.

To those who know the literary world of London there was a sharp
stroke of ironic comedy in the irresistible verdict in its favor.  In
critical literature there is one prize that is always open to
competition, one blue ribbon that always carries the highest critical
rank with it.  To win, you must write the best book of your generation
on Shakespear.  It is felt on all sides that to do this a certain
fastidious refinement, a delicacy of taste, a correctness of manner
and tone, and high academic distinction in addition to the
indispensable scholarship and literary reputation, are needed; and men
who pretend to these qualifications are constantly looked to with a
gentle expectation that presently they will achieve the great feat.
Now if there is a man on earth who is the utter contrary of everything
that this description implies; whose very existence is an insult to
the ideal it realizes; whose eye disparages, whose resonant voice
denounces, whose cold shoulder jostles every decency, every delicacy,
every amenity, every dignity, every sweet usage of that quiet life of
mutual admiration in which perfect Shakespearian appreciation is
expected to arise, that man is Frank Harris.  Here is one who is
extraordinarily qualified, by a range of sympathy and understanding
that extends from the ribaldry of a buccaneer to the shyest
tendernesses of the most sensitive poetry, to be all things to all
men, yet whose proud humor it is to be to every man, provided the man
is eminent and pretentious, the champion of his enemies.  To the
Archbishop he is an atheist, to the atheist a Catholic mystic, to the
Bismarckian Imperialist an Anacharsis Klootz, to Anacharsis Klootz a
Washington, to Mrs Proudie a Don Juan, to Aspasia a John Knox:  in
short, to everyone his complement rather than his counterpart, his
antagonist rather than his fellow-creature.  Always provided, however,
that the persons thus confronted are respectable persons.  Sophie
Perovskaia, who perished on the scaffold for blowing Alexander II to
fragments, may perhaps have echoed Hamlet's

     Oh God, Horatio, what a wounded name--
     Things standing thus unknown--I leave behind!

but Frank Harris, in his Sonia, has rescued her from that injustice,
and enshrined her among the saints.  He has lifted the Chicago
anarchists out of their infamy, and shewn that, compared with the
Capitalism that killed them, they were heroes and martyrs.  He has
done this with the most unusual power of conviction.  The story, as he
tells it, inevitably and irresistibly displaces all the vulgar, mean,
purblind, spiteful versions.  There is a precise realism and an
unsmiling, measured, determined sincerity which gives a strange
dignity to the work of one whose fixed practice and ungovernable
impulse it is to kick conventional dignity whenever he sees it.




Harris "durch Mitleid wissend"

Frank Harris is everything except a humorist, not, apparently, from
stupidity, but because scorn overcomes humor in him.  Nobody ever
dreamt of reproaching Milton's Lucifer for not seeing the comic side
of his fall; and nobody who has read Mr Harris's stories desires to
have them lightened by chapters from the hand of Artemus Ward.  Yet he
knows the taste and the value of humor.  He was one of the few men of
letters who really appreciated Oscar Wilde, though he did not rally
fiercely to Wilde's side until the world deserted Oscar in his ruin.
I myself was present at a curious meeting between the two, when
Harris, on the eve of the Queensberry trial, prophesied to Wilde with
miraculous precision exactly what immediately afterwards happened to
him, and warned him to leave the country.  It was the first time
within my knowledge that such a forecast proved true.  Wilde, though
under no illusion as to the folly of the quite unselfish suit-at-law
he had been persuaded to begin, nevertheless so miscalculated the
force of the social vengeance he was unloosing on himself that he
fancied it could be stayed by putting up the editor of The Saturday
Review (as Mr Harris then was) to declare that he considered Dorian
Grey a highly moral book, which it certainly is.  When Harris foretold
him the truth, Wilde denounced him as a fainthearted friend who was
failing him in his hour of need, and left the room in anger.  Harris's
idiosyncratic power of pity saved him from feeling or shewing the
smallest resentment; and events presently proved to Wilde how insanely
he had been advised in taking the action, and how accurately Harris
had gauged the situation.

The same capacity for pity governs Harris's study of Shakespear, whom,
as I have said, he pities too much; but that he is not insensible to
humor is shewn not only by his appreciation of Wilde, but by the fact
that the group of contributors who made his editorship of The Saturday
Review so remarkable, and of whom I speak none the less highly because
I happened to be one of them myself, were all, in their various ways,
humorists.




"Sidney's Sister:  Pembroke's Mother"

And now to return to Shakespear.  Though Mr Harris followed Tyler in
identifying Mary Fitton as the Dark Lady, and the Earl of Pembroke as
the addressee of the other sonnets and the man who made love
successfully to Shakespear's mistress, he very characteristically
refuses to follow Tyler on one point, though for the life of me I
cannot remember whether it was one of the surmises which Tyler
published, or only one which he submitted to me to see what I would
say about it, just as he used to submit difficult lines from the
sonnets.

This surmise was that "Sidney's sister:  Pembroke's mother" set
Shakespear on to persuade Pembroke to marry, and that this was the
explanation of those earlier sonnets which so persistently and
unnaturally urged matrimony on Mr W. H.  I take this to be one of the
brightest of Tyler's ideas, because the persuasions in the sonnets are
unaccountable and out of character unless they were offered to please
somebody whom Shakespear desired to please, and who took a motherly
interest in Pembroke.  There is a further temptation in the theory for
me.  The most charming of all Shakespear's old women, indeed the most
charming of all his women, young or old, is the Countess of Rousillon
in All's Well That Ends Well.  It has a certain individuality among
them which suggests a portrait.  Mr Harris will have it that all
Shakespear's nice old women are drawn from his beloved mother; but I
see no evidence whatever that Shakespear's mother was a particularly
nice woman or that he was particularly fond of her.  That she was a
simple incarnation of extravagant maternal pride like the mother of
Coriolanus in Plutarch, as Mr Harris asserts, I cannot believe:  she
is quite as likely to have borne her son a grudge for becoming "one of
these harlotry players" and disgracing the Ardens.  Anyhow, as a
conjectural model for the Countess of Rousillon, I prefer that one of
whom Jonson wrote

     Sidney's sister:  Pembroke's mother:
     Death:  ere thou has slain another,
     Learnd and fair and good as she,
     Time shall throw a dart at thee.

But Frank will not have her at any price, because his ideal Shakespear
is rather like a sailor in a melodrama; and a sailor in a melodrama
must adore his mother.  I do not at all belittle such sailors.  They
are the emblems of human generosity; but Shakespear was not an emblem:
he was a man and the author of Hamlet, who had no illusions about his
mother.  In weak moments one almost wishes he had.




Shakespear's Social Standing

On the vexed question of Shakespear's social standing Mr Harris says
that Shakespear "had not had the advantage of a middle-class
training."  I suggest that Shakespear missed this questionable
advantage, not because he was socially too low to have attained to it,
but because he conceived himself as belonging to the upper class from
which our public school boys are now drawn.  Let Mr Harris survey for
a moment the field of contemporary journalism.  He will see there some
men who have the very characteristics from which he infers that
Shakespear was at a social disadvantage through his lack of
middle-class training.  They are rowdy, ill-mannered, abusive,
mischievous, fond of quoting obscene schoolboy anecdotes, adepts in
that sort of blackmail which consists in mercilessly libelling and
insulting every writer whose opinions are sufficiently heterodox to
make it almost impossible for him to risk perhaps five years of a
slender income by an appeal to a prejudiced orthodox jury; and they
see nothing in all this cruel blackguardism but an uproariously jolly
rag, although they are by no means without genuine literary ability, a
love of letters, and even some artistic conscience.  But he will find
not one of the models of his type (I say nothing of mere imitators of
it) below the rank that looks at the middle class, not humbly and
enviously from below, but insolently from above.  Mr Harris himself
notes Shakespear's contempt for the tradesman and mechanic, and his
incorrigible addiction to smutty jokes.  He does us the public service
of sweeping away the familiar plea of the Bardolatrous ignoramus, that
Shakespear's coarseness was part of the manners of his time, putting
his pen with precision on the one name, Spenser, that is necessary to
expose such a libel on Elizabethan decency.  There was nothing
whatever to prevent Shakespear from being as decent as More was before
him, or Bunyan after him, and as self-respecting as Raleigh or Sidney,
except the tradition of his class, in which education or statesmanship
may no doubt be acquired by those who have a turn for them, but in
which insolence, derision, profligacy, obscene jesting, debt
contracting, and rowdy mischievousness, give continual scandal to the
pious, serious, industrious, solvent bourgeois.  No other class is
infatuated enough to believe that gentlemen are born and not made by a
very elaborate process of culture.  Even kings are taught and coached
and drilled from their earliest boyhood to play their part.  But the
man of family (I am convinced that Shakespear took that view of
himself) will plunge into society without a lesson in table manners,
into politics without a lesson in history, into the city without a
lesson in business, and into the army without a lesson in honor.

It has been said, with the object of proving Shakespear a laborer,
that he could hardly write his name.  Why?  Because he "had not the
advantage of a middle-class training."  Shakespear himself tells us,
through Hamlet, that gentlemen purposely wrote badly lest they should
be mistaken for scriveners; but most of them, then as now, wrote badly
because they could not write any better.  In short, the whole range of
Shakespear's foibles:  the snobbishness, the naughtiness, the contempt
for tradesmen and mechanics, the assumption that witty conversation
can only mean smutty conversation, the flunkeyism towards social
superiors and insolence towards social inferiors, the easy ways with
servants which is seen not only between The Two Gentlemen of Verona
and their valets, but in the affection and respect inspired by a great
servant like Adam:  all these are the characteristics of Eton and
Harrow, not of the public elementary or private adventure school.
They prove, as everything we know about Shakespear suggests, that he
thought of the Shakespears and Ardens as families of consequence, and
regarded himself as a gentleman under a cloud through his father's ill
luck in business, and never for a moment as a man of the people.  This
is at once the explanation of and excuse for his snobbery.  He was not
a parvenu trying to cover his humble origin with a purchased coat of
arms:  he was a gentleman resuming what he conceived to be his natural
position as soon as he gained the means to keep it up.




This Side Idolatry

There is another matter which I think Mr Harris should ponder.  He
says that Shakespear was but "little esteemed by his own generation."
He even describes Jonson's description of his "little Latin and less
Greek" as a sneer, whereas it occurs in an unmistakably sincere eulogy
of Shakespear, written after his death, and is clearly meant to
heighten the impression of Shakespear's prodigious natural endowments
by pointing out that they were not due to scholastic acquirements.
Now there is a sense in which it is true enough that Shakespear was
too little esteemed by his own generation, or, for the matter of that,
by any subsequent generation.  The bargees on the Regent's Canal do
not chant Shakespear's verses as the gondoliers in Venice are said to
chant the verses of Tasso (a practice which was suspended for some
reason during my stay in Venice:  at least no gondolier ever did it in
my hearing).  Shakespear is no more a popular author than Rodin is a
popular sculptor or Richard Strauss a popular composer.  But
Shakespear was certainly not such a fool as to expect the Toms, Dicks,
and Harrys of his time to be any more interested in dramatic poetry
than Newton, later on, expected them to be interested in fluxions.
And when we come to the question whether Shakespear missed that
assurance which all great men have had from the more capable and
susceptible members of their generation that they were great men, Ben
Jonson's evidence disposes of so improbable a notion at once and for
ever.  "I loved the man," says Ben, "this side idolatry, as well as
any."  Now why in the name of common sense should he have made that
qualification unless there had been, not only idolatry, but idolatry
fulsome enough to irritate Jonson into an express disavowal of it?
Jonson, the bricklayer, must have felt sore sometimes when Shakespear
spoke and wrote of bricklayers as his inferiors.  He must have felt it
a little hard that being a better scholar, and perhaps a braver and
tougher man physically than Shakespear, he was not so successful or so
well liked.  But in spite of this he praised Shakespear to the utmost
stretch of his powers of eulogy:  in fact, notwithstanding his
disclaimer, he did not stop "this side idolatry."  If, therefore, even
Jonson felt himself forced to clear himself of extravagance and
absurdity in his appreciation of Shakespear, there must have been many
people about who idolized Shakespear as American ladies idolize
Paderewski, and who carried Bardolatry, even in the Bard's own time,
to an extent that threatened to make his reasonable admirers
ridiculous.




Shakespear's Pessimism

I submit to Mr Harris that by ruling out this idolatry, and its
possible effect in making Shakespear think that his public would stand
anything from him, he has ruled out a far more plausible explanation
of the faults of such a play as Timon of Athens than his theory that
Shakespear's passion for the Dark Lady "cankered and took on proud
flesh in him, and tortured him to nervous breakdown and madness."  In
Timon the intellectual bankruptcy is obvious enough:  Shakespear tried
once too often to make a play out of the cheap pessimism which is
thrown into despair by a comparison of actual human nature with
theoretical morality, actual law and administration with abstract
justice, and so forth.  But Shakespear's perception of the fact that
all men, judged by the moral standard which they apply to others and
by which they justify their punishment of others, are fools and
scoundrels, does not date from the Dark Lady complication:  he seems
to have been born with it.  If in The Comedy of Errors and A Midsummer
Night's Dream the persons of the drama are not quite so ready for
treachery and murder as Laertes and even Hamlet himself (not to
mention the procession of ruffians who pass through the latest plays)
it is certainly not because they have any more regard for law or
religion.  There is only one place in Shakespear's plays where the
sense of shame is used as a human attribute; and that is where Hamlet
is ashamed, not of anything he himself has done, but of his mother's
relations with his uncle.  This scene is an unnatural one:  the son's
reproaches to his mother, even the fact of his being able to discuss
the subject with her, is more repulsive than her relations with her
deceased husband's brother.

Here, too, Shakespear betrays for once his religious sense by making
Hamlet, in his agony of shame, declare that his mother's conduct makes
"sweet religion a rhapsody of words."  But for that passage we might
almost suppose that the feeling of Sunday morning in the country which
Orlando describes so perfectly in As You Like It was the beginning and
end of Shakespear's notion of religion.  I say almost, because
Isabella in Measure for Measure has religious charm, in spite of the
conventional theatrical assumption that female religion means an
inhumanly ferocious chastity.  But for the most part Shakespear
differentiates his heroes from his villains much more by what they do
than by what they are.  Don John in Much Ado is a true villain:  a man
with a malicious will; but he is too dull a duffer to be of any use in
a leading part; and when we come to the great villains like Macbeth,
we find, as Mr Harris points out, that they are precisely identical
with the heroes:  Macbeth is only Hamlet incongruously committing
murders and engaging in hand-to-hand combats.  And Hamlet, who does
not dream of apologizing for the three murders he commits, is always
apologizing because he has not yet committed a fourth, and finds, to
his great bewilderment, that he does not want to commit it.  "It
cannot be," he says, "but I am pigeon-livered, and lack gall to make
oppression bitter; else, ere this, I should have fatted all the region
kites with this slave's offal."  Really one is tempted to suspect that
when Shylock asks "Hates any man the thing he would not kill?" he is
expressing the natural and proper sentiments of the human race as
Shakespear understood them, and not the vindictiveness of a stage Jew.




Gaiety of Genius

In view of these facts, it is dangerous to cite Shakespear's pessimism
as evidence of the despair of a heart broken by the Dark Lady.  There
is an irrepressible gaiety of genius which enables it to bear the
whole weight of the world's misery without blenching.  There is a
laugh always ready to avenge its tears of discouragement.  In the
lines which Mr Harris quotes only to declare that he can make nothing
of them, and to condemn them as out of character, Richard III,
immediately after pitying himself because

     There is no creature loves me
     And if I die no soul will pity me,

adds, with a grin,

     Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself
     Find in myself no pity for myself?

Let me again remind Mr Harris of Oscar Wilde.  We all dreaded to read
De Profundis:  our instinct was to stop our ears, or run away from the
wail of a broken, though by no means contrite, heart.  But we were
throwing away our pity.  De Profundis was de profundis indeed:  Wilde
was too good a dramatist to throw away so powerful an effect; but none
the less it was de profundis in excelsis.  There was more laughter
between the lines of that book than in a thousand farces by men of no
genius.  Wilde, like Richard and Shakespear, found in himself no pity
for himself.  There is nothing that marks the born dramatist more
unmistakably than this discovery of comedy in his own misfortunes
almost in proportion to the pathos with which the ordinary man
announces their tragedy.  I cannot for the life of me see the broken
heart in Shakespear's latest works.  "Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's
gate sings" is not the lyric of a broken man; nor is Cloten's comment
that if Imogen does not appreciate it, "it is a vice in her ears which
horse hairs, and cats' guts, and the voice of unpaved eunuch to boot,
can never amend," the sally of a saddened one.  Is it not clear that
to the last there was in Shakespear an incorrigible divine levity, an
inexhaustible joy that derided sorrow?  Think of the poor Dark Lady
having to stand up to this unbearable power of extracting a grim fun
from everything.  Mr Harris writes as if Shakespear did all the
suffering and the Dark Lady all the cruelty.  But why does he not put
himself in the Dark Lady's place for a moment as he has put himself so
successfully in Shakespear's?  Imagine her reading the hundred and
thirtieth sonnet!

     My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
     Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
     If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
     If hairs be wire, black wires grow on her head;
     I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
     But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
     And in some perfumes is there more delight
     Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
     I love to hear her speak; yet well I know
     That music hath a far more pleasing sound.
     I grant I never saw a goddess go:
     My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground.
          And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
          As any she belied with false compare.

Take this as a sample of the sort of compliment from which she was
never for a moment safe with Shakespear.  Bear in mind that she was
not a comedian; that the Elizabethan fashion of treating brunettes as
ugly woman must have made her rather sore on the subject of her
complexion; that no human being, male or female, can conceivably enjoy
being chaffed on that point in the fourth couplet about the perfumes;
that Shakespear's revulsions, as the sonnet immediately preceding
shews, were as violent as his ardors, and were expressed with the
realistic power and horror that makes Hamlet say that the heavens got
sick when they saw the queen's conduct; and then ask Mr Harris whether
any woman could have stood it for long, or have thought the "sugred"
compliment worth the cruel wounds, the cleaving of the heart in twain,
that seemed to Shakespear as natural and amusing a reaction as the
burlesquing of his heroics by Pistol, his sermons by Falstaff, and his
poems by Cloten and Touchstone.




Jupiter and Semele

This does not mean that Shakespear was cruel:  evidently he was not;
but it was not cruelty that made Jupiter reduce Semele to ashes:  it
was the fact that he could not help being a god nor she help being a
mortal.  The one thing Shakespear's passion for the Dark Lady was not,
was what Mr Harris in one passage calls it:  idolatrous.  If it had
been, she might have been able to stand it.  The man who "dotes yet
doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves," is tolerable even by a spoilt
and tyrannical mistress; but what woman could possibly endure a man
who dotes without doubting; who _knows_, and who is hugely amused at
the absurdity of his infatuation for a woman of whose mortal
imperfections not one escapes him:  a man always exchanging grins with
Yorick's skull, and inviting "my lady" to laugh at the sepulchral
humor of the fact that though she paint an inch thick (which the Dark
Lady may have done), to Yorick's favor she must come at last.  To the
Dark Lady he must sometimes have seemed cruel beyond description:  an
intellectual Caliban.  True, a Caliban who could say

     Be not afeard:  the isle is full of noises
     Sounds and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not.
     Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
     Will hum about mine ears; and sometimes voices,
     That, if I then had waked after long sleep
     Will make me sleep again; and then, in dreaming,
     The clouds, methought, would open and shew riches
     Ready to drop on me:  that when I wak'd
     I cried to dream again.

which is very lovely; but the Dark Lady may have had that vice in her
ears which Cloten dreaded:  she may not have seen the beauty of it,
whereas there can be no doubt at all that of "My mistress' eyes are
nothing like the sun," &c., not a word was lost on her.

And is it to be supposed that Shakespear was too stupid or too modest
not to see at last that it was a case of Jupiter and Semele?
Shakespear was most certainly not modest in that sense.  The timid
cough of the minor poet was never heard from him.

     Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
     Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme

is only one out of a dozen passages in which he (possibly with a keen
sense of the fun of scandalizing the modest coughers) proclaimed his
place and his power in "the wide world dreaming of things to come."
The Dark Lady most likely thought this side of him insufferably
conceited; for there is no reason to suppose that she liked his plays
any better than Minna Wagner liked Richard's music dramas:  as likely
as not, she thought The Spanish Tragedy worth six Hamlets.  He was not
stupid either:  if his class limitations and a profession that cut him
off from actual participation in great affairs of State had not
confined his opportunities of intellectual and political training to
private conversation and to the Mermaid Tavern, he would probably have
become one of the ablest men of his time instead of being merely its
ablest playwright.  One might surmise that Shakespear found out that
the Dark Lady's brains could no more keep pace with his than Anne
Hathaway's, if there were any evidence that their friendship ceased
when he stopped writing sonnets to her.  As a matter of fact the
consolidation of a passion into an enduring intimacy generally puts an
end to sonnets.

That the Dark Lady broke Shakespear's heart, as Mr Harris will have it
she did, is an extremely unShakespearian hypothesis.  "Men have died
from time to time, and worms have eaten them; but not for love," says
Rosalind.  Richard of Gloster, into whom Shakespear put all his own
impish superiority to vulgar sentiment, exclaims

     And this word "love," which greybeards call divine,
     Be resident in men like one another
     And not in me:  I am myself alone.

Hamlet has not a tear for Ophelia:  her death moves him to fierce
disgust for the sentimentality of Laertes by her grave; and when he
discusses the scene with Horatio immediately after, he utterly forgets
her, though he is sorry he forgot himself, and jumps at the proposal
of a fencing match to finish the day with.  As against this view Mr
Harris pleads Romeo, Orsino, and even Antonio; and he does it so
penetratingly that he convinces you that Shakespear did betray himself
again and again in these characters; but self-betrayal is one thing;
and self-portrayal, as in Hamlet and Mercutio, is another.  Shakespear
never "saw himself," as actors say, in Romeo or Orsino or Antonio.  In
Mr Harris's own play Shakespear is presented with the most pathetic
tenderness.  He is tragic, bitter, pitiable, wretched and broken among
a robust crowd of Jonsons and Elizabeths; but to me he is not
Shakespear because I miss the Shakespearian irony and the
Shakespearian gaiety.  Take these away and Shakespear is no longer
Shakespear:  all the bite, the impetus, the strength, the grim delight
in his own power of looking terrible facts in the face with a chuckle,
is gone; and you have nothing left but that most depressing of all
things:  a victim.  Now who can think of Shakespear as a man with a
grievance?  Even in that most thoroughgoing and inspired of all
Shakespear's loves:  his love of music (which Mr Harris has been the
first to appreciate at anything like its value), there is a dash of
mockery.  "Spit in the hole, man; and tune again."  "Divine air!  Now
is his soul ravished.  Is it not strange that sheep's guts should hale
the souls out of men's bodies?"  "An he had been a dog that should
have howled thus, they would have hanged him."  There is just as much
Shakespear here as in the inevitable quotation about the sweet south
and the bank of violets.

I lay stress on this irony of Shakespear's, this impish rejoicing in
pessimism, this exultation in what breaks the hearts of common men,
not only because it is diagnostic of that immense energy of life which
we call genius, but because its omission is the one glaring defect in
Mr Harris's otherwise extraordinarily penetrating book.  Fortunately,
it is an omission that does not disable the book as (in my judgment)
it disabled the hero of the play, because Mr Harris left himself out
of his play, whereas he pervades his book, mordant, deep-voiced, and
with an unconquerable style which is the man.




The Idol of the Bardolaters

There is even an advantage in having a book on Shakespear with the
Shakespearian irony left out of account.  I do not say that the
missing chapter should not be added in the next edition:  the hiatus
is too great:  it leaves the reader too uneasy before this touching
picture of a writhing worm substituted for the invulnerable giant.
But it is none the less probable that in no other way could Mr Harris
have got at his man as he has.  For, after all, what is the secret of
the hopeless failure of the academic Bardolaters to give us a credible
or even interesting Shakespear, and the easy triumph of Mr Harris in
giving us both?  Simply that Mr Harris has assumed that he was dealing
with a man, whilst the others have assumed that they were writing
about a god, and have therefore rejected every consideration of fact,
tradition, or interpretation, that pointed to any human imperfection
in their hero.  They thus leave themselves with so little material
that they are forced to begin by saying that we know very little about
Shakespear.  As a matter of fact, with the plays and sonnets in our
hands, we know much more about Shakespear than we know about Dickens
or Thackeray:  the only difficulty is that we deliberately suppress it
because it proves that Shakespear was not only very unlike the
conception of a god current in Clapham, but was not, according to the
same reckoning, even a respectable man.  The academic view starts with
a Shakespear who was not scurrilous; therefore the verses about "lousy
Lucy" cannot have been written by him, and the cognate passages in the
plays are either strokes of character-drawing or gags interpolated by
the actors.  This ideal Shakespear was too well behaved to get drunk;
therefore the tradition that his death was hastened by a drinking bout
with Jonson and Drayton must be rejected, and the remorse of Cassio
treated as a thing observed, not experienced:  nay, the disgust of
Hamlet at the drinking customs of Denmark is taken to establish
Shakespear as the superior of Alexander in self-control, and the
greatest of teetotallers.

Now this system of inventing your great man to start with, and then
rejecting all the materials that do not fit him, with the ridiculous
result that you have to declare that there are no materials at all
(with your waste-paper basket full of them), ends in leaving
Shakespear with a much worse character than he deserves.  For though
it does not greatly matter whether he wrote the lousy Lucy lines or
not, and does not really matter at all whether he got drunk when he
made a night of it with Jonson and Drayton, the sonnets raise an
unpleasant question which does matter a good deal; and the refusal of
the academic Bardolaters to discuss or even mention this question has
had the effect of producing a silent verdict against Shakespear.  Mr
Harris tackles the question openly, and has no difficulty whatever in
convincing us that Shakespear was a man of normal constitution
sexually, and was not the victim of that most cruel and pitiable of
all the freaks of nature:  the freak which transposes the normal aim
of the affections.  Silence on this point means condemnation; and the
condemnation has been general throughout the present generation,
though it only needed Mr Harris's fearless handling of the matter to
sweep away what is nothing but a morbid and very disagreeable modern
fashion.  There is always some stock accusation brought against
eminent persons.  When I was a boy every well-known man was accused of
beating his wife.  Later on, for some unexplained reason, he was
accused of psychopathic derangement.  And this fashion is
retrospective.  The cases of Shakespear and Michel Angelo are cited as
proving that every genius of the first magnitude was a sufferer; and
both here and in Germany there are circles in which such derangement
is grotesquely reverenced as part of the stigmata of heroic powers.
All of which is gross nonsense.  Unfortunately, in Shakespear's case,
prudery, which cannot prevent the accusation from being whispered,
does prevent the refutation from being shouted.  Mr Harris, the
deep-voiced, refuses to be silenced.  He dismisses with proper
contempt the stupidity which places an outrageous construction on
Shakespear's apologies in the sonnets for neglecting that "perfect
ceremony" of love which consists in returning calls and making
protestations and giving presents and paying the trumpery attentions
which men of genius always refuse to bother about, and to which touchy
people who have no genius attach so much importance.  No leader who
had not been tampered with by the psychopathic monomaniacs could ever
put any construction but the obvious and innocent one on these
passages.  But the general vocabulary of the sonnets to Pembroke (or
whoever "Mr W. H." really was) is so overcharged according to modern
ideas that a reply on the general case is necessary.




Shakespear's alleged Sycophancy and Perversion

That reply, which Mr Harris does not hesitate to give, is twofold:
first, that Shakespear was, in his attitude towards earls, a
sycophant; and, second, that the normality of Shakespear's sexual
constitution is only too well attested by the excessive susceptibility
to the normal impulse shewn in the whole mass of his writings.  This
latter is the really conclusive reply.  In the case of Michel Angelo,
for instance, one must admit that if his works are set beside those of
Titian or Paul Veronese, it is impossible not to be struck by the
absence in the Florentine of that susceptibility to feminine charm
which pervades the pictures of the Venetians.  But, as Mr Harris
points out (though he does not use this particular illustration) Paul
Veronese is an anchorite compared to Shakespear.  The language of the
sonnets addressed to Pembroke, extravagant as it now seems, is the
language of compliment and fashion, transfigured no doubt by
Shakespear's verbal magic, and hyperbolical, as Shakespear always
seems to people who cannot conceive so vividly as he, but still
unmistakable for anything else than the expression of a friendship
delicate enough to be wounded, and a manly loyalty deep enough to be
outraged.  But the language of the sonnets to the Dark Lady is the
language of passion:  their cruelty shews it.  There is no evidence
that Shakespear was capable of being unkind in cold blood.  But in his
revulsions from love, he was bitter, wounding, even ferocious; sparing
neither himself nor the unfortunate woman whose only offence was that
she had reduced the great man to the common human denominator.

In seizing on these two points Mr Harris has made so sure a stroke,
and placed his evidence so featly that there is nothing left for me to
do but to plead that the second is sounder than the first, which is, I
think, marked by the prevalent mistake as to Shakespear's social
position, or, if you prefer it, the confusion between his actual
social position as a penniless tradesman's son taking to the theatre
for a livelihood, and his own conception of himself as a gentleman of
good family.  I am prepared to contend that though Shakespear was
undoubtedly sentimental in his expressions of devotion to Mr W. H.
even to a point which nowadays makes both ridiculous, he was not
sycophantic if Mr W. H. was really attractive and promising, and
Shakespear deeply attached to him.  A sycophant does not tell his
patron that his fame will survive, not in the renown of his own
actions, but in the sonnets of his sycophant.  A sycophant, when his
patron cuts him out in a love affair, does not tell his patron exactly
what he thinks of him.  Above all, a sycophant does not write to his
patron precisely as he feels on all occasions; and this rare kind of
sincerity is all over the sonnets.  Shakespear, we are told, was "a
very civil gentleman."  This must mean that his desire to please
people and be liked by them, and his reluctance to hurt their
feelings, led him into amiable flattery even when his feelings were
not strongly stirred.  If this be taken into account along with the
fact that Shakespear conceived and expressed all his emotions with a
vehemence that sometimes carried him into ludicrous extravagance,
making Richard offer his kingdom for a horse and Othello declare of
Cassio that

     Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
     Had stomach for them all,

we shall see more civility and hyperbole than sycophancy even in the
earlier and more coldblooded sonnets.




Shakespear and Democracy

Now take the general case pled against Shakespear as an enemy of
democracy by Tolstoy, the late Ernest Crosbie and others, and endorsed
by Mr Harris.  Will it really stand fire?  Mr Harris emphasizes the
passages in which Shakespear spoke of mechanics and even of small
master tradesmen as base persons whose clothes were greasy, whose
breath was rank, and whose political imbecility and caprice moved
Coriolanus to say to the Roman Radical who demanded at least "good
words" from him

     He that will give good words to thee will flatter
     Beneath abhorring.

But let us be honest.  As political sentiments these lines are an
abomination to every democrat.  But suppose they are not political
sentiments!  Suppose they are merely a record of observed fact.  John
Stuart Mill told our British workmen that they were mostly liars.
Carlyle told us all that we are mostly fools.  Matthew Arnold and
Ruskin were more circumstantial and more abusive.  Everybody,
including the workers themselves, know that they are dirty, drunken,
foul-mouthed, ignorant, gluttonous, prejudiced:  in short, heirs to
the peculiar ills of poverty and slavery, as well as co-heirs with the
plutocracy to all the failings of human nature.  Even Shelley
admitted, 200 years after Shakespear wrote Coriolanus, that universal
suffrage was out of the question.  Surely the real test, not of
Democracy, which was not a live political issue in Shakespear's time,
but of impartiality in judging classes, which is what one demands from
a great human poet, is not that he should flatter the poor and
denounce the rich, but that he should weigh them both in the same
balance.  Now whoever will read Lear and Measure for Measure will find
stamped on his mind such an appalled sense of the danger of dressing
man in a little brief authority, such a merciless stripping of the
purple from the "poor, bare, forked animal" that calls itself a king
and fancies itself a god, that one wonders what was the real nature of
the mysterious restraint that kept "Eliza and our James" from teaching
Shakespear to be civil to crowned heads, just as one wonders why
Tolstoy was allowed to go free when so many less terrible levellers
went to the galleys or Siberia.  From the mature Shakespear we get no
such scenes of village snobbery as that between the stage country
gentleman Alexander Iden and the stage Radical Jack Cade.  We get the
shepherd in As You Like It, and many honest, brave, human, and loyal
servants, beside the inevitable comic ones.  Even in the Jingo play,
Henry V, we get Bates and Williams drawn with all respect and honor as
normal rank and file men.  In Julius Caesar, Shakespear went to work
with a will when he took his cue from Plutarch in glorifying regicide
and transfiguring the republicans.  Indeed hero-worshippers have never
forgiven him for belittling Caesar and failing to see that side of his
assassination which made Goethe denounce it as the most senseless of
crimes.  Put the play beside the Charles I of Wills, in which Cromwell
is written down to a point at which the Jack Cade of Henry VI becomes
a hero in comparison; and then believe, if you can, that Shakespear
was one of them that "crook the pregnant hinges of the knee where
thrift may follow fawning."  Think of Rosencrantz, Guildenstern,
Osric, the fop who annoyed Hotspur, and a dozen passages concerning
such people!  If such evidence can prove anything (and Mr Harris
relies throughout on such evidence) Shakespear loathed courtiers.

If, on the other hand, Shakespear's characters are mostly members of
the leisured classes, the same thing is true of Mr Harris's own plays
and mine.  Industrial slavery is not compatible with that freedom of
adventure, that personal refinement and intellectual culture, that
scope of action, which the higher and subtler drama demands.

Even Cervantes had finally to drop Don Quixote's troubles with
innkeepers demanding to be paid for his food and lodging, and make him
as free of economic difficulties as Amadis de Gaul.  Hamlet's
experiences simply could not have happened to a plumber.  A poor man
is useful on the stage only as a blind man is:  to excite sympathy.
The poverty of the apothecary in Romeo and Juliet produces a great
effect, and even points the sound moral that a poor man cannot afford
to have a conscience; but if all the characters of the play had been
as poor as he, it would have been nothing but a melodrama of the sort
that the Sicilian players gave us here; and that was not the best that
lay in Shakespear's power.  When poverty is abolished, and leisure and
grace of life become general, the only plays surviving from our epoch
which will have any relation to life as it will be lived then will be
those in which none of the persons represented are troubled with want
of money or wretched drudgery.  Our plays of poverty and squalor, now
the only ones that are true to the life of the majority of living men,
will then be classed with the records of misers and monsters, and read
only by historical students of social pathology.

Then consider Shakespear's kings and lords and gentlemen!  Would even
John Ball or Jeremiah complain that they are flattered?  Surely a more
mercilessly exposed string of scoundrels never crossed the stage.  The
very monarch who paralyzes a rebel by appealing to the divinity that
hedges a king, is a drunken and sensual assassin, and is presently
killed contemptuously before our eyes in spite of his hedge of
divinity.  I could write as convincing a chapter on Shakespear's
Dickensian prejudice against the throne and the nobility and gentry in
general as Mr Harris or Ernest Crosbie on the other side.  I could
even go so far as to contend that one of Shakespear's defects is his
lack of an intelligent comprehension of feudalism.  He had of course
no prevision of democratic Collectivism.  He was, except in the
commonplaces of war and patriotism, a privateer through and through.
Nobody in his plays, whether king or citizen, has any civil public
business or conception of such a thing, except in the method of
appointing constables, to the abuses in which he called attention
quite in the vein of the Fabian Society.  He was concerned about
drunkenness and about the idolatry and hypocrisy of our judicial
system; but his implied remedy was personal sobriety and freedom from
idolatrous illusion in so far as he had any remedy at all, and did not
merely despair of human nature.  His first and last word on parliament
was "Get thee glass eyes, and, like a scurvy politician, seem to see
the thing thou dost not."  He had no notion of the feeling with which
the land nationalizers of today regard the fact that he was a party to
the enclosure of common lands at Wellcome.  The explanation is, not a
general deficiency in his mind, but the simple fact that in his day
what English land needed was individual appropriation and cultivation,
and what the English Constitution needed was the incorporation of Whig
principles of individual liberty.




Shakespear and the British Public

I have rejected Mr Harris's view that Shakespear died broken-hearted
of "the pangs of love despised."  I have given my reasons for
believing that Shakespear died game, and indeed in a state of levity
which would have been considered unbecoming in a bishop.  But Mr
Harris's evidence does prove that Shakespear had a grievance and a
very serious one.  He might have been jilted by ten dark ladies and
been none the worse for it; but his treatment by the British Public
was another matter.  The idolatry which exasperated Ben Jonson was by
no means a popular movement; and, like all such idolatries, it was
excited by the magic of Shakespear's art rather than by his views.

He was launched on his career as a successful playwright by the Henry
VI trilogy, a work of no originality, depth, or subtlety except the
originality, depth, and subtlety of the feelings and fancies of the
common people.  But Shakespear was not satisfied with this.  What is
the use of being Shakespear if you are not allowed to express any
notions but those of Autolycus?  Shakespear did not see the world as
Autolycus did:  he saw it, if not exactly as Ibsen did (for it was not
quite the same world), at least with much of Ibsen's power of
penetrating its illusions and idolatries, and with all Swift's horror
of its cruelty and uncleanliness.

Now it happens to some men with these powers that they are forced to
impose their fullest exercise on the world because they cannot produce
popular work.  Take Wagner and Ibsen for instance!  Their earlier
works are no doubt much cheaper than their later ones; still, they
were not popular when they were written.  The alternative of doing
popular work was never really open to them:  had they stooped they
would have picked up less than they snatched from above the people's
heads.  But Handel and Shakespear were not held to their best in this
way.  They could turn out anything they were asked for, and even heap
up the measure.  They reviled the British Public, and never forgave it
for ignoring their best work and admiring their splendid commonplaces;
but they produced the commonplaces all the same, and made them sound
magnificent by mere brute faculty for their art.  When Shakespear was
forced to write popular plays to save his theatre from ruin, he did it
mutinously, calling the plays "As _You_ Like It," and "Much Ado About
Nothing."  All the same, he did it so well that to this day these two
genial vulgarities are the main Shakespearian stock-in-trade of our
theatres.  Later on Burbage's power and popularity as an actor enabled
Shakespear to free himself from the tyranny of the box office, and to
express himself more freely in plays consisting largely of monologue
to be spoken by a great actor from whom the public would stand a good
deal.  The history of Shakespear's tragedies has thus been the history
of a long line of famous actors, from Burbage and Betterton to Forbes
Robertson; and the man of whom we are told that "when he would have
said that Richard died, and cried A horse! A horse! he Burbage cried"
was the father of nine generations of Shakespearian playgoers, all
speaking of Garrick's Richard, and Kean's Othello, and Irving's
Shylock, and Forbes Robertson's Hamlet without knowing or caring how
much these had to do with Shakespear's Richard and Othello and so
forth.  And the plays which were written without great and predominant
parts, such as Troilus and Cressida, All's Well That Ends Well, and
Measure for Measure, have dropped on our stage as dead as the second
part of Goethe's Faust or Ibsen's Emperor or Galilean.

Here, then, Shakespear had a real grievance; and though it is a
sentimental exaggeration to describe him as a broken-hearted man in
the face of the passages of reckless jollity and serenely happy poetry
in his latest plays, yet the discovery that his most serious work
could reach success only when carried on the back of a very
fascinating actor who was enormously overcharging his part, and that
the serious plays which did not contain parts big enough to hold the
overcharge were left on the shelf, amply accounts for the evident fact
that Shakespear did not end his life in a glow of enthusiastic
satisfaction with mankind and with the theatre, which is all that Mr
Harris can allege in support of his broken-heart theory.  But even if
Shakespear had had no failures, it was not possible for a man of his
powers to observe the political and moral conduct of his
contemporaries without perceiving that they were incapable of dealing
with the problems raised by their own civilization, and that their
attempts to carry out the codes of law and to practise the religions
offered to them by great prophets and law-givers were and still are so
foolish that we now call for The Superman, virtually a new species, to
rescue the world from mismanagement.  This is the real sorrow of great
men; and in the face of it the notion that when a great man speaks
bitterly or looks melancholy he must be troubled by a disappointment
in love seems to me sentimental trifling.

If I have carried the reader with me thus far, he will find that
trivial as this little play of mine is, its sketch of Shakespear is
more complete than its levity suggests.  Alas! its appeal for a
National Theatre as a monument to Shakespear failed to touch the very
stupid people who cannot see that a National Theatre is worth having
for the sake of the National Soul.  I had unfortunately represented
Shakespear as treasuring and using (as I do myself) the jewels of
unconsciously musical speech which common people utter and throw away
every day; and this was taken as a disparagement of Shakespear's
"originality."  Why was I born with such contemporaries?  Why is
Shakespear made ridiculous by such a posterity?



_The Dark Lady of The Sonnets was first performed at the Haymarket
Theatre, on the afternoon of Thursday, the 24th November 1910, by Mona
Limerick as the Dark Lady, Suzanne Sheldon as Queen Elizabeth,
Granville Barker as Shakespear, and Hugh Tabberer as the Warder._




THE DARK LADY OF THE SONNETS

_Fin de siecle 15-1600.  Midsummer night on the terrace of the Palace
at Whitehall, overlooking the Thames.  The Palace clock chimes four
quarters and strikes eleven._

_A Beefeater on guard.  A Cloaked Man approaches._

THE BEEFEATER.  Stand.  Who goes there?  Give the word.

THE MAN.  Marry!  I cannot.  I have clean forgotten it.

THE BEEFEATER.  Then cannot you pass here.  What is your business?
Who are you?  Are you a true man?

THE MAN.  Far from it, Master Warder.  I am not the same man two days
together:  sometimes Adam, sometimes Benvolio, and anon the Ghost.

THE BEEFEATER.  _[recoiling]_  A ghost!  Angels and ministers of grace
defend us!

THE MAN.  Well said, Master Warder.  With your leave I will set that
down in writing; for I have a very poor and unhappy brain for
remembrance.  _[He takes out his tablets and writes]._  Methinks this
is a good scene, with you on your lonely watch, and I approaching like
a ghost in the moonlight.  Stare not so amazedly at me; but mark what
I say.  I keep tryst here to-night with a dark lady.  She promised to
bribe the warder.  I gave her the wherewithal:  four tickets for the
Globe Theatre.

THE BEEFEATER.  Plague on her!  She gave me two only.

THE MAN.  _[detaching a tablet]_  My friend:  present this tablet, and
you will be welcomed at any time when the plays of Will Shakespear are
in hand.  Bring your wife.  Bring your friends.  Bring the whole
garrison.  There is ever plenty of room.

THE BEEFEATER.  I care not for these new-fangled plays.  No man can
understand a word of them.  They are all talk.  Will you not give me a
pass for The Spanish Tragedy?

THE MAN.  To see The Spanish Tragedy one pays, my friend.  Here are
the means.  _[He gives him a piece of gold]._

THE BEEFEATER.  _[overwhelmed]_  Gold!  Oh, sir, you are a better
paymaster than your dark lady.

THE MAN.  Women are thrifty, my friend.

THE BEEFEATER.  Tis so, sir.  And you have to consider that the most
open handed of us must een cheapen that which we buy every day.  This
lady has to make a present to a warder nigh every night of her life.

THE MAN.  _[turning pale]_  I'll not believe it.

THE BEEFEATER.  Now you, sir, I dare be sworn, do not have an
adventure like this twice in the year.

THE MAN.  Villain:  wouldst tell me that my dark lady hath ever done
thus before? that she maketh occasions to meet other men?

THE BEEFEATER.  Now the Lord bless your innocence, sir, do you think
you are the only pretty man in the world?  A merry lady, sir:  a warm
bit of stuff.  Go to:  I'll not see her pass a deceit on a gentleman
that hath given me the first piece of gold I ever handled.

THE MAN.  Master Warder:  is it not a strange thing that we, knowing
that all women are false, should be amazed to find our own particular
drab no better than the rest?

THE BEEFEATER.  Not all, sir.  Decent bodies, many of them.

THE MAN.  _[intolerantly]_  No.  All false.  All.  If thou deny it,
thou liest.

THE BEEFEATER.  You judge too much by the Court, sir.  There, indeed,
you may say of frailty that its name is woman.

THE MAN.  _[pulling out his tablets again]_  Prithee say that again:
that about frailty:  the strain of music.

THE BEEFEATER.  What strain of music, sir?  I'm no musician, God
knows.

THE MAN.  There is music in your soul:  many of your degree have it
very notably.  _[Writing]_  "Frailty:  thy name is woman!"
_[Repeating it affectionately]_  "Thy name is woman."

THE BEEFEATER.  Well, sir, it is but four words.  Are you a snapper-up
of such unconsidered trifles?

THE MAN.  _[eagerly]_  Snapper-up of--_[he gasps]_  Oh!  Immortal
phrase!  _[He writes it down]._  This man is a greater than I.

THE BEEFEATER.  You have my lord Pembroke's trick, sir.

THE MAN.  Like enough:  he is my near friend.  But what call you his
trick?

THE BEEFEATER.  Making sonnets by moonlight.  And to the same lady
too.

THE MAN.  No!

THE BEEFEATER.  Last night he stood here on your errand, and in your
shoes.

THE MAN.  Thou, too, Brutus!  And I called him friend!

THE BEEFEATER.  Tis ever so, sir.

THE MAN.  Tis ever so.  Twas ever so.  _[He turns away, overcome]._
Two Gentlemen of Verona!  Judas!  Judas!!

THE BEEFEATER.  Is he so bad as that, sir?

THE MAN.  _[recovering his charity and self-possession]_  Bad?  Oh no.
Human, Master Warder, human.  We call one another names when we are
offended, as children do.  That is all.

THE BEEFEATER.  Ay, sir:  words, words, words.  Mere wind, sir.  We
fill our bellies with the east wind, sir, as the Scripture hath it.
You cannot feed capons so.

THE MAN.  A good cadence.  By your leave _[He makes a note of it]._

THE BEEFEATER.  What manner of thing is a cadence, sir?  I have not
heard of it.

THE MAN.  A thing to rule the world with, friend.

THE BEEFEATER.  You speak strangely, sir:  no offence.  But, an't like
you, you are a very civil gentleman; and a poor man feels drawn to
you, you being, as twere, willing to share your thought with him.

THE MAN.  Tis my trade.  But alas! the world for the most part will
none of my thoughts.

_Lamplight streams from the palace door as it opens from within._

THE BEEFEATER.  Here comes your lady, sir.  I'll to t'other end of my
ward.  You may een take your time about your business:  I shall not
return too suddenly unless my sergeant comes prowling round.  Tis a
fell sergeant, sir:  strict in his arrest.  Go'd'en, sir; and good
luck!  _[He goes]._

THE MAN.  "Strict in his arrest"!  "Fell sergeant"!  _[As if tasting a
ripe plum]_  O-o-o-h!  _[He makes a note of them]._

_A Cloaked Lady gropes her way from the palace and wanders along the
terrace, walking in her sleep._

THE LADY.  _[rubbing her hands as if washing them]_  Out, damned spot.
You will mar all with these cosmetics.  God made you one face; and you
make yourself another.  Think of your grave, woman, not ever of being
beautified.  All the perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this Tudor
hand.

THE MAN.  "All the perfumes of Arabia"!  "Beautified"!  "Beautified"!
a poem in a single word.  Can this be my Mary?  _[To the Lady]_  Why
do you speak in a strange voice, and utter poetry for the first time?
Are you ailing?  You walk like the dead.  Mary!  Mary!

THE LADY.  _[echoing him]_  Mary!  Mary!  Who would have thought that
woman to have had so much blood in her!  Is it my fault that my
counsellors put deeds of blood on me?  Fie!  If you were women you
would have more wit than to stain the floor so foully.  Hold not up
her head so:  the hair is false.  I tell you yet again, Mary's buried:
she cannot come out of her grave.  I fear her not:  these cats that
dare jump into thrones though they be fit only for men's laps must be
put away.  Whats done cannot be undone.  Out, I say.  Fie! a queen,
and freckled!

THE MAN.  _[shaking her arm]_  Mary, I say:  art asleep?

_The Lady wakes; starts; and nearly faints.  He catches her on his
arm._

THE LADY.  Where am I?  What art thou?

THE MAN.  I cry your mercy.  I have mistook your person all this
while.  Methought you were my Mary:  my mistress.

THE LADY.  _[outraged]_  Profane fellow:  how do you dare?

THE MAN.  Be not wroth with me, lady.  My mistress is a marvellous
proper woman.  But she does not speak so well as you.  "All the
perfumes of Arabia"!  That was well said:  spoken with good accent and
excellent discretion.

THE LADY.  Have I been in speech with you here?

THE MAN.  Why, yes, fair lady.  Have you forgot it?

THE LADY.  I have walked in my sleep.

THE MAN.  Walk ever in your sleep, fair one; for then your words drop
like honey.

THE LADY.  _[with cold majesty]_  Know you to whom you speak, sir,
that you dare express yourself so saucily?

THE MAN.  _[unabashed]_  Not I, not care neither.  You are some lady
of the Court, belike.  To me there are but two sorts of women:  those
with excellent voices, sweet and low, and cackling hens that cannot
make me dream.  Your voice has all manner of loveliness in it.  Grudge
me not a short hour of its music.

THE LADY.  Sir:  you are overbold.  Season your admiration for a while
with--

THE MAN.  _[holding up his hand to stop her]_  "Season your admiration
for a while--"

THE LADY.  Fellow:  do you dare mimic me to my face?

THE MAN.  Tis music.  Can you not hear?  When a good musician sings a
song, do you not sing it and sing it again till you have caught and
fixed its perfect melody?  "Season your admiration for a while":  God!
the history of man's heart is in that one word admiration.
Admiration!  _[Taking up his tablets]_  What was it?  "Suspend your
admiration for a space--"

THE LADY.  A very vile jingle of esses.  I said "Season your--"

THE MAN.  _[hastily]_  Season:  ay, season, season, season.  Plague on
my memory, my wretched memory!  I must een write it down.  _[He begins
to write, but stops, his memory failing him]._  Yet tell me which was
the vile jingle?  You said very justly:  mine own ear caught it even
as my false tongue said it.

THE LADY.  You said "for a space."  I said "for a while."

THE MAN.  "For a while" _[he corrects it]._  Good!  _[Ardently]_  And
now be mine neither for a space nor a while, but for ever.

THE LADY.  Odds my life!  Are you by chance making love to me, knave?

THE MAN.  Nay:  tis you who have made the love:  I but pour it out at
your feet.  I cannot but love a lass that sets such store by an apt
word.  Therefore vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman--no:  I have
said that before somewhere; and the wordy garment of my love for you
must be fire-new--

THE LADY.  You talk too much, sir.  Let me warn you:  I am more
accustomed to be listened to than preached at.

THE MAN.  The most are like that that do talk well.  But though you
spake with the tongues of angels, as indeed you do, yet know that I am
the king of words--

THE LADY.  A king, ha!

THE MAN.  No less.  We are poor things, we men and women--

THE LADY.  Dare you call me woman?

THE MAN.  What nobler name can I tender you?  How else can I love you?
Yet you may well shrink from the name:  have I not said we are but
poor things?  Yet there is a power that can redeem us.

THE LADY.  Gramercy for your sermon, sir.  I hope I know my duty.

THE MAN.  This is no sermon, but the living truth.  The power I speak
of is the power of immortal poesy.  For know that vile as this world
is, and worms as we are, you have but to invest all this vileness with
a magical garment of words to transfigure us and uplift our souls til
earth flowers into a million heavens.

THE LADY.  You spoil your heaven with your million.  You are
extravagant.  Observe some measure in your speech.

THE MAN.  You speak now as Ben does.

THE LADY.  And who, pray, is Ben?

THE MAN.  A learned bricklayer who thinks that the sky is at the top
of his ladder, and so takes it on him to rebuke me for flying.  I tell
you there is no word yet coined and no melody yet sung that is
extravagant and majestical enough for the glory that lovely words can
reveal.  It is heresy to deny it:  have you not been taught that in
the beginning was the Word? that the Word was with God? nay, that the
Word was God?

THE LADY.  Beware, fellow, how you presume to speak of holy things.
The Queen is the head of the Church.

THE MAN.  You are the head of my Church when you speak as you did at
first.  "All the perfumes of Arabia"!  Can the Queen speak thus?  They
say she playeth well upon the virginals.  Let her play so to me; and
I'll kiss her hands.  But until then, you are my Queen; and I'll kiss
those lips that have dropt music on my heart.  _[He puts his arms
about her]._

THE LADY.  Unmeasured impudence!  On your life, take your hands from
me.

_The Dark Lady comes stooping along the terrace behind them like a
running thrush.  When she sees how they are employed, she rises
angrily to her full height, and listens jealously._

THE MAN.  _[unaware of the Dark Lady]_  Then cease to make my hands
tremble with the streams of life you pour through them.  You hold me
as the lodestar holds the iron:  I cannot but cling to you.  We are
lost, you and I:  nothing can separate us now.

THE DARK LADY.  We shall see that, false lying hound, you and your
filthy trull.  _[With two vigorous cuffs, she knocks the pair asunder,
sending the man, who is unlucky enough to receive a righthanded blow,
sprawling an the flags]._  Take that, both of you!

THE CLOAKED LADY.  _[in towering wrath, throwing off her cloak and
turning in outraged majesty on her assailant]_  High treason!

THE DARK LADY.  _[recognizing her and falling on her knees in abject
terror]_  Will:  I am lost:  I have struck the Queen.

THE MAN.  _[sitting up as majestically as his ignominious posture
allows]_  Woman:  you have struck WILLIAM SHAKESPEAR.

QUEEN ELIZABETH.  _[stupent]_  Marry, come up!!!  Struck William
Shakespear quotha!  And who in the name of all the sluts and jades and
light-o'-loves and fly-by-nights that infest this palace of mine, may
William Shakespear be?

THE DARK LADY.  Madam:  he is but a player.  Oh, I could have my hand
cut off--

QUEEN ELIZABETH.  Belike you will, mistress.  Have you bethought you
that I am like to have your head cut off as well?

THE DARK LADY.  Will:  save me.  Oh, save me.

ELIZABETH.  Save you!  A likely savior, on my royal word!  I had
thought this fellow at least an esquire; for I had hoped that even the
vilest of my ladies would not have dishonored my Court by wantoning
with a baseborn servant.

SHAKESPEAR.  _[indignantly scrambling to his feet]_  Base-born!  I, a
Shakespear of Stratford!  I, whose mother was an Arden! baseborn!  You
forget yourself, madam.

ELIZABETH.  _[furious]_  S'blood! do I so?  I will teach you--

THE DARK LADY.  _[rising from her knees and throwing herself between
them]_  Will:  in God's name anger her no further.  It is death.
Madam:  do not listen to him.

SHAKESPEAR.  Not were it een to save your life, Mary, not to mention
mine own, will I flatter a monarch who forgets what is due to my
family.  I deny not that my father was brought down to be a poor
bankrupt; but twas his gentle blood that was ever too generous for
trade.  Never did he disown his debts.  Tis true he paid them not; but
it is an attested truth that he gave bills for them; and twas those
bills, in the hands of base hucksters, that were his undoing.

ELIZABETH.  _[grimly]_  The son of your father shall learn his place
in the presence of the daughter of Harry the Eighth.

SHAKESPEAR.  _[swelling with intolerant importance]_  Name not that
inordinate man in the same breath with Stratford's worthiest alderman.
John Shakespear wedded but once:  Harry Tudor was married six times.
You should blush to utter his name.

THE DARK LADY. |    Will:  for pity's sake--      | _crying out_

               |                                  | _together_

ELIZABETH.     |    Insolent dog--                |

SHAKESPEAR.  _[cutting them short]_  How know you that King Harry was
indeed your father?

ELIZABETH.     |    Zounds!  Now by--

               |    _[she stops to grind her teeth with rage]._

THE DARK LADY. |    She will have me whipped through

               |    the streets.  Oh God!  Oh God!

SHAKESPEAR.  Learn to know yourself better, madam.  I am an honest
gentleman of unquestioned parentage, and have already sent in my
demand for the coat-of-arms that is lawfully mine.  Can you say as
much for yourself?

ELIZABETH.  _[almost beside herself]_  Another word; and I begin with
mine own hands the work the hangman shall finish.

SHAKESPEAR.  You are no true Tudor:  this baggage here has as good a
right to your royal seat as you.  What maintains you on the throne of
England?  Is it your renowned wit? your wisdom that sets at naught the
craftiest statesmen of the Christian world?  No.  Tis the mere chance
that might have happened to any milkmaid, the caprice of Nature that
made you the most wondrous piece of beauty the age hath seen.
_[Elizabeth's raised fists, on the point of striking him, fall to her
side]._  That is what hath brought all men to your feet, and founded
your throne on the impregnable rock of your proud heart, a stony
island in a sea of desire.  There, madam, is some wholesome blunt
honest speaking for you.  Now do your worst.

ELIZABETH.  _[with dignity]_  Master Shakespear:  it is well for you
that I am a merciful prince.  I make allowance for your rustic
ignorance.  But remember that there are things which be true, and are
yet not seemly to be said (I will not say to a queen; for you will
have it that I am none) but to a virgin.

SHAKESPEAR.  _[bluntly]_  It is no fault of mine that you are a
virgin, madam, albeit tis my misfortune.

THE DARK LADY.  _[terrified again]_  In mercy, madam, hold no further
discourse with him.  He hath ever some lewd jest on his tongue.  You
hear how he useth me! calling me baggage and the like to your
Majesty's face.

ELIZABETH.  As for you, mistress, I have yet to demand what your
business is at this hour in this place, and how you come to be so
concerned with a player that you strike blindly at your sovereign in
your jealousy of him.

THE DARK LADY.  Madam:  as I live and hope for salvation--

SHAKESPEAR.  _[sardonically]_  Ha!

THE DARK LADY.  _[angrily]_--ay, I'm as like to be saved as thou
that believest naught save some black magic of words and verses--I
say, madam, as I am a living woman I came here to break with him for
ever.  Oh, madam, if you would know what misery is, listen to this man
that is more than man and less at the same time.  He will tie you down
to anatomize your very soul:  he will wring tears of blood from your
humiliation; and then he will heal the wound with flatteries that no
woman can resist.

SHAKESPEAR.  Flatteries!  _[Kneeling]_  Oh, madam, I put my case at
your royal feet.  I confess to much.  I have a rude tongue:  I am
unmannerly:  I blaspheme against the holiness of anointed royalty; but
oh, my royal mistress, AM I a flatterer?

ELIZABETH.  I absolve you as to that.  You are far too plain a dealer
to please me.  _[He rises gratefully]._

THE DARK LADY.  Madam:  he is flattering you even as he speaks.

ELIZABETH.  _[a terrible flash in her eye]_  Ha!  Is it so?

SHAKESPEAR.  Madam:  she is jealous; and, heaven help me! not without
reason.  Oh, you say you are a merciful prince; but that was cruel of
you, that hiding of your royal dignity when you found me here.  For
how can I ever be content with this black-haired, black-eyed,
black-avised devil again now that I have looked upon real beauty and
real majesty?

THE DARK LADY.  _[wounded and desperate]_  He hath swore to me ten
times over that the day shall come in England when black women, for
all their foulness, shall be more thought on than fair ones.  _[To
Shakespear, scolding at him]_  Deny it if thou canst.  Oh, he is
compact of lies and scorns.  I am tired of being tossed up to heaven
and dragged down to hell at every whim that takes him.  I am ashamed
to my very soul that I have abased myself to love one that my father
would not have deemed fit to hold my stirrup--one that will talk to
all the world about me--that will put my love and my shame into his
plays and make me blush for myself there--that will write sonnets
about me that no man of gentle strain would put his hand to.  I am all
disordered:  I know not what I am saying to your Majesty:  I am of all
ladies most deject and wretched--

SHAKESPEAR.  Ha!  At last sorrow hath struck a note of music out of
thee.  "Of all ladies most deject and wretched."  _[He makes a note of
it]._

THE DARK LADY.  Madam:  I implore you give me leave to go.  I am
distracted with grief and shame.  I--

ELIZABETH.  Go _[The Dark Lady tries to kiss her hand]._  No more.
Go.  _[The Dark Lady goes, convulsed]._  You have been cruel to that
poor fond wretch, Master Shakespear.

SHAKESPEAR.  I am not cruel, madam; but you know the fable of Jupiter
and Semele.  I could not help my lightnings scorching her.

ELIZABETH.  You have an overweening conceit of yourself, sir, that
displeases your Queen.

SHAKESPEAR.  Oh, madam, can I go about with the modest cough of a
minor poet, belittling my inspiration and making the mightiest wonder
of your reign a thing of nought?  I have said that "not marble nor the
gilded monuments of princes shall outlive" the words with which I make
the world glorious or foolish at my will.  Besides, I would have you
think me great enough to grant me a boon.

ELIZABETH.  I hope it is a boon that may be asked of a virgin Queen
without offence, sir.  I mistrust your forwardness; and I bid you
remember that I do not suffer persons of your degree (if I may say so
without offence to your father the alderman) to presume too far.

SHAKESPEAR.  Oh, madam, I shall not forget myself again; though by my
life, could I make you a serving wench, neither a queen nor a virgin
should you be for so much longer as a flash of lightning might take to
cross the river to the Bankside.  But since you are a queen and will
none of me, nor of Philip of Spain, nor of any other mortal man, I
must een contain myself as best I may, and ask you only for a boon of
State.

ELIZABETH.  A boon of State already!  You are becoming a courtier like
the rest of them.  You lack advancement.

SHAKESPEAR.  "Lack advancement."  By your Majesty's leave:  a queenly
phrase.  _[He is about to write it down]._

ELIZABETH.  _[striking the tablets from his hand]_  Your tables begin
to anger me, sir.  I am not here to write your plays for you.

SHAKESPEAR.  You are here to inspire them, madam.  For this, among the
rest, were you ordained.  But the boon I crave is that you do endow a
great playhouse, or, if I may make bold to coin a scholarly name for
it, a National Theatre, for the better instruction and gracing of your
Majesty's subjects.

ELIZABETH.  Why, sir, are there not theatres enow on the Bankside and
in Blackfriars?

SHAKESPEAR.  Madam:  these are the adventures of needy and desperate
men that must, to save themselves from perishing of want, give the
sillier sort of people what they best like; and what they best like,
God knows, is not their own betterment and instruction, as we well see
by the example of the churches, which must needs compel men to
frequent them, though they be open to all without charge.  Only when
there is a matter of a murder, or a plot, or a pretty youth in
petticoats, or some naughty tale of wantonness, will your subjects pay
the great cost of good players and their finery, with a little profit
to boot.  To prove this I will tell you that I have written two noble
and excellent plays setting forth the advancement of women of high
nature and fruitful industry even as your Majesty is:  the one a
skilful physician, the other a sister devoted to good works.  I have
also stole from a book of idle wanton tales two of the most damnable
foolishnesses in the world, in the one of which a woman goeth in man's
attire and maketh impudent love to her swain, who pleaseth the
groundlings by overthrowing a wrestler; whilst, in the other, one of
the same kidney sheweth her wit by saying endless naughtinesses to a
gentleman as lewd as herself.  I have writ these to save my friends
from penury, yet shewing my scorn for such follies and for them that
praise them by calling the one As You Like It, meaning that it is not
as _I_ like it, and the other Much Ado About Nothing, as it truly is.
And now these two filthy pieces drive their nobler fellows from the
stage, where indeed I cannot have my lady physician presented at all,
she being too honest a woman for the taste of the town.  Wherefore I
humbly beg your Majesty to give order that a theatre be endowed out of
the public revenue for the playing of those pieces of mine which no
merchant will touch, seeing that his gain is so much greater with the
worse than with the better.  Thereby you shall also encourage other
men to undertake the writing of plays who do now despise it and leave
it wholly to those whose counsels will work little good to your realm.
For this writing of plays is a great matter, forming as it does the
minds and affections of men in such sort that whatsoever they see done
in show on the stage, they will presently be doing in earnest in the
world, which is but a larger stage.  Of late, as you know, the Church
taught the people by means of plays; but the people flocked only to
such as were full of superstitious miracles and bloody martyrdoms; and
so the Church, which also was just then brought into straits by the
policy of your royal father, did abandon and discountenance the art of
playing; and thus it fell into the hands of poor players and greedy
merchants that had their pockets to look to and not the greatness of
this your kingdom.  Therefore now must your Majesty take up that good
work that your Church hath abandoned, and restore the art of playing
to its former use and dignity.

ELIZABETH.  Master Shakespear:  I will speak of this matter to the
Lord Treasurer.

SHAKESPEAR.  Then am I undone, madam; for there was never yet a Lord
Treasurer that could find a penny for anything over and above the
necessary expenses of your government, save for a war or a salary for
his own nephew.

ELIZABETH.  Master Shakespear:  you speak sooth; yet cannot I in any
wise mend it.  I dare not offend my unruly Puritans by making so lewd
a place as the playhouse a public charge; and there be a thousand
things to be done in this London of mine before your poetry can have
its penny from the general purse.  I tell thee, Master Will, it will
be three hundred years and more before my subjects learn that man
cannot live by bread alone, but by every word that cometh from the
mouth of those whom God inspires.  By that time you and I will be dust
beneath the feet of the horses, if indeed there be any horses then,
and men be still riding instead of flying.  Now it may be that by then
your works will be dust also.

SHAKESPEAR.  They will stand, madam:  fear nor for that.

ELIZABETH.  It may prove so.  But of this I am certain (for I know my
countrymen) that until every other country in the Christian world,
even to barbarian Muscovy and the hamlets of the boorish Germans, have
its playhouse at the public charge, England will never adventure.  And
she will adventure then only because it is her desire to be ever in
the fashion, and to do humbly and dutifully whatso she seeth everybody
else doing.  In the meantime you must content yourself as best you can
by the playing of those two pieces which you give out as the most
damnable ever writ, but which your countrymen, I warn you, will swear
are the best you have ever done.  But this I will say, that if I could
speak across the ages to our descendants, I should heartily recommend
them to fulfil your wish; for the Scottish minstrel hath well said
that he that maketh the songs of a nation is mightier than he that
maketh its laws; and the same may well be true of plays and
interludes.  _[The clock chimes the first quarter.  The warder returns
on his round]._  And now, sir, we are upon the hour when it better
beseems a virgin queen to be abed than to converse alone with the
naughtiest of her subjects.  Ho there!  Who keeps ward on the queen's
lodgings tonight?

THE WARDER.  I do, an't please your majesty.

ELIZABETH.  See that you keep it better in future.  You have let pass
a most dangerous gallant even to the very door of our royal chamber.
Lead him forth; and bring me word when he is safely locked out; for I
shall scarce dare disrobe until the palace gates are between us.

SHAKESPEAR.  _[kissing her hand]_  My body goes through the gate into
the darkness, madam; but my thoughts follow you.

ELIZABETH.  How! to my bed!

SHAKESPEAR.  No, madam, to your prayers, in which I beg you to
remember my theatre.

ELIZABETH.  That is my prayer to posterity.  Forget not your own to
God; and so goodnight, Master Will.

SHAKESPEAR.  Goodnight, great Elizabeth.  God save the Queen!

ELIZABETH.  Amen.

_Exeunt severally:  she to her chamber:  he, in custody of the warder,
to the gate nearest Blackfriars._


AYOT, ST. LAWRENCE, _20th June_ 1910.


Notes on the editing:  Italicized text is delimited with underlines.
Punctuation and spelling retained as in the printed text.
Shaw intentionally spelled many words according to a non-standard
system.  For example, "don't" is given as "dont" (without apostrophe),
"Dr." is given as "Dr" (without a period at the end), and
"Shakespeare" is given as "Shakespear" (no "e" at the end).  Where
several characters in the play are speaking at once, I have indicated
it with vertical bars ("|").  The pound (currency) symbol has been
replaced by the word "pounds".

========================================
========================================

MISALLIANCE


by George Bernard Shaw




Notes on the editing:  Italicized text is delimited with underlines
("_").  Punctuation and spelling are retained as in the printed text.
Shaw used a non-standard system of spelling and punctuation.  For
example, contractions usually have no apostrophe:  "don't" is given as
"dont", "you've" as "youve", and so on.  Abbreviated honorifics have
no trailing period:  "Dr." is given as "Dr", "Mrs." as "Mrs", and so
on.  "Shakespeare" is given as "Shakespear".  Where several characters
in the play are speaking at once, I have indicated it with vertical
bars ("|").  The pound (currency) symbol has been replaced by the word
"pounds".





MISALLIANCE


_Johnny Tarleton, an ordinary young business man of thirty or less, is
taking his weekly Friday to Tuesday in the house of his father, John
Tarleton, who has made a great deal of money out of Tarleton's
Underwear.  The house is in Surrey, on the slope of Hindhead; and
Johnny, reclining, novel in hand, in a swinging chair with a little
awning above it, is enshrined in a spacious half hemisphere of glass
which forms a pavilion commanding the garden, and, beyond it, a barren
but lovely landscape of hill profile with fir trees, commons of
bracken and gorse, and wonderful cloud pictures._

_The glass pavilion springs from a bridgelike arch in the wall of the
house, through which one comes into a big hall with tiled flooring,
which suggests that the proprietor's notion of domestic luxury is
founded on the lounges of week-end hotels.  The arch is not quite in
the centre of the wall.  There is more wall to its right than to its
left, and this space is occupied by a hat rack and umbrella stand in
which tennis rackets, white parasols, caps, Panama hats, and other
summery articles are bestowed.  Just through the arch at this corner
stands a new portable Turkish bath, recently unpacked, with its crate
beside it, and on the crate the drawn nails and the hammer used in
unpacking.  Near the crate are open boxes of garden games:  bowls and
croquet.  Nearly in the middle of the glass wall of the pavilion is a
door giving on the garden, with a couple of steps to surmount the
hot-water pipes which skirt the glass.  At intervals round the
pavilion are marble pillars with specimens of Viennese pottery on
them, very flamboyant in colour and florid in design.  Between them
are folded garden chairs flung anyhow against the pipes.  In the side
walls are two doors:  one near the hat stand, leading to the interior
of the house, the other on the opposite side and at the other end,
leading to the vestibule._

_There is no solid furniture except a sideboard which stands against
the wall between the vestibule door and the pavilion, a small writing
table with a blotter, a rack for telegram forms and stationery, and a
wastepaper basket, standing out in the hall near the sideboard, and a
lady's worktable, with two chairs at it, towards the other side of the
lounge.  The writing table has also two chairs at it.  On the
sideboard there is a tantalus, liqueur bottles, a syphon, a glass jug
of lemonade, tumblers, and every convenience for casual drinking.
Also a plate of sponge cakes, and a highly ornate punchbowl in the
same style as the keramic display in the pavilion.  Wicker chairs and
little bamboo tables with ash trays and boxes of matches on them are
scattered in all directions.  In the pavilion, which is flooded with
sunshine, is the elaborate patent swing seat and awning in which
Johnny reclines with his novel.  There are two wicker chairs right and
left of him._

_Bentley Summerhays, one of those smallish, thinskinned youths, who
from 17 to 70 retain unaltered the mental airs of the later and the
physical appearance of the earlier age, appears in the garden and
comes through the glass door into the pavilion.  He is unmistakably a
grade above Johnny socially; and though he looks sensitive enough, his
assurance and his high voice are a little exasperating._

JOHNNY.  Hallo!  Wheres your luggage?

BENTLEY.  I left it at the station.  Ive walked up from Haslemere.
_[He goes to the hat stand and hangs up his hat]._

JOHNNY _[shortly]_  Oh!  And who's to fetch it?

BENTLEY.  Dont know.  Dont care.  Providence, probably.  If not, your
mother will have it fetched.

JOHNNY.  Not her business, exactly, is it?

BENTLEY.  _[returning to the pavilion]_  Of course not.  Thats why one
loves her for doing it.  Look here:  chuck away your silly week-end
novel, and talk to a chap.  After a week in that filthy office my
brain is simply blue-mouldy.  Lets argue about something intellectual.
_[He throws himself into the wicker chair on Johnny's right]._

JOHNNY.  _[straightening up in the swing with a yell of protest]_  No.
Now seriously, Bunny, Ive come down here to have a pleasant week-end;
and I'm not going to stand your confounded arguments.  If you want to
argue, get out of this and go over to the Congregationalist
minister's.  He's a nailer at arguing.  He likes it.

BENTLEY.  You cant argue with a person when his livelihood depends on
his not letting you convert him.  And would you mind not calling me
Bunny.  My name is Bentley Summerhays, which you please.

JOHNNY.  Whats the matter with Bunny?

BENTLEY.  It puts me in a false position.  Have you ever considered
the fact that I was an afterthought?

JOHNNY.  An afterthought?  What do you mean by that?

BENTLEY.  I--

JOHNNY.  No, stop:  I dont want to know.  It's only a dodge to start
an argument.

BENTLEY.  Dont be afraid:  it wont overtax your brain.  My father was
44 when I was born.  My mother was 41.  There was twelve years between
me and the next eldest.  I was unexpected.  I was probably
unintentional.  My brothers and sisters are not the least like me.
Theyre the regular thing that you always get in the first batch from
young parents:  quite pleasant, ordinary, do-the-regular-thing sort:
all body and no brains, like you.

JOHNNY.  Thank you.

BENTLEY.  Dont mention it, old chap.  Now I'm different.  By the time
I was born, the old couple knew something.  So I came out all brains
and no more body than is absolutely necessary.  I am really a good
deal older than you, though you were born ten years sooner.  Everybody
feels that when they hear us talk; consequently, though it's quite
natural to hear me calling you Johnny, it sounds ridiculous and
unbecoming for you to call me Bunny.  _[He rises]._

JOHNNY.  Does it, by George?  You stop me doing it if you can:  thats
all.

BENTLEY.  If you go on doing it after Ive asked you not, youll feel an
awful swine.  _[He strolls away carelessly to the sideboard with his
eye on the sponge cakes]._  At least I should; but I suppose youre not
so particular.

JOHNNY _[rising vengefully and following Bentley, who is forced to
turn and listen]_  I'll tell you what it is, my boy:  you want a good
talking to; and I'm going to give it to you.  If you think that
because your father's a K.C.B., and you want to marry my sister, you
can make yourself as nasty as you please and say what you like, youre
mistaken.  Let me tell you that except Hypatia, not one person in this
house is in favor of her marrying you; and I dont believe shes happy
about it herself.  The match isnt settled yet:  dont forget that.
Youre on trial in the office because the Governor isnt giving his
daughter money for an idle man to live on her.  Youre on trial here
because my mother thinks a girl should know what a man is like in the
house before she marries him.  Thats been going on for two months now;
and whats the result?  Youve got yourself thoroughly disliked in the
office; and youre getting yourself thoroughly disliked here, all
through your bad manners and your conceit, and the damned impudence
you think clever.

BENTLEY.  _[deeply wounded and trying hard to control himself]_  Thats
enough, thank you.  You dont suppose, I hope, that I should have come
down if I had known that that was how you felt about me.  _[He makes
for the vestibule door]._

JOHNNY.  _[collaring him]._  No:  you dont run away.  I'm going to
have this out with you.  Sit down:  d'y' hear?  _[Bentley attempts to
go with dignity.  Johnny slings him into a chair at the writing table,
where he sits, bitterly humiliated, but afraid to speak lest he should
burst into tears]._  Thats the advantage of having more body than
brains, you see:  it enables me to teach you manners; and I'm going to
do it too.  Youre a spoilt young pup; and you need a jolly good
licking.  And if youre not careful youll get it:  I'll see to that
next time you call me a swine.

BENTLEY.  I didnt call you a swine.  But _[bursting into a fury of
tears]_  you are a swine:  youre a beast:  youre a brute:  youre a
cad:  youre a liar:  youre a bully:  I should like to wring your
damned neck for you.

JOHNNY.  _[with a derisive laugh]_  Try it, my son.  _[Bentley gives
an inarticulate sob of rage]._  Fighting isnt in your line.  Youre too
small and youre too childish.  I always suspected that your cleverness
wouldnt come to very much when it was brought up against something
solid:  some decent chap's fist, for instance.

BENTLEY.  I hope your beastly fist may come up against a mad bull or a
prizefighter's nose, or something solider than me.  I dont care about
your fist; but if everybody here dislikes me-- _[he is checked by a
sob]._  Well, I dont care.  _[Trying to recover himself]_  I'm sorry I
intruded:  I didnt know.  _[Breaking down again]_  Oh you beast! you
pig!  Swine, swine, swine, swine, swine!  Now!

JOHNNY.  All right, my lad, all right.  Sling your mud as hard as you
please:  it wont stick to me.  What I want to know is this.  How is it
that your father, who I suppose is the strongest man England has
produced in our time--

BENTLEY.  You got that out of your halfpenny paper.  A lot you know
about him!

JOHNNY.  I dont set up to be able to do anything but admire him and
appreciate him and be proud of him as an Englishman.  If it wasnt for
my respect for him, I wouldnt have stood your cheek for two days, let
alone two months.  But what I cant understand is why he didnt lick it
out of you when you were a kid.  For twenty-five years he kept a place
twice as big as England in order:  a place full of seditious
coffee-colored heathens and pestilential white agitators in the middle
of a lot of savage tribes.  And yet he couldnt keep you in order.  I
dont set up to be half the man your father undoubtedly is; but, by
George, it's lucky for you you were not my son.  I dont hold with my
own father's views about corporal punishment being wrong.  It's
necessary for some people; and I'd have tried it on you until you
first learnt to howl and then to behave yourself.

BENTLEY.  _[contemptuously]_  Yes:  behavior wouldnt come naturally to
your son, would it?

JOHNNY.  _[stung into sudden violence]_  Now you keep a civil tongue
in your head.  I'll stand none of your snobbery.  I'm just as proud of
Tarleton's Underwear as you are of your father's title and his K.C.B.,
and all the rest of it.  My father began in a little hole of a shop in
Leeds no bigger than our pantry down the passage there.  He--

BENTLEY.  Oh yes:  I know.  Ive read it.  "The Romance of Business, or
The Story of Tarleton's Underwear.  Please Take One!"  I took one the
day after I first met Hypatia.  I went and bought half a dozen
unshrinkable vests for her sake.

JOHNNY.  Well:  did they shrink?

BENTLEY.  Oh, dont be a fool.

JOHNNY.  Never mind whether I'm a fool or not.  Did they shrink?
Thats the point.  Were they worth the money?

BENTLEY.  I couldnt wear them:  do you think my skin's as thick as
your customers' hides?  I'd as soon have dressed myself in a nutmeg
grater.

JOHNNY.  Pity your father didnt give your thin skin a jolly good
lacing with a cane--!

BENTLEY.  Pity you havnt got more than one idea!  If you want to know,
they did try that on me once, when I was a small kid.  A silly
governess did it.  I yelled fit to bring down the house and went into
convulsions and brain fever and that sort of thing for three weeks.
So the old girl got the sack; and serve her right!  After that, I was
let do what I like.  My father didnt want me to grow up a
broken-spirited spaniel, which is your idea of a man, I suppose.

JOHNNY.  Jolly good thing for you that my father made you come into
the office and shew what you were made of.  And it didnt come to much:
let me tell you that.  When the Governor asked me where I thought we
ought to put you, I said, "Make him the Office Boy."  The Governor
said you were too green.  And so you were.

BENTLEY.  I daresay.  So would you be pretty green if you were shoved
into my father's set.  I picked up your silly business in a fortnight.
Youve been at it ten years; and you havnt picked it up yet.

JOHNNY.  Dont talk rot, child.  You know you simply make me pity you.

BENTLEY.  "Romance of Business" indeed!  The real romance of
Tarleton's business is the story that you understand anything about
it.  You never could explain any mortal thing about it to me when I
asked you.  "See what was done the last time":  that was the beginning
and the end of your wisdom.  Youre nothing but a turnspit.

JOHNNY.  A what!

BENTLEY.  A turnspit.  If your father hadnt made a roasting jack for
you to turn, youd be earning twenty-four shillings a week behind a
counter.

JOHNNY.  If you dont take that back and apologize for your bad
manners, I'll give you as good a hiding as ever--

BENTLEY.  Help!  Johnny's beating me!  Oh!  Murder!  _[He throws
himself on the ground, uttering piercing yells]._

JOHNNY.  Dont be a fool.  Stop that noise, will you.  I'm not going to
touch you.  Sh--sh--

_Hypatia rushes in through the inner door, followed by Mrs Tarleton,
and throws herself on her knees by Bentley.  Mrs Tarleton, whose knees
are stiffer, bends over him and tries to lift him.  Mrs Tarleton is a
shrewd and motherly old lady who has been pretty in her time, and is
still very pleasant and likeable and unaffected.  Hypatia is a typical
English girl of a sort never called typical:  that is, she has an
opaque white skin, black hair, large dark eyes with black brows and
lashes, curved lips, swift glances and movements that flash out of a
waiting stillness, boundless energy and audacity held in leash._

HYPATIA.  _[pouncing on Bentley with no very gentle hand]_  Bentley:
whats the matter?  Dont cry like that:  whats the use?  Whats
happened?

MRS TARLETON.  Are you ill, child?  _[They get him up.]_  There, there,
pet!  It's all right:  dont cry _[they put him into a chair]_:  there!
there! there!  Johnny will go for the doctor; and he'll give you
something nice to make it well.

HYPATIA.  What has happened, Johnny?

MRS TARLETON.  Was it a wasp?

BENTLEY.  _[impatiently]_  Wasp be dashed!

MRS TARLETON.  Oh Bunny! that was a naughty word.

BENTLEY.  Yes, I know:  I beg your pardon.  _[He rises, and extricates
himself from them]_  Thats all right.  Johnny frightened me.  You know
how easy it is to hurt me; and I'm too small to defend myself against
Johnny.

MRS TARLETON.  Johnny:  how often have I told you that you must not
bully the little ones.  I thought youd outgrown all that.

HYPATIA.  _[angrily]_  I do declare, mamma, that Johnny's brutality
makes it impossible to live in the house with him.

JOHNNY.  _[deeply hurt]_  It's twenty-seven years, mother, since you
had that row with me for licking Robert and giving Hypatia a black eye
because she bit me.  I promised you then that I'd never raise my hand
to one of them again; and Ive never broken my word.  And now because
this young whelp begins to cry out before he's hurt, you treat me as
if I were a brute and a savage.

MRS TARLETON.  No dear, not a savage; but you know you must not call
our visitor naughty names.

BENTLEY.  Oh, let him alone--

JOHNNY.  _[fiercely]_  Dont you interfere between my mother and me:
d'y' hear?

HYPATIA.  Johnny's lost his temper, mother.  We'd better go.  Come,
Bentley.

MRS TARLETON.  Yes:  that will be best.  _[To Bentley]_  Johnny doesnt
mean any harm, dear:  he'll be himself presently.  Come.

_The two ladies go out through the inner door with Bentley, who turns
at the door to grin at Johnny as he goes out._

_Johnny, left alone, clenches his fists and grinds his teeth, but can
find no relief in that way for his rage.  After choking and stamping
for a moment, he makes for the vestibule door.  It opens before he
reaches it; and Lord Summerhays comes in.  Johnny glares at him,
speechless.  Lord Summerhays takes in the situation, and quickly takes
the punchbowl from the sideboard and offers it to Johnny._

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Smash it.  Dont hesitate:  it's an ugly thing.
Smash it:  hard.  _[Johnny, with a stifled yell, dashes it in pieces,
and then sits down and mops his brow]._  Feel better now?  _[Johnny
nods]._  I know only one person alive who could drive me to the point
of having either to break china or commit murder; and that person is
my son Bentley.  Was it he?  _[Johnny nods again, not yet able to
speak]._  As the car stopped I heard a yell which is only too familiar
to me.  It generally means that some infuriated person is trying to
thrash Bentley.  Nobody has ever succeeded, though almost everybody
has tried.  _[He seats himself comfortably close to the writing table,
and sets to work to collect the fragments of the punchbowl in the
wastepaper basket whilst Johnny, with diminishing difficulty, collects
himself]._  Bentley is a problem which I confess I have never been
able to solve.  He was born to be a great success at the age of fifty.
Most Englishmen of his class seem to be born to be great successes at
the age of twenty-four at most.  The domestic problem for me is how to
endure Bentley until he is fifty.  The problem for the nation is how
to get itself governed by men whose growth is arrested when they are
little more than college lads.  Bentley doesnt really mean to be
offensive.  You can always make him cry by telling him you dont like
him.  Only, he cries so loud that the experiment should be made in the
open air:  in the middle of Salisbury Plain if possible.  He has a
hard and penetrating intellect and a remarkable power of looking facts
in the face; but unfortunately, being very young, he has no idea of
how very little of that sort of thing most of us can stand.  On the
other hand, he is frightfully sensitive and even affectionate; so that
he probably gets as much as he gives in the way of hurt feelings.
Youll excuse me rambling on like this about my son.

JOHNNY.  _[who has pulled himself together]_  You did it on purpose.
I wasnt quite myself:  I needed a moment to pull round:  thank you.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Not at all.  Is your father at home?

JOHNNY.  No:  he's opening one of his free libraries.  Thats another
nice little penny gone.  He's mad on reading.  He promised another
free library last week.  It's ruinous.  Itll hit you as well as me
when Bunny marries Hypatia.  When all Hypatia's money is thrown away
on libraries, where will Bunny come in?  Cant you stop him?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I'm afraid not.  Hes a perfect whirlwind.
Indefatigable at public work.  Wonderful man, I think.

JOHNNY.  Oh, public work!  He does too much of it.  It's really a sort
of laziness, getting away from your own serious business to amuse
yourself with other people's.  Mind:  I dont say there isnt another
side to it.  It has its value as an advertisement.  It makes useful
acquaintances and leads to valuable business connections.  But it
takes his mind off the main chance; and he overdoes it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  The danger of public business is that it never ends.
A man may kill himself at it.

JOHNNY.  Or he can spend more on it than it brings him in:  thats how
I look at it.  What I say is that everybody's business is nobody's
business.  I hope I'm not a hard man, nor a narrow man, nor unwilling
to pay reasonable taxes, and subscribe in reason to deserving
charities, and even serve on a jury in my turn; and no man can say I
ever refused to help a friend out of a difficulty when he was worth
helping.  But when you ask me to go beyond that, I tell you frankly I
dont see it.  I never did see it, even when I was only a boy, and had
to pretend to take in all the ideas the Governor fed me up with.  I
didnt see it; and I dont see it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  There is certainly no business reason why you should
take more than your share of the world's work.

JOHNNY.  So I say.  It's really a great encouragement to me to find
you agree with me.  For of course if nobody agrees with you, how are
you to know that youre not a fool?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Quite so.

JOHNNY.  I wish youd talk to him about it.  It's no use my saying
anything:  I'm a child to him still:  I have no influence.  Besides,
you know how to handle men.  See how you handled me when I was making
a fool of myself about Bunny!

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Not at all.

JOHNNY.  Oh yes I was:  I know I was.  Well, if my blessed father had
come in he'd have told me to control myself.  As if I was losing my
temper on purpose!

_Bentley returns, newly washed.  He beams when he sees his father, and
comes affectionately behind him and pats him on the shoulders._

BENTLEY.  Hel-lo, commander! have you come?  Ive been making a filthy
silly ass of myself here.  I'm awfully sorry, Johnny, old chap:  I beg
your pardon.  Why dont you kick me when I go on like that?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  As we came through Godalming I thought I heard some
yelling--

BENTLEY.  I should think you did.  Johnny was rather rough on me,
though.  He told me nobody here liked me; and I was silly enough to
believe him.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  And all the women have been kissing you and pitying
you ever since to stop your crying, I suppose.  Baby!

BENTLEY.  I did cry.  But I always feel good after crying:  it
relieves my wretched nerves.  I feel perfectly jolly now.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Not at all ashamed of yourself, for instance?

BENTLEY.  If I started being ashamed of myself I shouldnt have time
for anything else all my life.  I say:  I feel very fit and spry.
Lets all go down and meet the Grand Cham.  _[He goes to the hatstand
and takes down his hat]._

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Does Mr Tarleton like to be called the Grand Cham,
do you think, Bentley?

BENTLEY.  Well, he thinks hes too modest for it.  He calls himself
Plain John.  But you cant call him that in his own office:  besides,
it doesnt suit him:  it's not flamboyant enough.

JOHNNY.  Flam what?

BENTLEY.  Flamboyant.  Lets go and meet him.  Hes telephoned from
Guildford to say hes on the road.  The dear old son is always
telephoning or telegraphing:  he thinks hes hustling along like
anything when hes only sending unnecessary messages.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Thank you:  I should prefer a quiet afternoon.

BENTLEY.  Right O.  I shant press Johnny:  hes had enough of me for
one week-end.  _[He goes out through the pavilion into the grounds]._

JOHNNY.  Not a bad idea, that.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  What?

JOHNNY.  Going to meet the Governor.  You know you wouldnt think it;
but the Governor likes Bunny rather.  And Bunny is cultivating it.  I
shouldnt be surprised if he thought he could squeeze me out one of
these days.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  You dont say so!  Young rascal!  I want to consult
you about him, if you dont mind.  Shall we stroll over to the Gibbet?
Bentley is too fast for me as a walking companion; but I should like a
short turn.

JOHNNY.  _[rising eagerly, highly flattered]_  Right you are.  Thatll
suit me down to the ground.  _[He takes a Panama and stick from the
hat stand]._

_Mrs Tarleton and Hypatia come back just as the two men are going out.
Hypatia salutes Summerhays from a distance with an enigmatic lift of
her eyelids in his direction and a demure nod before she sits down at
the worktable and busies herself with her needle.  Mrs Tarleton,
hospitably fussy, goes over to him._

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, Lord Summerhays, I didnt know you were here.  Wont
you have some tea?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  No, thank you:  I'm not allowed tea.  And I'm
ashamed to say Ive knocked over your beautiful punch-bowl.  You must
let me replace it.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, it doesnt matter:  I'm only too glad to be rid of
it.  The shopman told me it was in the best taste; but when my poor
old nurse Martha got cataract, Bunny said it was a merciful provision
of Nature to prevent her seeing our china.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[gravely]_  That was exceedingly rude of Bentley,
Mrs Tarleton.  I hope you told him so.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, bless you!  I dont care what he says; so long as he
says it to me and not before visitors.

JOHNNY.  We're going out for a stroll, mother.

MRS TARLETON.  All right:  dont let us keep you.  Never mind about
that crock:  I'll get the girl to come and take the pieces away.
_[Recollecting herself]_  There!  Ive done it again!

JOHNNY.  Done what?

MRS TARLETON.  Called her the girl.  You know, Lord Summerhays, its a
funny thing; but now I'm getting old, I'm dropping back into all the
ways John and I had when we had barely a hundred a year.  You should
have known me when I was forty!  I talked like a duchess; and if
Johnny or Hypatia let slip a word that was like old times, I was down
on them like anything.  And now I'm beginning to do it myself at every
turn.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  There comes a time when all that seems to matter so
little.  Even queens drop the mask when they reach our time of life.

MRS TARLETON.  Let you alone for giving a thing a pretty turn!  Youre
a humbug, you know, Lord Summerhays.  John doesnt know it; and Johnny
doesnt know it; but you and I know it, dont we?  Now thats something
that even you cant answer; so be off with you for your walk without
another word.

_Lord Summerhays smiles; bows; and goes out through the vestibule
door, followed by Johnny.  Mrs Tarleton sits down at the worktable and
takes out her darning materials and one of her husband's socks.
Hypatia is at the other side of the table, on her mother's right.
They chat as they work._

HYPATIA.  I wonder whether they laugh at us when they are by
themselves!

MRS TARLETON.  Who?

HYPATIA.  Bentley and his father and all the toffs in their set.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, thats only their way.  I used to think that the
aristocracy were a nasty sneering lot, and that they were laughing at
me and John.  Theyre always giggling and pretending not to care much
about anything.  But you get used to it:  theyre the same to one
another and to everybody.  Besides, what does it matter what they
think?  It's far worse when theyre civil, because that always means
that they want you to lend them money; and you must never do that,
Hypatia, because they never pay.  How can they?  They dont make
anything, you see.  Of course, if you can make up your mind to regard
it as a gift, thats different; but then they generally ask you again;
and you may as well say no first as last.  You neednt be afraid of the
aristocracy, dear:  theyre only human creatures like ourselves after
all; and youll hold your own with them easy enough.

HYPATIA.  Oh, I'm not a bit afraid of them, I assure you.

MRS TARLETON.  Well, no, not afraid of them, exactly; but youve got to
pick up their ways.  You know, dear, I never quite agreed with your
father's notion of keeping clear of them, and sending you to a school
that was so expensive that they couldnt afford to send their daughters
there; so that all the girls belonged to big business families like
ourselves.  It takes all sorts to make a world; and I wanted you to
see a little of all sorts.  When you marry Bunny, and go among the
women of his father's set, theyll shock you at first.

HYPATIA.  _[incredulously]_  How?

MRS TARLETON.  Well, the things they talk about.

HYPATIA.  Oh! scandalmongering?

MRS TARLETON.  Oh no:  we all do that:  thats only human nature.  But
you know theyve no notion of decency.  I shall never forget the first
day I spent with a marchioness, two duchesses, and no end of Ladies
This and That.  Of course it was only a committee:  theyd put me on to
get a big subscription out of John.  I'd never heard such talk in my
life.  The things they mentioned!  And it was the marchioness that
started it.

HYPATIA.  What sort of things?

MRS TARLETON.  Drainage!!  She'd tried three systems in her castle;
and she was going to do away with them all and try another.  I didnt
know which way to look when she began talking about it:  I thought
theyd all have got up and gone out of the room.  But not a bit of it,
if you please.  They were all just as bad as she.  They all had
systems; and each of them swore by her own system.  I sat there with
my cheeks burning until one of the duchesses, thinking I looked out of
it, I suppose, asked me what system I had.  I said I was sure I knew
nothing about such things, and hadnt we better change the subject.
Then the fat was in the fire, I can tell you.  There was a regular
terror of a countess with an anaerobic system; and she told me,
downright brutally, that I'd better learn something about them before
my children died of diphtheria.  That was just two months after I'd
buried poor little Bobby; and that was the very thing he died of, poor
little lamb!  I burst out crying:  I couldnt help it.  It was as good
as telling me I'd killed my own child.  I had to go away; but before I
was out of the door one of the duchesses--quite a young woman--began
talking about what sour milk did in her inside and how she expected to
live to be over a hundred if she took it regularly.  And me listening
to her, that had never dared to think that a duchess could have
anything so common as an inside!  I shouldnt have minded if it had
been children's insides:  we have to talk about them.  But grown-up
people!  I was glad to get away that time.

HYPATIA.  There was a physiology and hygiene class started at school;
but of course none of our girls were let attend it.

MRS TARLETON.  If it had been an aristocratic school plenty would have
attended it.  Thats what theyre like:  theyve nasty minds.  With
really nice good women a thing is either decent or indecent; and if
it's indecent, we just dont mention it or pretend to know about it;
and theres an end of it.  But all the aristocracy cares about is
whether it can get any good out of the thing.  Theyre what Johnny
calls cynical-like.  And of course nobody can say a word to them for
it.  Theyre so high up that they can do and say what they like.

HYPATIA.  Well, I think they might leave the drains to their husbands.
I shouldnt think much of a man that left such things to me.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, dont think that, dear, whatever you do.  I never
let on about it to you; but it's me that takes care of the drainage
here.  After what that countess said to me I wasnt going to lose
another child or trust John.  And I don't want my grandchildren to die
any more than my children.

HYPATIA.  Do you think Bentley will ever be as big a man as his
father?  I dont mean clever:  I mean big and strong.

MRS TARLETON.  Not he.  Hes overbred, like one of those expensive
little dogs.  I like a bit of a mongrel myself, whether it's a man or
a dog:  theyre the best for everyday.  But we all have our tastes:
whats one woman's meat is another woman's poison.  Bunny's a dear
little fellow; but I never could have fancied him for a husband when I
was your age.

HYPATIA.  Yes; but he has some brains.  Hes not like all the rest.
One can't have everything.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, youre quite right, dear:  quite right.  It's a
great thing to have brains:  look what it's done for your father!
Thats the reason I never said a word when you jilted poor Jerry
Mackintosh.

HYPATIA.  _[excusing herself]_  I really couldnt stick it out with
Jerry, mother.  I know you liked him; and nobody can deny that hes a
splendid animal--

MRS TARLETON.  _[shocked]_  Hypatia!  How can you!  The things that
girls say nowadays!

HYPATIA.  Well, what else can you call him?  If I'd been deaf or he'd
been dumb, I could have married him.  But living with father, Ive got
accustomed to cleverness.  Jerry would drive me mad:  you know very
well hes a fool:  even Johnny thinks him a fool.

MRS TARLETON.  _[up in arms at once in defence of her boy]_  Now dont
begin about my Johnny.  You know it annoys me.  Johnny's as clever as
anybody else in his own way.  I dont say hes as clever as you in some
ways; but hes a man, at all events, and not a little squit of a thing
like your Bunny.

HYPATIA.  Oh, I say nothing against your darling:  we all know
Johnny's perfection.

MRS TARLETON.  Dont be cross, dearie.  You let Johnny alone; and I'll
let Bunny alone.  I'm just as bad as you.  There!

HYPATIA.  Oh, I dont mind your saying that about Bentley.  It's true.
He is a little squit of a thing.  I wish he wasnt.  But who else is
there?  Think of all the other chances Ive had!  Not one of them has
as much brains in his whole body as Bentley has in his little finger.
Besides, theyve no distinction.  It's as much as I can do to tell one
from the other.  They wouldnt even have money if they werent the sons
of their fathers, like Johnny.  Whats a girl to do?  I never met
anybody like Bentley before.  He may be small; but hes the best of the
bunch:  you cant deny that.

MRS TARLETON.  _[with a sigh]_  Well, my pet, if you fancy him, theres
no more to be said.

_A pause follows this remark:  the two women sewing silently._

HYPATIA.  Mother:  do you think marriage is as much a question of
fancy as it used to be in your time and father's?

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, it wasnt much fancy with me, dear:  your father
just wouldnt take no for an answer; and I was only too glad to be his
wife instead of his shop-girl.  Still, it's curious; but I had more
choice than you in a way, because, you see, I was poor; and there are
so many more poor men than rich ones that I might have had more of a
pick, as you might say, if John hadnt suited me.

HYPATIA.  I can imagine all sorts of men I could fall in love with;
but I never seem to meet them.  The real ones are too small, like
Bunny, or too silly, like Jerry.  Of course one can get into a state
about any man:  fall in love with him if you like to call it that.
But who would risk marrying a man for love?  _I_ shouldnt.  I remember
three girls at school who agreed that the one man you should never
marry was the man you were in love with, because it would make a
perfect slave of you.  Theres a sort of instinct against it, I think,
thats just as strong as the other instinct.  One of them, to my
certain knowledge, refused a man she was in love with, and married
another who was in love with her; and it turned out very well.

MRS TARLETON.  Does all that mean that youre not in love with Bunny?

HYPATIA.  Oh, how could anybody be in love with Bunny?  I like him to
kiss me just as I like a baby to kiss me.  I'm fond of him; and he
never bores me; and I see that hes very clever; but I'm not what you
call gone about him, if thats what you mean.

MRS TARLETON.  Then why need you marry him?

HYPATIA.  What better can I do?  I must marry somebody, I suppose.
Ive realized that since I was twenty-three.  I always used to take it
as a matter of course that I should be married before I was twenty.

BENTLEY'S VOICE.  _[in the garden]_  Youve got to keep yourself fresh:
to look at these things with an open mind.

JOHN TARLETON'S VOICE.  Quite right, quite right:  I always say so.

MRS TARLETON.  Theres your father, and Bunny with him.

BENTLEY.  Keep young.  Keep your eye on me.  Thats the tip for you.

_Bentley and Mr Tarleton (an immense and genial veteran of trade) come
into view and enter the pavilion._

JOHN TARLETON.  You think youre young, do you?  You think I'm old?
_[energetically shaking off his motoring coat and hanging it up with
his cap]._

BENTLEY.  _[helping him with the coat]_  Of course youre old.  Look at
your face and look at mine.  What you call your youth is nothing but
your levity.  Why do we get on so well together?  Because I'm a young
cub and youre an old josser.  _[He throws a cushion at Hypatia's feet
and sits down on it with his back against her knees]._

TARLETON.  Old!  Thats all you know about it, my lad.  How do, Patsy!
_[Hypatia kisses him]._  How is my Chickabiddy?  _[He kisses Mrs
Tarleton's hand and poses expansively in the middle of the picture]._
Look at me!  Look at these wrinkles, these gray hairs, this repulsive
mask that you call old age!  What is it?  _[Vehemently]_  I ask you,
what is it?

BENTLEY.  Jolly nice and venerable, old man.  Dont be discouraged.

TARLETON.  Nice?  Not a bit of it.  Venerable?  Venerable be blowed!
Read your Darwin, my boy.  Read your Weismann.  _[He goes to the
sideboard for a drink of lemonade]._

MRS TARLETON.  For shame, John!  Tell him to read his Bible.

TARLETON.  _[manipulating the syphon]_  Whats the use of telling
children to read the Bible when you know they wont.  I was kept away
from the Bible for forty years by being told to read it when I was
young.  Then I picked it up one evening in a hotel in Sunderland when
I had left all my papers in the train; and I found it wasnt half bad.
_[He drinks, and puts down the glass with a smack of enjoyment]._
Better than most halfpenny papers, anyhow, if only you could make
people believe it.  _[He sits down by the writing-table, near his
wife]._  But if you want to understand old age scientifically, read
Darwin and Weismann.  Of course if you want to understand it
romantically, read about Solomon.

MRS TARLETON.  Have you had tea, John?

TARLETON.  Yes.  Dont interrupt me when I'm improving the boy's mind.
Where was I?  This repulsive mask--Yes.  _[Explosively]_  What is
death?

MRS TARLETON.  John!

HYPATIA.  Death is a rather unpleasant subject, papa.

TARLETON.  Not a bit.  Not scientifically.  Scientifically it's a
delightful subject.  You think death's natural.  Well, it isnt.  You
read Weismann.  There wasnt any death to start with.  You go look in
any ditch outside and youll find swimming about there as fresh as
paint some of the identical little live cells that Adam christened in
the Garden of Eden.  But if big things like us didnt die, we'd crowd
one another off the face of the globe.  Nothing survived, sir, except
the sort of people that had the sense and good manners to die and make
room for the fresh supplies.  And so death was introduced by Natural
Selection.  You get it out of your head, my lad, that I'm going to die
because I'm wearing out or decaying.  Theres no such thing as decay to
a vital man.  I shall clear out; but I shant decay.

BENTLEY.  And what about the wrinkles and the almond tree and the
grasshopper that becomes a burden and the desire that fails?

TARLETON.  Does it? by George!  No, sir:  it spiritualizes.  As to
your grasshopper, I can carry an elephant.

MRS TARLETON.  You do say such things, Bunny!  What does he mean by
the almond tree?

TARLETON.  He means my white hairs:  the repulsive mask.  That, my
boy, is another invention of Natural Selection to disgust young women
with me, and give the lads a turn.

MRS TARLETON.  John:  I wont have it.  Thats a forbidden subject.

TARLETON.  They talk of the wickedness and vanity of women painting
their faces and wearing auburn wigs at fifty.  But why shouldnt they?
Why should a woman allow Nature to put a false mask of age on her when
she knows that shes as young as ever?  Why should she look in the
glass and see a wrinkled lie when a touch of fine art will shew her a
glorious truth?  The wrinkles are a dodge to repel young men.  Suppose
she doesnt want to repel young men!  Suppose she likes them!

MRS TARLETON.  Bunny:  take Hypatia out into the grounds for a walk:
theres a good boy.  John has got one of his naughty fits this evening.

HYPATIA.  Oh, never mind me.  I'm used to him.

BENTLEY.  I'm not.  I never heard such conversation:  I cant believe
my ears.  And mind you, this is the man who objected to my marrying
his daughter on the ground that a marriage between a member of the
great and good middle class with one of the vicious and corrupt
aristocracy would be a misalliance.  A misalliance, if you please!
This is the man Ive adopted as a father!

TARLETON.  Eh!  Whats that?  Adopted me as a father, have you?

BENTLEY.  Yes.  Thats an idea of mine.  I knew a chap named Joey
Percival at Oxford (you know I was two months at Balliol before I was
sent down for telling the old woman who was head of that silly college
what I jolly well thought of him.  He would have been glad to have me
back, too, at the end of six months; but I wouldnt go:  I just let him
want; and serve him right!)  Well, Joey was a most awfully clever
fellow, and so nice!  I asked him what made such a difference between
him and all the other pups--they were pups, if you like.  He told me
it was very simple:  they had only one father apiece; and he had
three.

MRS TARLETON.  Dont talk nonsense, child.  How could that be?

BENTLEY.  Oh, very simple.  His father--

TARLETON.  Which father?

BENTLEY.  The first one:  the regulation natural chap.  He kept a tame
philosopher in the house:  a sort of Coleridge or Herbert Spencer kind
of card, you know.  That was the second father.  Then his mother was
an Italian princess; and she had an Italian priest always about.  He
was supposed to take charge of her conscience; but from what I could
make out, she jolly well took charge of his.  The whole three of them
took charge of Joey's conscience.  He used to hear them arguing like
mad about everything.  You see, the philosopher was a freethinker, and
always believed the latest thing.  The priest didnt believe anything,
because it was sure to get him into trouble with someone or another.
And the natural father kept an open mind and believed whatever paid
him best.  Between the lot of them Joey got cultivated no end.  He
said if he could only have had three mothers as well, he'd have backed
himself against Napoleon.

TARLETON.  _[impressed]_  Thats an idea.  Thats a most interesting
idea:  a most important idea.

MRS TARLETON.  You always were one for ideas, John.

TARLETON.  Youre right, Chickabiddy.  What do I tell Johnny when he
brags about Tarleton's Underwear?  It's not the underwear.  The
underwear be hanged!  Anybody can make underwear.  Anybody can sell
underwear.  Tarleton's Ideas:  thats whats done it.  Ive often thought
of putting that up over the shop.

BENTLEY.  Take me into partnership when you do, old man.  I'm wasted
on the underwear; but I shall come in strong on the ideas.

TARLETON.  You be a good boy; and perhaps I will.

MRS TARLETON.  _[scenting a plot against her beloved Johnny]_  Now,
John:  you promised--

TARLETON.  Yes, yes.  All right, Chickabiddy:  dont fuss.  Your
precious Johnny shant be interfered with.  _[Bouncing up, too
energetic to sit still]_  But I'm getting sick of that old shop.
Thirty-five years Ive had of it:  same blessed old stairs to go up and
down every day:  same old lot:  same old game:  sorry I ever started
it now.  I'll chuck it and try something else:  something that will
give a scope to all my faculties.

HYPATIA.  Theres money in underwear:  theres none in wild-cat ideas.

TARLETON.  Theres money in me, madam, no matter what I go into.

MRS TARLETON.  Dont boast, John.  Dont tempt Providence.

TARLETON.  Rats!  You dont understand Providence.  Providence likes to
be tempted.  Thats the secret of the successful man.  Read Browning.
Natural theology on an island, eh?  Caliban was afraid to tempt
Providence:  that was why he was never able to get even with Prospero.
What did Prospero do?  Prospero didnt even tempt Providence:  he was
Providence.  Thats one of Tarleton's ideas; and dont you forget it.

BENTLEY.  You are full of beef today, old man.

TARLETON.  Beef be blowed!  Joy of life.  Read Ibsen.  _[He goes into
the pavilion to relieve his restlessness, and stares out with his
hands thrust deep in his pockets]._

HYPATIA.  _[thoughtful]_  Bentley:  couldnt you invite your friend Mr
Percival down here?

BENTLEY.  Not if I know it.  Youd throw me over the moment you set
eyes on him.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, Bunny!  For shame!

BENTLEY.  Well, who'd marry me, dyou suppose, if they could get my
brains with a full-sized body?  No, thank you.  I shall take jolly
good care to keep Joey out of this until Hypatia is past praying for.

_Johnny and Lord Summerhays return through the pavilion from their
stroll._

TARLETON.  Welcome! welcome!  Why have you stayed away so long?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[shaking hands]_  Yes:  I should have come sooner.
But I'm still rather lost in England.  _[Johnny takes his hat and
hangs it up beside his own]._  Thank you.  _[Johnny returns to his
swing and his novel.  Lord Summerhays comes to the writing table]._
The fact is that as Ive nothing to do, I never have time to go
anywhere.  _[He sits down next Mrs Tarleton]._

TARLETON.  _[following him and sitting down on his left]_  Paradox,
paradox.  Good.  Paradoxes are the only truths.  Read Chesterton.  But
theres lots for you to do here.  You have a genius for government.
You learnt your job out there in Jinghiskahn.  Well, we want to be
governed here in England.  Govern us.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Ah yes, my friend; but in Jinghiskahn you have to
govern the right way.  If you dont, you go under and come home.  Here
everything has to be done the wrong way, to suit governors who
understand nothing but partridge shooting (our English native princes,
in fact) and voters who dont know what theyre voting about.  I dont
understand these democratic games; and I'm afraid I'm too old to
learn.  What can I do but sit in the window of my club, which consists
mostly of retired Indian Civil servants?  We look on at the muddle and
the folly and amateurishness; and we ask each other where a single
fortnight of it would have landed us.

TARLETON.  Very true.  Still, Democracy's all right, you know.  Read
Mill.  Read Jefferson.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Yes.  Democracy reads well; but it doesnt act well,
like some people's plays.  No, no, my friend Tarleton:  to make
Democracy work, you need an aristocratic democracy.  To make
Aristocracy work, you need a democratic aristocracy.  Youve got
neither; and theres an end of it.

TARLETON.  Still, you know, the superman may come.  The superman's an
idea.  I believe in ideas.  Read Whatshisname.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Reading is a dangerous amusement, Tarleton.  I wish
I could persuade your free library people of that.

TARLETON.  Why, man, it's the beginning of education.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  On the contrary, it's the end of it.  How can you
dare teach a man to read until youve taught him everything else first?

JOHNNY.  _[intercepting his father's reply by coming out of the swing
and taking the floor]_  Leave it at that.  Thats good sense.  Anybody
on for a game of tennis?

BENTLEY.  Oh, lets have some more improving conversation.  Wouldnt you
rather, Johnny?

JOHNNY.  If you ask me, no.

TARLETON.  Johnny:  you dont cultivate your mind.  You dont read.

JOHNNY.  _[coming between his mother and Lord Summerhays, book in
hand]_  Yes I do.  I bet you what you like that, page for page, I read
more than you, though I dont talk about it so much.  Only, I dont read
the same books.  I like a book with a plot in it.  You like a book
with nothing in it but some idea that the chap that writes it keeps
worrying, like a cat chasing its own tail.  I can stand a little of
it, just as I can stand watching the cat for two minutes, say, when
Ive nothing better to do.  But a man soon gets fed up with that sort
of thing.  The fact is, you look on an author as a sort of god.  _I_
look on him as a man that I pay to do a certain thing for me.  I pay
him to amuse me and to take me out of myself and make me forget.

TARLETON.  No.  Wrong principle.  You want to remember.  Read Kipling.
"Lest we forget."

JOHNNY.  If Kipling wants to remember, let him remember.  If he had to
run Tarleton's Underwear, he'd be jolly glad to forget.  As he has a
much softer job, and wants to keep himself before the public, his cry
is, "Dont you forget the sort of things I'm rather clever at writing
about."  Well, I dont blame him:  it's his business:  I should do the
same in his place.  But what he wants and what I want are two
different things.  I want to forget; and I pay another man to make me
forget.  If I buy a book or go to the theatre, I want to forget the
shop and forget myself from the moment I go in to the moment I come
out.  Thats what I pay my money for.  And if I find that the author's
simply getting at me the whole time, I consider that hes obtained my
money under false pretences.  I'm not a morbid crank:  I'm a natural
man; and, as such, I dont like being got at.  If a man in my
employment did it, I should sack him.  If a member of my club did it,
I should cut him.  If he went too far with it, I should bring his
conduct before the committee.  I might even punch his head, if it came
to that.  Well, who and what is an author that he should be privileged
to take liberties that are not allowed to other men?

MRS TARLETON.  You see, John!  What have I always told you?  Johnny
has as much to say for himself as anybody when he likes.

JOHNNY.  I'm no fool, mother, whatever some people may fancy.  I dont
set up to have as many ideas as the Governor; but what ideas I have
are consecutive, at all events.  I can think as well as talk.

BENTLEY.  _[to Tarleton, chuckling]_  Had you there, old man, hadnt
he?  You are rather all over the shop with your ideas, aint you?

JOHNNY.  _[handsomely]_  I'm not saying anything against you,
Governor.  But I do say that the time has come for sane, healthy,
unpretending men like me to make a stand against this conspiracy of
the writing and talking and artistic lot to put us in the back row.
It isnt a fact that we're inferior to them:  it's a put-up job; and
it's they that have put the job up.  It's we that run the country for
them; and all the thanks we get is to be told we're Philistines and
vulgar tradesmen and sordid city men and so forth, and that theyre all
angels of light and leading.  The time has come to assert ourselves
and put a stop to their stuck-up nonsense.  Perhaps if we had nothing
better to do than talking or writing, we could do it better than they.
Anyhow, theyre the failures and refuse of business (hardly a man of
them that didnt begin in an office) and we're the successes of it.
Thank God I havnt failed yet at anything; and I dont believe I should
fail at literature if it would pay me to turn my hand to it.

BENTLEY.  Hear, hear!

MRS TARLETON.  Fancy you writing a book, Johnny!  Do you think he
could, Lord Summerhays?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Why not?  As a matter of fact all the really
prosperous authors I have met since my return to England have been
very like him.

TARLETON.  _[again impressed]_  Thats an idea.  Thats a new idea.  I
believe I ought to have made Johnny an author.  Ive never said so
before for fear of hurting his feelings, because, after all, the lad
cant help it; but Ive never thought Johnny worth tuppence as a man of
business.

JOHNNY.  _[sarcastic]_  Oh!  You think youve always kept that to
yourself, do you, Governor?  I know your opinion of me as well as you
know it yourself.  It takes one man of business to appreciate another;
and you arnt, and you never have been, a real man of business.  I know
where Tarleton's would have been three of four times if it hadnt been
for me.  _[With a snort and a nod to emphasize the implied warning, he
retreats to the Turkish bath, and lolls against it with an air of
good-humoured indifference]._

TARLETON.  Well, who denies it?  Youre quite right, my boy.  I don't
mind confessing to you all that the circumstances that condemned me to
keep a shop are the biggest tragedy in modern life.  I ought to have
been a writer.  I'm essentially a man of ideas.  When I was a young
man I sometimes used to pray that I might fail, so that I should be
justified in giving up business and doing something:  something
first-class.  But it was no good:  I couldnt fail.  I said to myself
that if I could only once go to my Chickabiddy here and shew her a
chartered accountant's statement proving that I'd made 20 pounds less
than last year, I could ask her to let me chance Johnny's and
Hypatia's future by going into literature.  But it was no good.  First
it was 250 pounds more than last year.  Then it was 700 pounds.  Then
it was 2000 pounds.  Then I saw it was no use:  Prometheus was chained
to his rock:  read Shelley:  read Mrs Browning.  Well, well, it was
not to be.  _[He rises solemnly]._  Lord Summerhays:  I ask you to
excuse me for a few moments.  There are times when a man needs to
meditate in solitude on his destiny.  A chord is touched; and he sees
the drama of his life as a spectator sees a play.  Laugh if you feel
inclined:  no man sees the comic side of it more than I.  In the
theatre of life everyone may be amused except the actor.
_[Brightening]_  Theres an idea in this:  an idea for a picture.  What
a pity young Bentley is not a painter!  Tarleton meditating on his
destiny.  Not in a toga.  Not in the trappings of the tragedian or the
philosopher.  In plain coat and trousers:  a man like any other man.
And beneath that coat and trousers a human soul.  Tarleton's
Underwear!  _[He goes out gravely into the vestibule]._

MRS TARLETON.  _[fondly]_  I suppose it's a wife's partiality, Lord
Summerhays; but I do think John is really great.  I'm sure he was
meant to be a king.  My father looked down on John, because he was a
rate collector, and John kept a shop.  It hurt his pride to have to
borrow money so often from John; and he used to console himself by
saying, "After all, he's only a linendraper."  But at last one day he
said to me, "John is a king."

BENTLEY.  How much did he borrow on that occasion?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[sharply]_  Bentley!

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, dont scold the child:  he'd have to say something
like that if it was to be his last word on earth.  Besides, hes quite
right:  my poor father had asked for his usual five pounds; and John
gave him a hundred in his big way.  Just like a king.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Not at all.  I had five kings to manage in
Jinghiskahn; and I think you do your husband some injustice, Mrs
Tarleton.  They pretended to like me because I kept their brothers
from murdering them; but I didnt like them.  And I like Tarleton.

MRS TARLETON.  Everybody does.  I really must go and make the cook do
him a Welsh rabbit.  He expects one on special occasions.  _[She goes
to the inner door]._  Johnny:  when he comes back ask him where we're
to put that new Turkish bath.  Turkish baths are his latest.  _[She
goes out]._

JOHNNY.  _[coming forward again]_  Now that the Governor has given
himself away, and the old lady's gone, I'll tell you something, Lord
Summerhays.  If you study men whove made an enormous pile in business
without being keen on money, youll find that they all have a slate
off.  The Governor's a wonderful man; but hes not quite all there, you
know.  If you notice, hes different from me; and whatever my failings
may be, I'm a sane man.  Erratic:  thats what he is.  And the danger
is that some day he'll give the whole show away.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Giving the show away is a method like any other
method.  Keeping it to yourself is only another method.  I should keep
an open mind about it.

JOHNNY.  Has it ever occurred to you that a man with an open mind must
be a bit of a scoundrel?  If you ask me, I like a man who makes up his
mind once for all as to whats right and whats wrong and then sticks to
it.  At all events you know where to have him.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  That may not be his object.

BENTLEY.  He may want to have you, old chap.

JOHNNY.  Well, let him.  If a member of my club wants to steal my
umbrella, he knows where to find it.  If a man put up for the club who
had an open mind on the subject of property in umbrellas, I should
blackball him.  An open mind is all very well in clever talky-talky;
but in conduct and in business give me solid ground.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Yes:  the quicksands make life difficult.  Still,
there they are.  It's no use pretending theyre rocks.

JOHNNY.  I dont know.  You can draw a line and make other chaps toe
it.  Thats what I call morality.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Very true.  But you dont make any progress when
youre toeing a line.

HYPATIA.  _[suddenly, as if she could bear no more of it]_  Bentley:
do go and play tennis with Johnny.  You must take exercise.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Do, my boy, do.  _[To Johnny]_  Take him out and
make him skip about.

BENTLEY.  _[rising reluctantly]_  I promised you two inches more round
my chest this summer.  I tried exercises with an indiarubber expander;
but I wasnt strong enough:  instead of my expanding it, it crumpled me
up.  Come along, Johnny.

JOHNNY.  Do you no end of good, young chap.  _[He goes out with
Bentley through the pavilion]._

_Hypatia throws aside her work with an enormous sigh of relief._

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  At last!

HYPATIA.  At last.  Oh, if I might only have a holiday in an asylum
for the dumb.  How I envy the animals!  They cant talk.  If Johnny
could only put back his ears or wag his tail instead of laying down
the law, how much better it would be!  We should know when he was
cross and when he was pleased; and thats all we know now, with all his
talk.  It never stops:  talk, talk, talk, talk.  Thats my life.  All
the day I listen to mamma talking; at dinner I listen to papa talking;
and when papa stops for breath I listen to Johnny talking.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  You make me feel very guilty.  I talk too, I'm
afraid.

HYPATIA.  Oh, I dont mind that, because your talk is a novelty.  But
it must have been dreadful for your daughters.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I suppose so.

HYPATIA.  If parents would only realize how they bore their children!
Three or four times in the last half hour Ive been on the point of
screaming.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Were we very dull?

HYPATIA.  Not at all:  you were very clever.  Thats whats so hard to
bear, because it makes it so difficult to avoid listening.  You see,
I'm young; and I do so want something to happen.  My mother tells me
that when I'm her age, I shall be only too glad that nothing's
happened; but I'm not her age; so what good is that to me?  Theres my
father in the garden, meditating on his destiny.  All very well for
him:  hes had a destiny to meditate on; but I havnt had any destiny
yet.  Everything's happened to him:  nothing's happened to me.  Thats
why this unending talk is so maddeningly uninteresting to me.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It would be worse if we sat in silence.

HYPATIA.  No it wouldnt.  If you all sat in silence, as if you were
waiting for something to happen, then there would be hope even if
nothing did happen.  But this eternal cackle, cackle, cackle about
things in general is only fit for old, old, OLD people.  I suppose it
means something to them:  theyve had their fling.  All I listen for is
some sign of it ending in something; but just when it seems to be
coming to a point, Johnny or papa just starts another hare; and it all
begins over again; and I realize that it's never going to lead
anywhere and never going to stop.  Thats when I want to scream.  I
wonder how you can stand it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Well, I'm old and garrulous myself, you see.
Besides, I'm not here of my own free will, exactly.  I came because
you ordered me to come.

HYPATIA.  Didnt you want to come?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  My dear:  after thirty years of managing other
people's business, men lose the habit of considering what they want or
dont want.

HYPATIA.  Oh, dont begin to talk about what men do, and about thirty
years experience.  If you cant get off that subject, youd better send
for Johnny and papa and begin it all over again.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I'm sorry.  I beg your pardon.

HYPATIA.  I asked you, didnt you want to come?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I did not stop to consider whether I wanted or not,
because when I read your letter I knew I had to come.

HYPATIA.  Why?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Oh come, Miss Tarleton!  Really, really!  Dont force
me to call you a blackmailer to your face.  You have me in your power;
and I do what you tell me very obediently.  Dont ask me to pretend I
do it of my own free will.

HYPATIA.  I dont know what a blackmailer is.  I havnt even that much
experience.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  A blackmailer, my dear young lady, is a person who
knows a disgraceful secret in the life of another person, and extorts
money from that other person by threatening to make his secret public
unless the money is paid.

HYPATIA.  I havnt asked you for money.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  No; but you asked me to come down here and talk to
you; and you mentioned casually that if I didnt youd have nobody to
talk about me to but Bentley.  That was a threat, was it not?

HYPATIA.  Well, I wanted you to come.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  In spite of my age and my unfortunate talkativeness?

HYPATIA.  I like talking to you.  I can let myself go with you.  I can
say things to you I cant say to other people.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I wonder why?

HYPATIA.  Well, you are the only really clever, grown-up, high-class,
experienced man I know who has given himself away to me by making an
utter fool of himself with me.  You cant wrap yourself up in your toga
after that.  You cant give yourself airs with me.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  You mean you can tell Bentley about me if I do.

HYPATIA.  Even if there wasnt any Bentley:  even if you didnt care
(and I really dont see why you should care so much) still, we never
could be on conventional terms with one another again.  Besides, Ive
got a feeling for you:  almost a ghastly sort of love for you.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[shrinking]_  I beg you--no, please.

HYPATIA.  Oh, it's nothing at all flattering:  and, of course, nothing
wrong, as I suppose youd call it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Please believe that I know that.  When men of my
age--

HYPATIA.  _[impatiently]_  Oh, do talk about yourself when you mean
yourself, and not about men of your age.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I'll put it as bluntly as I can.  When, as you say,
I made an utter fool of myself, believe me, I made a poetic fool of
myself.  I was seduced, not by appetites which, thank Heaven, Ive long
outlived:  not even by the desire of second childhood for a child
companion, but by the innocent impulse to place the delicacy and
wisdom and spirituality of my age at the affectionate service of your
youth for a few years, at the end of which you would be a grown,
strong, formed--widow.  Alas, my dear, the delicacy of age reckoned,
as usual, without the derision and cruelty of youth.  You told me that
you didnt want to be an old man's nurse, and that you didnt want to
have undersized children like Bentley.  It served me right:  I dont
reproach you:  I was an old fool.  But how you can imagine, after
that, that I can suspect you of the smallest feeling for me except the
inevitable feeling of early youth for late age, or imagine that I have
any feeling for you except one of shrinking humiliation, I cant
understand.

HYPATIA.  I dont blame you for falling in love with me.  I shall be
grateful to you all my life for it, because that was the first time
that anything really interesting happened to me.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Do you mean to tell me that nothing of that kind had
ever happened before? that no man had ever--

HYPATIA.  Oh, lots.  Thats part of the routine of life here:  the very
dullest part of it.  The young man who comes a-courting is as familiar
an incident in my life as coffee for breakfast.  Of course, hes too
much of a gentleman to misbehave himself; and I'm too much of a lady
to let him; and hes shy and sheepish; and I'm correct and
self-possessed; and at last, when I can bear it no longer, I either
frighten him off, or give him a chance of proposing, just to see how
he'll do it, and refuse him because he does it in the same silly way
as all the rest.  You dont call that an event in one's life, do you?
With you it was different.  I should as soon have expected the North
Pole to fall in love with me as you.  You know I'm only a
linen-draper's daughter when all's said.  I was afraid of you:  you, a
great man! a lord! and older than my father.  And then what a
situation it was!  Just think of it!  I was engaged to your son; and
you knew nothing about it.  He was afraid to tell you:  he brought you
down here because he thought if he could throw us together I could get
round you because I was such a ripping girl.  We arranged it all:  he
and I.  We got Papa and Mamma and Johnny out of the way splendidly;
and then Bentley took himself off, and left us--you and me!--to take a
walk through the heather and admire the scenery of Hindhead.  You
never dreamt that it was all a plan:  that what made me so nice was
the way I was playing up to my destiny as the sweet girl that was to
make your boy happy.  And then! and then!  _[She rises to dance and
clap her hands in her glee]._

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[shuddering]_  Stop, stop.  Can no woman understand
a man's delicacy?

HYPATIA.  _[revelling in the recollection]_  And then--ha, ha!--you
proposed.  You!  A father!  For your son's girl!

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Stop, I tell you.  Dont profane what you dont
understand.

HYPATIA.  That was something happening at last with a vengeance.  It
was splendid.  It was my first peep behind the scenes.  If I'd been
seventeen I should have fallen in love with you.  Even as it is, I
feel quite differently towards you from what I do towards other old
men.  So _[offering her hand]_ you may kiss my hand if that will be
any fun for you.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[rising and recoiling to the table, deeply
revolted]_  No, no, no.  How dare you?  _[She laughs mischievously]._
How callous youth is!  How coarse!  How cynical!  How ruthlessly
cruel!

HYPATIA.  Stuff!  It's only that youre tired of a great many things
Ive never tried.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It's not alone that.  Ive not forgotten the
brutality of my own boyhood.  But do try to learn, glorious young
beast that you are, that age is squeamish, sentimental, fastidious.
If you cant understand my holier feelings, at least you know the
bodily infirmities of the old.  You know that I darent eat all the
rich things you gobble up at every meal; that I cant bear the noise
and racket and clatter that affect you no more than they affect a
stone.  Well, my soul is like that too.  Spare it:  be gentle with it
_[he involuntarily puts out his hands to plead:  she takes them with a
laugh]._  If you could possibly think of me as half an angel and half
an invalid, we should get on much better together.

HYPATIA.  We get on very well, I think.  Nobody else ever called me a
glorious young beast.  I like that.  Glorious young beast expresses
exactly what I like to be.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[extricating his hands and sitting down]_  Where on
earth did you get these morbid tastes?  You seem to have been well
brought up in a normal, healthy, respectable, middle-class family.
Yet you go on like the most unwholesome product of the rankest
Bohemianism.

HYPATIA.  Thats just it.  I'm fed up with--

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Horrible expression.  Dont.

HYPATIA.  Oh, I daresay it's vulgar; but theres no other word for it.
I'm fed up with nice things:  with respectability, with propriety!
When a woman has nothing to do, money and respectability mean that
nothing is ever allowed to happen to her.  I dont want to be good; and
I dont want to be bad:  I just dont want to be bothered about either
good or bad:  I want to be an active verb.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  An active verb?  Oh, I see.  An active verb
signifies to be, to do, or to suffer.

HYPATIA.  Just so:  how clever of you!  I want to be; I want to do;
and I'm game to suffer if it costs that.  But stick here doing nothing
but being good and nice and ladylike I simply wont.  Stay down here
with us for a week; and I'll shew you what it means:  shew it to you
going on day after day, year after year, lifetime after lifetime.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Shew me what?

HYPATIA.  Girls withering into ladies.  Ladies withering into old
maids.  Nursing old women.  Running errands for old men.  Good for
nothing else at last.  Oh, you cant imagine the fiendish selfishness
of the old people and the maudlin sacrifice of the young.
It's more unbearable than any poverty:  more horrible than any
regular-right-down wickedness.  Oh, home! home! parents! family! duty!
how I loathe them!  How I'd like to see them all blown to bits!  The
poor escape.  The wicked escape.  Well, I cant be poor:  we're rolling
in money:  it's no use pretending we're not.  But I can be wicked; and
I'm quite prepared to be.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  You think that easy?

HYPATIA.  Well, isnt it?  Being a man, you ought to know.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It requires some natural talent, which can no doubt
be cultivated.  It's not really easy to be anything out of the common.

HYPATIA.  Anyhow, I mean to make a fight for living.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Living your own life, I believe the Suffragist
phrase is.

HYPATIA.  Living any life.  Living, instead of withering without even
a gardener to snip you off when youre rotten.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Ive lived an active life; but Ive withered all the
same.

HYPATIA.  No:  youve worn out:  thats quite different.  And youve some
life in you yet or you wouldnt have fallen in love with me.  You can
never imagine how delighted I was to find that instead of being the
correct sort of big panjandrum you were supposed to be, you were
really an old rip like papa.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  No, no:  not about your father:  I really cant bear
it.  And if you must say these terrible things:  these heart-wounding
shameful things, at least find something prettier to call me than an
old rip.

HYPATIA.  Well, what would you call a man proposing to a girl who
might be--

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  His daughter:  yes, I know.

HYPATIA.  I was going to say his granddaughter.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  You always have one more blow to get in.

HYPATIA.  Youre too sensitive.  Did you ever make mud pies when you
were a kid--beg pardon:  a child.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I hope not.

HYPATIA.  It's a dirty job; but Johnny and I were vulgar enough to
like it.  I like young people because theyre not too afraid of dirt to
live.  Ive grown out of the mud pies; but I like slang; and I like
bustling you up by saying things that shock you; and I'd rather put up
with swearing and smoking than with dull respectability; and there are
lots of things that would just shrivel you up that I think rather
jolly.  Now!

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Ive not the slightest doubt of it.  Dont insist.

HYPATIA.  It's not your ideal, is it?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  No.

HYPATIA.  Shall I tell you why?  Your ideal is an old woman.  I
daresay shes got a young face; but shes an old woman.  Old, old, old.
Squeamish.  Cant stand up to things.  Cant enjoy things:  not real
things.  Always on the shrink.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  On the shrink!  Detestable expression.

HYPATIA.  Bah! you cant stand even a little thing like that.  What
good are you?  Oh, what good are you?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Dont ask me.  I dont know.  I dont know.

_Tarleton returns from the vestibule.  Hypatia sits down demurely._

HYPATIA.  Well, papa:  have you meditated on your destiny?

TARLETON.  _[puzzled]_  What?  Oh! my destiny.  Gad, I forgot all
about it:  Jock started a rabbit and put it clean out of my head.
Besides, why should I give way to morbid introspection?  It's a sign
of madness.  Read Lombroso.  _[To Lord Summerhays]_  Well, Summerhays,
has my little girl been entertaining you?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Yes.  She is a wonderful entertainer.

TARLETON.  I think my idea of bringing up a young girl has been rather
a success.  Dont you listen to this, Patsy:  it might make you
conceited.  Shes never been treated like a child.  I always said the
same thing to her mother.  Let her read what she likes.  Let her do
what she likes.  Let her go where she likes.  Eh, Patsy?

HYPATIA.  Oh yes, if there had only been anything for me to do, any
place for me to go, anything I wanted to read.

TARLETON.  There, you see!  Shes not satisfied.  Restless.  Wants
things to happen.  Wants adventures to drop out of the sky.

HYPATIA.  _[gathering up her work]_  If youre going to talk about me
and my education, I'm off.

TARLETON.  Well, well, off with you.  _[To Lord Summerhays]_  Shes
active, like me.  She actually wanted me to put her into the shop.

HYPATIA.  Well, they tell me that the girls there have adventures
sometimes.  _[She goes out through the inner door]_

TARLETON.  She had me there, though she doesnt know it, poor innocent
lamb!  Public scandal exaggerates enormously, of course; but moralize
as you will, superabundant vitality is a physical fact that cant be
talked away.  _[He sits down between the writing table and the
sideboard]._  Difficult question this, of bringing up children.
Between ourselves, it has beaten me.  I never was so surprised in my
life as when I came to know Johnny as a man of business and found out
what he was really like.  How did you manage with your sons?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Well, I really hadnt time to be a father:  thats the
plain truth of the matter.  Their poor dear mother did the usual thing
while they were with us.  Then of course, Harrow, Cambridge, the usual
routine of their class.  I saw very little of them, and thought very
little about them:  how could I? with a whole province on my hands.
They and I are--acquaintances.  Not perhaps, quite ordinary
acquaintances:  theres a sort of--er--I should almost call it a sort
of remorse about the way we shake hands (when we do shake hands) which
means, I suppose, that we're sorry we dont care more for one another;
and I'm afraid we dont meet oftener than we can help.  We put each
other too much out of countenance.  It's really a very difficult
relation.  To my mind not altogether a natural one.

TARLETON.  _[impressed, as usual]_  Thats an idea, certainly.  I dont
think anybody has ever written about that.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Bentley is the only one who was really my son in any
serious sense.  He was completely spoilt.  When he was sent to a
preparatory school he simply yelled until he was sent home.  Harrow
was out of the question; but we managed to tutor him into Cambridge.
No use:  he was sent down.  By that time my work was over; and I saw a
good deal of him.  But I could do nothing with him--except look on.  I
should have thought your case was quite different.  You keep up the
middle-class tradition:  the day school and the business training
instead of the university.  I believe in the day school part of it.
At all events, you know your own children.

TARLETON.  Do you?  I'm not so sure of it.  Fact is, my dear
Summerhays, once childhood is over, once the little animal has got
past the stage at which it acquires what you might call a sense of
decency, it's all up with the relation between parent and child.  You
cant get over the fearful shyness of it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Shyness?

TARLETON.  Yes, shyness.  Read Dickens.

LORD SUMMERHAYS _[surprised]_  Dickens!!  Of all authors, Charles
Dickens!  Are you serious?

TARLETON.  I dont mean his books.  Read his letters to his family.
Read any man's letters to his children.  Theyre not human.  Theyre not
about himself or themselves.  Theyre about hotels, scenery, about the
weather, about getting wet and losing the train and what he saw on the
road and all that.  Not a word about himself.  Forced.  Shy.  Duty
letters.  All fit to be published:  that says everything.  I tell you
theres a wall ten feet thick and ten miles high between parent and
child.  I know what I'm talking about.  Ive girls in my employment:
girls and young men.  I had ideas on the subject.  I used to go to the
parents and tell them not to let their children go out into the world
without instruction in the dangers and temptations they were going to
be thrown into.  What did every one of the mothers say to me?  "Oh,
sir, how could I speak of such things to my own daughter?"  The men
said I was quite right; but they didnt do it, any more than I'd been
able to do it myself to Johnny.  I had to leave books in his way; and
I felt just awful when I did it.  Believe me, Summerhays, the relation
between the young and the old should be an innocent relation.  It
should be something they could talk about.  Well, the relation between
parent and child may be an affectionate relation.  It may be a useful
relation.  It may be a necessary relation.  But it can never be an
innocent relation.  Youd die rather than allude to it.  Depend on it,
in a thousand years itll be considered bad form to know who your
father and mother are.  Embarrassing.  Better hand Bentley over to me.
I can look him in the face and talk to him as man to man.  You can
have Johnny.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Thank you.  Ive lived so long in a country where a
man may have fifty sons, who are no more to him than a regiment of
soldiers, that I'm afraid Ive lost the English feeling about it.

TARLETON.  _[restless again]_  You mean Jinghiskahn.  Ah yes.  Good
thing the empire.  Educates us.  Opens our minds.  Knocks the Bible
out of us.  And civilizes the other chaps.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Yes:  it civilizes them.  And it uncivilizes us.
Their gain.  Our loss, Tarleton, believe me, our loss.

TARLETON.  Well, why not?  Averages out the human race.  Makes the
nigger half an Englishman.  Makes the Englishman half a nigger.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Speaking as the unfortunate Englishman in question,
I dont like the process.  If I had my life to live over again, I'd
stay at home and supercivilize myself.

TARLETON.  Nonsense! dont be selfish.  Think how youve improved the
other chaps.  Look at the Spanish empire!  Bad job for Spain, but
splendid for South America.  Look at what the Romans did for Britain!
They burst up and had to clear out; but think of all they taught us!
They were the making of us:  I believe there was a Roman camp on
Hindhead:  I'll shew it to you tomorrow.  Thats the good side of
Imperialism:  it's unselfish.  I despise the Little Englanders:
theyre always thinking about England.  Smallminded.  I'm for the
Parliament of man, the federation of the world.  Read Tennyson.  _[He
settles down again]._  Then theres the great food question.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[apprehensively]_  Need we go into that this
afternoon?

TARLETON.  No; but I wish youd tell the Chickabiddy that the
Jinghiskahns eat no end of toasted cheese, and that it's the secret of
their amazing health and long life!

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Unfortunately they are neither healthy nor long
lived.  And they dont eat toasted cheese.

TARLETON.  There you are!  They would be if they ate it.    Anyhow,
say what you like, provided the moral is a Welsh rabbit for my supper.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  British morality in a nutshell!

TARLETON.  _[hugely amused]_  Yes.  Ha ha!  Awful hypocrites, aint we?

_They are interrupted by excited cries from the grounds._

HYPATIA.       |    Papa!  Mamma!  Come out as fast as you can.
               |    Quick.  Quick.
               |
BENTLEY.       |    Hello, governor!  Come out.  An aeroplane.
               |    Look, look.

TARLETON.  _[starting up]_  Aeroplane!  Did he say an aeroplane?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Aeroplane!  _[A shadow falls on the pavilion; and
some of the glass at the top is shattered and falls on the floor]._

_Tarleton and Lord Summerhays rush out through the pavilion into the
garden._

HYPATIA.       |    Take care.  Take care of the chimney.
               |
BENTLEY.       |    Come this side:  it's coming right
               |    where youre standing.
               |
TARLETON.      |    Hallo! where the devil are you
               |    coming? youll have my roof off.
               |
LORD SUMMERHAYS|    He's lost control.

MRS TARLETON.  Look, look, Hypatia.  There are two people in it.

BENTLEY.  Theyve cleared it.  Well steered!

TARLETON.      |    Yes; but theyre coming slam into the greenhouse.
               |
LORD SUMMERHAYS|    Look out for the glass.
               |
MRS TARLETON.  |    Theyll break all the glass.  Theyll
               |    spoil all the grapes.
               |
BENTLEY.       |    Mind where youre coming.  He'll
               |    save it.  No:  theyre down.

_An appalling crash of breaking glass is heard.  Everybody shrieks._

MRS TARLETON.  |    Oh, are they killed?  John:  are they killed?
               |
LORD SUMMERHAYS|    Are you hurt?  Is anything broken?  Can you stand?
               |
HYPATIA.       |    Oh, you must be hurt.  Are you sure?  Shall I get
               |    you some water?  Or some wine?
               |
TARLETON.      |    Are you all right?  Sure you wont have some
               |    brandy just to take off the shock.

THE AVIATOR.  No, thank you.  Quite right.  Not a scratch.  I assure
you I'm all right.

BENTLEY.  What luck!  And what a smash!  You are a lucky chap, I can
tell you.

_The Aviator and Tarleton come in through the pavilion, followed by
Lord Summerhays and Bentley, the Aviator on Tarleton's right.  Bentley
passes the Aviator and turns to have an admiring look at him.  Lord
Summerhays overtakes Tarleton less pointedly on the opposite side with
the same object._

THE AVIATOR.  I'm really very sorry.  I'm afraid Ive knocked your
vinery into a cocked hat.  (_Effusively_)  You dont mind, do you?

TARLETON.  Not a bit.  Come in and have some tea.  Stay to dinner.
Stay over the week-end.  All my life Ive wanted to fly.

THE AVIATOR.  _[taking off his goggles]_  Youre really more than kind.

BENTLEY.  Why, its Joey Percival.

PERCIVAL.  Hallo, Ben!  That you?

TARLETON.  What!  The man with three fathers!

PERCIVAL.  Oh! has Ben been talking about me?

TARLETON.  Consider yourself as one of the family--if you will do me
the honor.  And your friend too.  Wheres your friend?

PERCIVAL.  Oh, by the way! before he comes in:  let me explain.  I
dont know him.

TARLETON.  Eh?

PERCIVAL.  Havnt even looked at him.  I'm trying to make a club record
with a passenger.  The club supplied the passenger.  He just got in;
and Ive been too busy handling the aeroplane to look at him.  I havnt
said a word to him; and I cant answer for him socially; but hes an
ideal passenger for a flyer.  He saved me from a smash.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I saw it.  It was extraordinary.  When you were
thrown out he held on to the top bar with one hand.  You came past him
in the air, going straight for the glass.  He caught you and turned
you off into the flower bed, and then lighted beside you like a bird.

PERCIVAL.  How he kept his head I cant imagine.  Frankly, _I_ didnt.

_The Passenger, also begoggled, comes in through the pavilion with
Johnny and the two ladies.  The Passenger comes between Percival and
Tarleton, Mrs Tarleton between Lord Summerhays and her husband,
Hypatia between Percival and Bentley, and Johnny to Bentley's right._

TARLETON.  Just discussing your prowess, my dear sir.  Magnificent.
Youll stay to dinner.  Youll stay the night.  Stay over the week.  The
Chickabiddy will be delighted.

MRS TARLETON.  Wont you take off your goggles and have some tea?

_The Passenger begins to remove the goggles._

TARLETON.  Do.  Have a wash.  Johnny:  take the gentleman to your
room:  I'll look after Mr Percival.  They must--

_By this time the passenger has got the goggles off, and stands
revealed as a remarkably good-looking woman._

MRS TARLETON.  |    Well I never!!!                         |
               |                                            |
BENTLEY.       |    [_in a whisper_] Oh, I say!             |
               |                                            |
JOHNNY.        |    By George!                              |
               |                                            | _All
LORD SUMMERHAYS|    A lady!                                 | to-
               |                                            | gether._
HYPATIA.       |    A woman!                                |
               |                                            |
TARLETON.      |    [_to Percival_] You never told me--     |
               |                                            |
PERCIVAL.      |    I hadnt the least idea--                |

_An embarrassed pause._

PERCIVAL.  I assure you if I'd had the faintest notion that my
passenger was a lady I shouldnt have left you to shift for yourself in
that selfish way.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  The lady seems to have shifted for both very
effectually, sir.

PERCIVAL.  Saved my life.  I admit it most gratefully.

TARLETON.  I must apologize, madam, for having offered you the
civilities appropriate to the opposite sex.  And yet, why opposite?
We are all human:  males and females of the same species.  When the
dress is the same the distinction vanishes.  I'm proud to receive in
my house a lady of evident refinement and distinction.  Allow me to
introduce myself:  Tarleton:  John Tarleton (_seeing conjecture in the
passenger's eye_)--yes, yes:  Tarleton's Underwear.  My wife, Mrs
Tarleton:  youll excuse me for having in what I had taken to be a
confidence between man and man alluded to her as the Chickabiddy.  My
daughter Hypatia, who has always wanted some adventure to drop out of
the sky, and is now, I hope, satisfied at last.  Lord Summerhays:  a
man known wherever the British flag waves.  His son Bentley, engaged
to Hypatia.  Mr Joseph Percival, the promising son of three highly
intellectual fathers.

HYPATIA.  _[startled]_  Bentley's friend?  _[Bentley nods]._

TARLETON.  _[continuing, to the passenger]_  May I now ask to be
allowed the pleasure of knowing your name?

THE PASSENGER.  My name is Lina Szczepanowska _[pronouncing it
Sh-Chepanovska]._

PERCIVAL.  Sh--  I beg your pardon?

LINA.  Szczepanowska.

PERCIVAL.  _[dubiously]_  Thank you.

TARLETON.  _[very politely]_  Would you mind saying it again?

LINA.  Say fish.

TARLETON.  Fish.

LINA.  Say church.

TARLETON.  Church.

LINA.  Say fish church.

TARLETON.  _[remonstrating]_  But it's not good sense.

LINA.  _[inexorable]_  Say fish church.

TARLETON.  Fish church.

LINA.  Again.

TARLETON.  No, but--_[resigning himself]_ fish church.

LINA.  Now say Szczepanowska.

TARLETON.  Szczepanowska.  Got it, by Gad.  _[A sibilant whispering
becomes audible:  they are all saying Sh-ch to themselves]._
Szczepanowska!  Not an English name, is it?

LINA.  Polish.  I'm a Pole.

TARLETON.  Ah yes.  Interesting nation.  Lucky people to get the
government of their country taken off their hands.  Nothing to do but
cultivate themselves.  Same as we took Gibraltar off the hands of the
Spaniards.  Saves the Spanish taxpayer.  Jolly good thing for us if
the Germans took Portsmouth.  Sit down, wont you?

_The group breaks up.  Johnny and Bentley hurry to the pavilion and
fetch the two wicker chairs.  Johnny gives his to Lina.  Hypatia and
Percival take the chairs at the worktable.  Lord Summerhays gives the
chair at the vestibule end of the writing table to Mrs Tarleton; and
Bentley replaces it with a wicker chair, which Lord Summerhays takes.
Johnny remains standing behind the worktable, Bentley behind his
father._

MRS TARLETON.  _[to Lina]_  Have some tea now, wont you?

LINA.  I never drink tea.

TARLETON.  _[sitting down at the end of the writing table nearest
Lina]_  Bad thing to aeroplane on, I should imagine.  Too jumpy.  Been
up much?

LINA.  Not in an aeroplane.  Ive parachuted; but thats child's play.

MRS TARLETON.  But arnt you very foolish to run such a dreadful risk?

LINA.  You cant live without running risks.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, what a thing to say!  Didnt you know you might have
been killed?

LINA.  That was why I went up.

HYPATIA.  Of course.  Cant you understand the fascination of the
thing? the novelty! the daring! the sense of something happening!

LINA.  Oh no.  It's too tame a business for that.  I went up for
family reasons.

TARLETON.  Eh?  What?  Family reasons?

MRS TARLETON.  I hope it wasnt to spite your mother?

PERCIVAL.  _[quickly]_  Or your husband?

LINA.  I'm not married.  And why should I want to spite my mother?

HYPATIA.  _[aside to Percival]_  That was clever of you, Mr Percival.

PERCIVAL.  What?

HYPATIA.  To find out.

TARLETON.  I'm in a difficulty.  I cant understand a lady going up in
an aeroplane for family reasons.  It's rude to be curious and ask
questions; but then it's inhuman to be indifferent, as if you didnt
care.

LINA.  I'll tell you with pleasure.  For the last hundred and fifty
years, not a single day has passed without some member of my family
risking his life--or her life.  It's a point of honor with us to keep
up that tradition.  Usually several of us do it; but it happens that
just at this moment it is being kept up by one of my brothers only.
Early this morning I got a telegram from him to say that there had
been a fire, and that he could do nothing for the rest of the week.
Fortunately I had an invitation from the Aerial League to see this
gentleman try to break the passenger record.  I appealed to the
President of the League to let me save the honor of my family.  He
arranged it for me.

TARLETON.  Oh, I must be dreaming.  This is stark raving nonsense.

LINA.  _[quietly]_  You are quite awake, sir.

JOHNNY.  We cant all be dreaming the same thing, Governor.

TARLETON.  Of course not, you duffer; but then I'm dreaming you as
well as the lady.

MRS TARLETON.  Dont be silly, John.  The lady is only joking, I'm
sure.  _[To Lina]_  I suppose your luggage is in the aeroplane.

PERCIVAL.  Luggage was out of the question.  If I stay to dinner I'm
afraid I cant change unless youll lend me some clothes.

MRS TARLETON.  Do you mean neither of you?

PERCIVAL.  I'm afraid so.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh well, never mind:  Hypatia will lend the lady a
gown.

LINA.  Thank you:  I'm quite comfortable as I am.  I am not accustomed
to gowns:  they hamper me and make me feel ridiculous; so if you dont
mind I shall not change.

MRS TARLETON.  Well, I'm beginning to think I'm doing a bit of
dreaming myself.

HYPATIA.  _[impatiently]_  Oh, it's all right, mamma.  Johnny:  look
after Mr. Percival.  _[To Lina, rising]_  Come with me.

_Lina follows her to the inner door.  They all rise._

JOHNNY.  _[to Percival]_  I'll shew you.

PERCIVAL.  Thank you.

_Lina goes out with Hypatia, and Percival with Johnny._

MRS TARLETON.  Well, this is a nice thing to happen!  And look at the
greenhouse!  Itll cost thirty pounds to mend it.  People have no right
to do such things.  And you invited them to dinner too!  What sort of
woman is that to have in our house when you know that all Hindhead
will be calling on us to see that aeroplane?  Bunny:  come with me and
help me to get all the people out of the grounds:  I declare they came
running as if theyd sprung up out of the earth _[she makes for the
inner door]._

TARLETON.  No:  dont you trouble, Chickabiddy:  I'll tackle em.

MRS TARLETON.  Indeed youll do nothing of the kind:  youll stay here
quietly with Lord Summerhays.  Youd invite them all to dinner.  Come,
Bunny.  _[She goes out, followed by Bentley.  Lord Summerhays sits
down again]._

TARLETON.  Singularly beautiful woman Summerhays.  What do you make of
her?  She must be a princess.  Whats this family of warriors and
statesmen that risk their lives every day?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  They are evidently not warriors and statesmen, or
they wouldnt do that.

TARLETON.  Well, then, who the devil are they?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I think I know.  The last time I saw that lady, she
did something I should not have thought possible.

TARLETON.  What was that?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Well, she walked backwards along a taut wire without
a balancing pole and turned a somersault in the middle.  I remember
that her name was Lina, and that the other name was foreign; though I
dont recollect it.

TARLETON.  Szcz!  You couldnt have forgotten that if youd heard it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I didnt hear it:  I only saw it on a program.  But
it's clear shes an acrobat.  It explains how she saved Percival.  And
it accounts for her family pride.

TARLETON.  An acrobat, eh?  Good, good, good!  Summerhays:  that
brings her within reach.  Thats better than a princess.  I steeled
this evergreen heart of mine when I thought she was a princess.  Now I
shall let it be touched.  She is accessible.  Good.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I hope you are not serious.  Remember:  you have a
family.  You have a position.  You are not in your first youth.

TARLETON.  No matter.

     Theres magic in the night
     When the heart is young.

My heart is young.  Besides, I'm a married man, not a widower like
you.  A married man can do anything he likes if his wife dont mind.  A
widower cant be too careful.  Not that I would have you think me an
unprincipled man or a bad husband.  I'm not.  But Ive a superabundance
of vitality.  Read Pepys' Diary.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  The woman is your guest, Tarleton.

TARLETON.  Well, is she?  A woman I bring into my house is my guest.
A woman you bring into my house is my guest.  But a woman who drops
bang down out of the sky into my greenhouse and smashes every blessed
pane of glass in it must take her chance.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Still, you know that my name must not be associated
with any scandal.  Youll be careful, wont you?

TARLETON.  Oh Lord, yes.  Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.  I was only joking,
of course.

_Mrs Tarleton comes back through the inner door._

MRS TARLETON.  Well I never!  John:  I dont think that young woman's
right in her head.  Do you know what shes just asked for?

TARLETON.  Champagne?

MRS TARLETON.  No.  She wants a Bible and six oranges.

TARLETON.  What?

MRS TARLETON.  A Bible and six oranges.

TARLETON.  I understand the oranges:  shes doing an orange cure of
some sort.  But what on earth does she want the Bible for?

MRS TARLETON.  I'm sure I cant imagine.  She cant be right in her
head.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Perhaps she wants to read it.

MRS TARLETON.  But why should she, on a weekday, at all events.  What
would you advise me to do, Lord Summerhays?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Well, is there a Bible in the house?

TARLETON.  Stacks of em.  Theres the family Bible, and the Dore Bible,
and the parallel revised version Bible, and the Doves Press Bible, and
Johnny's Bible and Bobby's Bible and Patsy's Bible, and the
Chickabiddy's Bible and my Bible; and I daresay the servants could
raise a few more between them.  Let her have the lot.

MRS TARLETON.  Dont talk like that before Lord Summerhays, John.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It doesnt matter, Mrs Tarleton:  in Jinghiskahn it
was a punishable offence to expose a Bible for sale.  The empire has
no religion.

_Lina comes in.  She has left her cap in Hypatia's room.  She stops on
the landing just inside the door, and speaks over the handrail._

LINA.  Oh, Mrs Tarleton, shall I be making myself very troublesome if
I ask for a music-stand in my room as well?

TARLETON.  Not at all. You can have the piano if you like.  Or the
gramophone.  Have the gramophone.

LINA.  No, thank you:  no music.

MRS TARLETON.  _[going to the steps]_  Do you think it's good for you
to eat so many oranges?  Arnt you afraid of getting jaundice?

LINA.  _[coming down]_  Not in the least.  But billiard balls will do
quite as well.

MRS TARLETON.  But you cant eat billiard balls, child!

TARLETON.  Get em, Chickabiddy.  I understand.  _[He imitates a
juggler tossing up balls]._  Eh?

LINA.  _[going to him, past his wife]_  Just so.

TARLETON.  Billiard balls and cues.  Plates, knives, and forks.  Two
paraffin lamps and a hatstand.

LINA.  No:  that is popular low-class business.  In our family we
touch nothing but classical work.  Anybody can do lamps and hatstands.
_I_ can do silver bullets.  That is really hard.  _[She passes on to
Lord Summerhays, and looks gravely down at him as he sits by the
writing table]._

MRS TARLETON.  Well, I'm sure I dont know what youre talking about;
and I only hope you know yourselves.  However, you shall have what you
want, of course.  _[She goes up the steps and leaves the room]._

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Will you forgive my curiosity?  What is the Bible
for?

LINA.  To quiet my soul.

LORD SUMMERHAYS _[with a sigh]_  Ah yes, yes.  It no longer quiets
mine, I am sorry to say.

LINA.  That is because you do not know how to read it.  Put it up
before you on a stand; and open it at the Psalms.  When you can read
them and understand them, quite quietly and happily, and keep six
balls in the air all the time, you are in perfect condition; and youll
never make a mistake that evening.  If you find you cant do that, then
go and pray until you can.  And be very careful that evening.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Is that the usual form of test in your profession?

LINA.  Nothing that we Szczepanowskis do is usual, my lord.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Are you all so wonderful?

LINA.  It is our profession to be wonderful.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Do you never condescend to do as common people do?
For instance, do you not pray as common people pray?

LINA.  Common people do not pray, my lord:  they only beg.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  You never ask for anything?

LINA.  No.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Then why do you pray?

LINA.  To remind myself that I have a soul.

TARLETON.  _[walking about]_  True.  Fine.  Good.  Beautiful.  All
this damned materialism:  what good is it to anybody?  Ive got a soul:
dont tell me I havnt.  Cut me up and you cant find it.  Cut up a steam
engine and you cant find the steam.  But, by George, it makes the
engine go.  Say what you will, Summerhays, the divine spark is a fact.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Have I denied it?

TARLETON.  Our whole civilization is a denial of it.  Read Walt
Whitman.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I shall go to the billiard room and get the balls
for you.

LINA.  Thank you.

_Lord Summerhays goes out through the vestibule door._

TARLETON.  _[going to her]_  Listen to me.  _[She turns quickly]._
What you said just now was beautiful.  You touch chords.  You appeal
to the poetry in a man.  You inspire him.  Come now!  Youre a woman of
the world:  youre independent:  you must have driven lots of men
crazy.  You know the sort of man I am, dont you?  See through me at a
glance, eh?

LINA.  Yes.  _[She sits down quietly in the chair Lord Summerhays has
just left]._

TARLETON.  Good.  Well, do you like me?  Dont misunderstand me:  I'm
perfectly aware that youre not going to fall in love at first sight
with a ridiculous old shopkeeper.  I cant help that ridiculous old
shopkeeper.  I have to carry him about with me whether I like it or
not.  I have to pay for his clothes, though I hate the cut of them:
especially the waistcoat.  I have to look at him in the glass while
I'm shaving.  I loathe him because hes a living lie.  My soul's not
like that:  it's like yours.  I want to make a fool of myself.  About
you.  Will you let me?

LINA.  _[very calm]_  How much will you pay?

TARLETON.  Nothing.  But I'll throw as many sovereigns as you like
into the sea to shew you that I'm in earnest.

LINA.  Are those your usual terms?

TARLETON.  No.  I never made that bid before.

LINA.  _[producing a dainty little book and preparing to write in it]_
What did you say your name was?

TARLETON.  John Tarleton.  The great John Tarleton of Tarleton's
Underwear.

LINA.  _[writing]_  T-a-r-l-e-t-o-n.  Er--?  _[She looks up at him
inquiringly]._

TARLETON.  _[promptly]_  Fifty-eight.

LINA.  Thank you.  I keep a list of all my offers.  I like to know
what I'm considered worth.

TARLETON.  Let me look.

LINA.  _[offering the book to him]_  It's in Polish.

TARLETON.  Thats no good.  Is mine the lowest offer?

LINA.  No:  the highest.

TARLETON.  What do most of them come to?  Diamonds?  Motor cars?
Furs?  Villa at Monte Carlo?

LINA.  Oh yes:  all that.  And sometimes the devotion of a lifetime.

TARLETON.  Fancy that!  A young man offering a woman his old age as a
temptation!

LINA.  By the way, you did not say how long.

TARLETON.  Until you get tired of me.

LINA.  Or until you get tired of me?

TARLETON.  I never get tired.  I never go on long enough for that.
But when it becomes so grand, so inspiring that I feel that everything
must be an anti-climax after that, then I run away.

LINA.  Does she let you go without a struggle?

TARLETON.  Yes.  Glad to get rid of me.  When love takes a man as it
takes me--when it makes him great--it frightens a woman.

LINA.  The lady here is your wife, isnt she?  Dont you care for her?

TARLETON.  Yes.  And mind! she comes first always.  I reserve her
dignity even when I sacrifice my own.  Youll respect that point of
honor, wont you?

LINA.  Only a point of honor?

TARLETON.  _[impulsively]_  No, by God! a point of affection as well.

LINA.  _[smiling, pleased with him]_  Shake hands, old pal _[she rises
and offers him her hand frankly]._

TARLETON.  _[giving his hand rather dolefully]_  Thanks.  That means
no, doesnt it?

LINA.  It means something that will last longer than yes.  I like you.
I admit you to my friendship.  What a pity you were not trained when
you were young!  Youd be young still.

TARLETON.  I suppose, to an athlete like you, I'm pretty awful, eh?

LINA.  Shocking.

TARLETON.  Too much crumb.  Wrinkles.  Yellow patches that wont come
off.  Short wind.  I know.  I'm ashamed of myself.  I could do nothing
on the high rope.

LINA.  Oh yes:  I could put you in a wheelbarrow and run you along,
two hundred feet up.

TARLETON.  _[shuddering]_  Ugh!  Well, I'd do even that for you.  Read
The Master Builder.

LINA.  Have you learnt everything from books?

TARLETON.  Well, have you learnt everything from the flying trapeze?

LINA.  On the flying trapeze there is often another woman; and her
life is in your hands every night and your life in hers.

TARLETON.  Lina:  I'm going to make a fool of myself.  I'm going to
cry _[he crumples into the nearest chair]._

LINA.  Pray instead:  dont cry.  Why should you cry?  Youre not the
first I've said no to.

TARLETON.  If you had said yes, should I have been the first then?

LINA.  What right have you to ask?  Have I asked am _I_ the first?

TARLETON.  Youre right:  a vulgar question.  To a man like me,
everybody is the first.  Life renews itself.

LINA.  The youngest child is the sweetest.

TARLETON.  Dont probe too deep, Lina.  It hurts.

LINA.  You must get out of the habit of thinking that these things
matter so much.  It's linendraperish.

TARLETON.  Youre quite right.  Ive often said so.  All the same, it
does matter; for I want to cry.  _[He buries his face in his arms on
the work-table and sobs]._

LINA.  _[going to him]_  O la la!  _[She slaps him vigorously, but not
unkindly, on the shoulder]._  Courage, old pal, courage!  Have you a
gymnasium here?

TARLETON.  Theres a trapeze and bars and things in the billiard room.

LINA.  Come.  You need a few exercises.  I'll teach you how to stop
crying.  _[She takes his arm and leads him off into the vestibule]._

_A young man, cheaply dressed and strange in manner, appears in the
garden; steals to the pavilion door; and looks in.  Seeing that there
is nobody, he enters cautiously until he has come far enough to see
into the hatstand corner.  He draws a revolver, and examines it,
apparently to make sure that it is loaded.  Then his attention is
caught by the Turkish bath.  He looks down the lunette, and opens the
panels._

HYPATIA.  _[calling in the garden]_  Mr Percival!  Mr Percival!  Where
are you?

_The young man makes for the door, but sees Percival coming.  He turns
and bolts into the Turkish bath, which he closes upon himself just in
time to escape being caught by Percival, who runs in through the
pavilion, bareheaded.  He also, it appears, is in search of a
hiding-place; for he stops and turns between the two tables to take a
survey of the room; then runs into the corner between the end of the
sideboard and the wall.  Hypatia, excited, mischievous, her eyes
glowing, runs in, precisely on his trail; turns at the same spot; and
discovers him just as he makes a dash for the pavilion door.  She
flies back and intercepts him._

HYPATIA.  Aha! arnt you glad Ive caught you?

PERCIVAL.  _[illhumoredly turning away from her and coming towards the
writing table]_  No I'm not.  Confound it, what sort of girl are you?
What sort of house is this?  Must I throw all good manners to the
winds?

HYPATIA.  _[following him]_  Do, do, do, do, do.  This is the house of
a respectable shopkeeper, enormously rich.  This is the respectable
shopkeeper's daughter, tired of good manners.  _[Slipping her left
hand into his right]_  Come, handsome young man, and play with the
respectable shopkeeper's daughter.

PERCIVAL.  _[withdrawing quickly from her touch]_  No, no:  dont you
know you mustnt go on like this with a perfect stranger?

HYPATIA.  Dropped down from the sky.  Dont you know that you must
always go on like this when you get the chance?  You must come to the
top of the hill and chase me through the bracken.  You may kiss me if
you catch me.

PERCIVAL.  I shall do nothing of the sort.

HYPATIA.  Yes you will:  you cant help yourself.  Come along.  _[She
seizes his sleeve]._  Fool, fool:  come along.  Dont you want to?

PERCIVAL.  No:  certainly not.  I should never be forgiven if I did
it.

HYPATIA.  Youll never forgive yourself if you dont.

PERCIVAL.  Nonsense.  Youre engaged to Ben.  Ben's my friend.  What do
you take me for?

HYPATIA.  Ben's old.  Ben was born old.  Theyre all old here, except
you and me and the man-woman or woman-man or whatever you call her
that came with you.  They never do anything:  they only discuss
whether what other people do is right.  Come and give them something
to discuss.

PERCIVAL.  I will do nothing incorrect.

HYPATIA.  Oh, dont be afraid, little boy:  youll get nothing but a
kiss; and I'll fight like the devil to keep you from getting that.
But we must play on the hill and race through the heather.

PERCIVAL.  Why?

HYPATIA.  Because we want to, handsome young man.

PERCIVAL.  But if everybody went on in this way--

HYPATIA.  How happy! oh how happy the world would be!

PERCIVAL.  But the consequences may be serious.

HYPATIA.  Nothing is worth doing unless the consequences may be
serious.  My father says so; and I'm my father's daughter.

PERCIVAL.  I'm the son of three fathers.  I mistrust these wild
impulses.

HYPATIA.  Take care.  Youre letting the moment slip.  I feel the first
chill of the wave of prudence.  Save me.

PERCIVAL.  Really, Miss Tarleton _[she strikes him across the face]_
--Damn you!  _[Recovering himself, horrified at his lapse]_  I beg
your pardon; but since weve both forgotten ourselves, youll please
allow me to leave the house.  _[He turns towards the inner door,
having left his cap in the bedroom]._

HYPATIA.  _[standing in his way]_  Are you ashamed of having said
"Damn you" to me?

PERCIVAL.  I had no right to say it.  I'm very much ashamed of it.  I
have already begged your pardon.

HYPATIA.  And youre not ashamed of having said "Really, Miss
Tarleton."

PERCIVAL.  Why should I?

HYPATIA.  O man, man! mean, stupid, cowardly, selfish masculine male
man!  You ought to have been a governess.  I was expelled from school
for saying that the very next person that said "Really, Miss
Tarleton," to me, I would strike her across the face.  You were the
next.

PERCIVAL.  I had no intention of being offensive.  Surely there is
nothing that can wound any lady in--_[He hesitates, not quite
convinced]._  At least--er--I really didnt mean to be disagreeable.

HYPATIA.  Liar.

PERCIVAL.  Of course if youre going to insult me, I am quite helpless.
Youre a woman:  you can say what you like.

HYPATIA.  And you can only say what you dare.  Poor wretch:  it isnt
much.  _[He bites his lip, and sits down, very much annoyed]._
Really, Mr Percival!  You sit down in the presence of a lady and leave
her standing.  _[He rises hastily]._  Ha, ha!  Really, Mr Percival!
Oh really, really, really, really, really, Mr Percival!  How do you
like it?  Wouldnt you rather I damned you?

PERCIVAL.  Miss Tarleton--

HYPATIA.  _[caressingly]_  Hypatia, Joey. Patsy, if you like.

PERCIVAL.  Look here:  this is no good.  You want to do what you like?

HYPATIA.  Dont you?

PERCIVAL.  No.  Ive been too well brought up.  Ive argued all through
this thing; and I tell you I'm not prepared to cast off the social
bond.  It's like a corset:  it's a support to the figure even if it
does squeeze and deform it a bit.  I want to be free.

HYPATIA.  Well, I'm tempting you to be free.

PERCIVAL.  Not at all.  Freedom, my good girl, means being able to
count on how other people will behave.  If every man who dislikes me
is to throw a handful of mud in my face, and every woman who likes me
is to behave like Potiphar's wife, then I shall be a slave:  the slave
of uncertainty:  the slave of fear:  the worst of all slaveries.  How
would you like it if every laborer you met in the road were to make
love to you?  No.  Give me the blessed protection of a good stiff
conventionality among thoroughly well-brought up ladies and gentlemen.

HYPATIA.  Another talker!  Men like conventions because men made them.
I didnt make them:  I dont like them:  I wont keep them.  Now, what
will you do?

PERCIVAL.  Bolt.  _[He runs out through the pavilion]._

HYPATIA.  I'll catch you.  _[She dashes off in pursuit]._

_During this conversation the head of the scandalized man in the
Turkish bath has repeatedly risen from the lunette, with a strong
expression of moral shock.  It vanishes abruptly as the two turn
towards it in their flight.  At the same moment Tarleton comes back
through the vestibule door, exhausted by severe and unaccustomed
exercise._

TARLETON.  _[looking after the flying figures with amazement]_  Hallo,
Patsy:  whats up?  Another aeroplane?  _[They are far too preoccupied
to hear him; and he is left staring after them as they rush away
through the garden.  He goes to the pavilion door and looks up; but
the heavens are empty.  His exhaustion disables him from further
inquiry.  He dabs his brow with his handkerchief, and walks stiffly to
the nearest convenient support, which happens to be the Turkish bath.
He props himself upon it with his elbow, and covers his eyes with his
hand for a moment.  After a few sighing breaths, he feels a little
better, and uncovers his eyes.  The man's head rises from the lunette
a few inches from his nose.  He recoils from the bath with a violent
start]._  Oh Lord!  My brain's gone.  _[Calling piteously]_
Chickabiddy!  _[He staggers down to the writing table]._

THE MAN.  _[coming out of the bath, pistol in hand]_  Another sound;
and youre a dead man.

TARLETON.  _[braced]_  Am I?  Well, youre a live one:  thats one
comfort.  I thought you were a ghost.  _[He sits down, quite
undisturbed by the pistol]_  Who are you; and what the devil were you
doing in my new Turkish bath?

THE MAN.  _[with tragic intensity]_  I am the son of Lucinda Titmus.

TARLETON.  _[the name conveying nothing to him]_  Indeed?  And how is
she?  Quite well, I hope, eh?

THE MAN.  She is dead.  Dead, my God! and youre alive.

TARLETON.  _[unimpressed by the tragedy, but sympathetic]_  Oh!  Lost
your mother?  Thats sad.  I'm sorry.  But we cant all have the luck to
survive our mothers, and be nursed out of the world by the hands that
nursed us into it.

THE MAN.  Much you care, damn you!

TARLETON.  Oh, dont cut up rough.  Face it like a man.  You see I
didnt know your mother; but Ive no doubt she was an excellent woman.

THE MAN.  Not know her!  Do you dare to stand there by her open grave
and deny that you knew her?

TARLETON.  _[trying to recollect]_  What did you say her name was?

THE MAN.  Lucinda Titmus.

TARLETON.  Well, I ought to remember a rum name like that if I ever
heard it.  But I dont.  Have you a photograph or anything?

THE MAN.  Forgotten even the name of your victim!

TARLETON.  Oh! she was my victim, was she?

THE MAN.  She was.  And you shall see her face again before you die,
dead as she is.  I have a photograph.

TARLETON.  Good.

THE MAN.  Ive two photographs.

TARLETON.  Still better.  Treasure the mother's pictures.  Good boy!

THE MAN.  One of them as you knew her.  The other as she became when
you flung her aside, and she withered into an old woman.

TARLETON.  She'd have done that anyhow, my lad.  We all grow old.
Look at me!  _[Seeing that the man is embarrassed by his pistol in
fumbling for the photographs with his left hand in his breast pocket]_
Let me hold the gun for you.

THE MAN.  _[retreating to the worktable]_  Stand back.  Do you take me
for a fool?

TARLETON.  Well, youre a little upset, naturally.  It does you credit.

THE MAN.  Look here, upon this picture and on this.  _[He holds out
the two photographs like a hand at cards, and points to them with the
pistol]._

TARLETON.  Good.  Read Shakespear:  he has a word for every occasion.
_[He takes the photographs, one in each hand, and looks from one to
the other, pleased and interested, but without any sign of
recognition]_  What a pretty girl!  Very pretty.  I can imagine myself
falling in love with her when I was your age.  I wasnt a bad-looking
young fellow myself in those days.  _[Looking at the other]_  Curious
that we should both have gone the same way.

THE MAN.  You and she the same way!  What do you mean?

TARLETON.  Both got stout, I mean.

THE MAN.  Would you have had her deny herself food?

TARLETON.  No:  it wouldnt have been any use.  It's constitutional.
No matter how little you eat you put on flesh if youre made that way.
_[He resumes his study of the earlier photograph]._

THE MAN.  Is that all the feeling that rises in you at the sight of
the face you once knew so well?

TARLETON.  _[too much absorbed in the portrait to heed him]_  Funny
that I cant remember!  Let this be a lesson to you, young man.  I
could go into court tomorrow and swear I never saw that face before in
my life if it wasnt for that brooch _[pointing to the photograph]._
Have you got that brooch, by the way?  _[The man again resorts to his
breast pocket]._  You seem to carry the whole family property in that
pocket.

THE MAN.  _[producing a brooch]_  Here it is to prove my bona fides.

TARLETON.  _[pensively putting the photographs on the table and taking
the brooch]_  I bought that brooch in Cheapside from a man with a
yellow wig and a cast in his left eye.  Ive never set eyes on him from
that day to this.  And yet I remember that man; and I cant remember
your mother.

THE MAN.  Monster!  Without conscience! without even memory!  You left
her to her shame--

TARLETON.  _[throwing the brooch on the table and rising pepperily]_
Come, come, young man! none of that.  Respect the romance of your
mother's youth.  Dont you start throwing stones at her.  I dont recall
her features just at this moment; but Ive no doubt she was kind to me
and we were happy together.  If you have a word to say against her,
take yourself out of my house and say it elsewhere.

THE MAN.  What sort of a joker are you?  Are you trying to put me in
the wrong, when you have to answer to me for a crime that would make
every honest man spit at you as you passed in the street if I were to
make it known?

TARLETON.  You read a good deal, dont you?

THE MAN.  What if I do?  What has that to do with your infamy and my
mother's doom?

TARLETON.  There, you see!  Doom!  Thats not good sense; but it's
literature.  Now it happens that I'm a tremendous reader:  always was.
When I was your age I read books of that sort by the bushel:  the Doom
sort, you know.  It's odd, isnt it, that you and I should be like one
another in that respect?  Can you account for it in any way?

THE MAN.  No.  What are you driving at?

TARLETON.  Well, do you know who your father was?

THE MAN.  I see what you mean now.  You dare set up to be my father.
Thank heaven Ive not a drop of your vile blood in my veins.

TARLETON.  _[sitting down again with a shrug]_  Well, if you wont be
civil, theres no pleasure in talking to you, is there?  What do you
want?  Money?

THE MAN.  How dare you insult me?

TARLETON.  Well, what do you want?

THE MAN.  Justice.

TARLETON.  Youre quite sure thats all?

THE MAN.  It's enough for me.

TARLETON.  A modest sort of demand, isnt it?  Nobody ever had it since
the world began, fortunately for themselves; but you must have it,
must you?  Well, youve come to the wrong shop for it:  youll get no
justice here:  we dont keep it.  Human nature is what we stock.

THE MAN.  Human nature!  Debauchery! gluttony! selfishness! robbery of
the poor!  Is that what you call human nature?

TARLETON.  No:  thats what you call it.  Come, my lad!  Whats the
matter with you?  You dont look starved; and youve a decent suit of
clothes.

THE MAN.  Forty-two shillings.

TARLETON.  They can do you a very decent suit for forty-two shillings.
Have you paid for it?

THE MAN.  Do you take me for a thief?  And do you suppose I can get
credit like you?

TARLETON.  Then you were able to lay your hand on forty-two shillings.
Judging from your conversational style, I should think you must spend
at least a shilling a week on romantic literature.

THE MAN.  Where would I get a shilling a week to spend on books when I
can hardly keep myself decent?  I get books at the Free Library.

TARLETON _[springing to his feet]_  What!!!

THE MAN.  _[recoiling before his vehemence]_  The Free Library.
Theres no harm in that.

TARLETON.  Ingrate!  I supply you with free books; and the use you
make of them is to persuade yourself that it's a fine thing to shoot
me.  _[He throws himself doggedly back into his chair]._  I'll never
give another penny to a Free Library.

THE MAN.  Youll never give another penny to anything.  This is the
end:  for you and me.

TARLETON.  Pooh!  Come, come, man! talk business.  Whats wrong?  Are
you out of employment?

THE MAN.  No.  This is my Saturday afternoon.  Dont flatter yourself
that I'm a loafer or a criminal.  I'm a cashier; and I defy you to say
that my cash has ever been a farthing wrong.  Ive a right to call you
to account because my hands are clean.

TARLETON.  Well, call away.  What have I to account for?  Had you a
hard time with your mother?  Why didnt she ask me for money?

THE MAN.  She'd have died first.  Besides, who wanted your money?  Do
you suppose we lived in the gutter?  My father maynt have been in as
large a way as you; but he was better connected; and his shop was as
respectable as yours.

TARLETON.  I suppose your mother brought him a little capital.

THE MAN.  I dont know.  Whats that got to do with you?

TARLETON.  Well, you say she and I knew one another and parted.  She
must have had something off me then, you know.  One doesnt get out of
these things for nothing.  Hang it, young man:  do you suppose Ive no
heart?  Of course she had her due; and she found a husband with it,
and set him up in business with it, and brought you up respectably; so
what the devil have you to complain of?

THE MAN.  Are women to be ruined with impunity?

TARLETON.  I havnt ruined any woman that I'm aware of.  Ive been the
making of you and your mother.

THE MAN.  Oh, I'm a fool to listen to you and argue with you.  I came
here to kill you and then kill myself.

TARLETON.  Begin with yourself, if you dont mind.  Ive a good deal of
business to do still before I die.  Havnt you?

THE MAN.  No.  Thats just it:  Ive no business to do.  Do you know
what my life is?  I spend my days from nine to six--nine hours of
daylight and fresh air--in a stuffy little den counting another man's
money.  Ive an intellect:  a mind and a brain and a soul; and the use
he makes of them is to fix them on his tuppences and his
eighteenpences and his two pound seventeen and tenpences and see how
much they come to at the end of the day and take care that no one
steals them.  I enter and enter, and add and add, and take money and
give change, and fill cheques and stamp receipts; and not a penny of
that money is my own:  not one of those transactions has the smallest
interest for me or anyone else in the world but him; and even he
couldnt stand it if he had to do it all himself.  And I'm envied:
aye, envied for the variety and liveliness of my job, by the poor
devil of a bookkeeper that has to copy all my entries over again.
Fifty thousand entries a year that poor wretch makes; and not ten out
of the fifty thousand ever has to be referred to again; and when all
the figures are counted up and the balance sheet made out, the boss
isnt a penny the richer than he'd be if bookkeeping had never been
invented.  Of all the damnable waste of human life that ever was
invented, clerking is the very worst.

TARLETON.  Why not join the territorials?

THE MAN.  Because I shouldnt be let.  He hasnt even the sense to see
that it would pay him to get some cheap soldiering out of me.  How can
a man tied to a desk from nine to six be anything--be even a man, let
alone a soldier?  But I'll teach him and you a lesson.  Ive had enough
of living a dog's life and despising myself for it.  Ive had enough of
being talked down to by hogs like you, and wearing my life out for a
salary that wouldnt keep you in cigars.  Youll never believe that a
clerk's a man until one of us makes an example of one of you.

TARLETON.  Despotism tempered by assassination, eh?

THE MAN.  Yes.  Thats what they do in Russia.  Well, a business office
is Russia as far as the clerks are concerned.  So dont you take it so
coolly.  You think I'm not going to do it; but I am.

TARLETON.  _[rising and facing him]_  Come, now, as man to man!  It's
not my fault that youre poorer than I am; and it's not your fault that
I'm richer than you.  And if you could undo all that passed between me
and your mother, you wouldnt undo it; and neither would she.  But
youre sick of your slavery; and you want to be the hero of a romance
and to get into the papers.  Eh?  A son revenges his mother's shame.
Villain weltering in his gore.  Mother:  look down from heaven and
receive your unhappy son's last sigh.

THE MAN.  Oh, rot! do you think I read novelettes?  And do you suppose
I believe such superstitions as heaven?  I go to church because the
boss told me I'd get the sack if I didnt.  Free England!  Ha!  _[Lina
appears at the pavilion door, and comes swiftly and noiselessly
forward on seeing the man with a pistol in his hand]._

TARLETON.  Youre afraid of getting the sack; but youre not afraid to
shoot yourself.

THE MAN.  Damn you! youre trying to keep me talking until somebody
comes.  _[He raises the pistol desperately, but not very resolutely]._

LINA.  _[at his right elbow]_  Somebody has come.

THE MAN _[turning on her]_  Stand off.  I'll shoot you if you lay a
hand on me.  I will, by God.

LINA.  You cant cover me with that pistol.  Try.

_He tries, presenting the pistol at her face.  She moves round him in
the opposite direction to the hands of a clock with a light dancing
step.  He finds it impossible to cover her with the pistol:  she is
always too far to his left.  Tarleton, behind him, grips his wrist and
drags his arm straight up, so that the pistol points to the ceiling.
As he tries to turn on his assailant, Lina grips his other wrist._

LINA.  Please stop.  I cant bear to twist anyone's wrist; but I must
if you dont let the pistol go.

THE MAN.  _[letting Tarleton take it from him]_  All right:  I'm done.
Couldnt even do that job decently.  Thats a clerk all over.  Very
well:  send for your damned police and make an end of it.  I'm
accustomed to prison from nine to six:  I daresay I can stand it from
six to nine as well.

TARLETON.  Dont swear.  Thats a lady.  _[He throws the pistol on the
writing table]._

THE MAN.  _[looking at Lina in amazement]_  Beaten by a female!  It
needed only this.  _[He collapses in the chair near the worktable, and
hides his face.  They cannot help pitying him]._

LINA.  Old pal:  dont call the police.  Lend him a bicycle and let him
get away.

THE MAN.  I cant ride a bicycle.  I never could afford one.  I'm not
even that much good.

TARLETON.  If I gave you a hundred pound note now to go and have a
good spree with, I wonder would you know how to set about it.  Do you
ever take a holiday?

THE MAN.  Take!  I got four days last August.

TARLETON.  What did you do?

THE MAN.  I did a cheap trip to Folkestone.  I spent sevenpence on
dropping pennies into silly automatic machines and peepshows of rowdy
girls having a jolly time.  I spent a penny on the lift and fourpence
on refreshments.  That cleaned me out.  The rest of the time I was so
miserable that I was glad to get back to the office.  Now you know.

LINA.  Come to the gymnasium:  I'll teach you how to make a man of
yourself.  _[The man is about to rise irresolutely, from the mere
habit of doing what he is told, when Tarleton stops him]._

TARLETON.  Young man:  dont.  Youve tried to shoot me; but I'm not
vindictive.  I draw the line at putting a man on the rack.  If you
want every joint in your body stretched until it's an agony to
live--until you have an unnatural feeling that all your muscles are
singing and laughing with pain--then go to the gymnasium with that
lady.  But youll be more comfortable in jail.

LINA.  _[greatly amused]_  Was that why you went away, old pal?  Was
that the telegram you said you had forgotten to send?

_Mrs Tarleton comes in hastily through the inner door._

MRS TARLETON.  _[on the steps]_  Is anything the matter, John?  Nurse
says she heard you calling me a quarter of an hour ago; and that your
voice sounded as if you were ill.  _[She comes between Tarleton and
the man.]_  Is anything the matter?

TARLETON.  This is the son of an old friend of mine.  Mr--er--Mr
Gunner.  _[To the man, who rises awkwardly]._  My wife.

MRS TARLETON.  Good evening to you.

GUNNER.  Er-- _[He is too nervous to speak, and makes a shambling
bow]._

_Bentley looks in at the pavilion door, very peevish, and too
preoccupied with his own affairs to pay any attention to those of the
company._

BENTLEY.  I say:  has anybody seen Hypatia?  She promised to come out
with me; and I cant find her anywhere.  And wheres Joey?

GUNNER.  _[suddenly breaking out aggressively, being incapable of any
middle way between submissiveness and violence]_  _I_ can tell you
where Hypatia is.  I can tell you where Joey is.  And I say it's a
scandal and an infamy.  If people only knew what goes on in this
so-called respectable house it would be put a stop to.  These are the
morals of our pious capitalist class!  This is your rotten
bourgeoisie!  This!--

MRS TARLETON.  Dont you dare use such language in company.  I wont
allow it.

TARLETON.  All right, Chickabiddy:  it's not bad language:  it's only
Socialism.

MRS TARLETON.  Well, I wont have any Socialism in my house.

TARLETON.  _[to Gunner]_  You hear what Mrs Tarleton says.  Well, in
this house everybody does what she says or out they go.

GUNNER.  Do you suppose I want to stay?  Do you think I would breathe
this polluted atmosphere a moment longer than I could help?

BENTLEY.  _[running forward between Lina and Gunner]_  But what did
you mean by what you said about Miss Tarleton and Mr Percival, you
beastly rotter, you?

GUNNER.  _[to Tarleton]_  Oh! is Hypatia your daughter?  And Joey is
Mister Percival, is he?  One of your set, I suppose.  One of the smart
set!  One of the bridge-playing, eighty-horse-power, week-ender set!
One of the johnnies I slave for!  Well, Joey has more decency than
your daughter, anyhow.  The women are the worst.  I never believed it
til I saw it with my own eyes.  Well, it wont last for ever.  The
writing is on the wall.  Rome fell.  Babylon fell.  Hindhead's turn
will come.

MRS TARLETON.  _[naively looking at the wall for the writing]_
Whatever are you talking about, young man?

GUNNER.  I know what I'm talking about.  I went into that Turkish bath
a boy:  I came out a man.

MRS TARLETON.  Good gracious! hes mad.  _[To Lina]_  Did John make him
take a Turkish bath?

LINA.  No.  He doesnt need Turkish baths:  he needs to put on a little
flesh.  I dont understand what it's all about.  I found him trying to
shoot Mr Tarleton.

MRS TARLETON.  _[with a scream]_  Oh! and John encouraging him, I'll
be bound!  Bunny:  you go for the police.  _[To Gunner]_  I'll teach
you to come into my house and shoot my husband.

GUNNER.  Teach away.  I never asked to be let off.  I'm ashamed to be
free instead of taking my part with the rest.  Women--beautiful women
of noble birth--are going to prison for their opinions.  Girl students
in Russia go to the gallows; let themselves be cut in pieces with the
knout, or driven through the frozen snows of Siberia, sooner than
stand looking on tamely at the world being made a hell for the toiling
millions.  If you were not all skunks and cowards youd be suffering
with them instead of battening here on the plunder of the poor.

MRS TARLETON.  _[much vexed]_  Oh, did you ever hear such silly
nonsense?  Bunny:  go and tell the gardener to send over one of his
men to Grayshott for the police.

GUNNER.  I'll go with him.  I intend to give myself up.  I'm going to
expose what Ive seen here, no matter what the consequences may be to
my miserable self.

TARLETON.  Stop.  You stay where you are, Ben.  Chickabiddy:  youve
never had the police in.  If you had, youd not be in a hurry to have
them in again.  Now, young man:  cut the cackle; and tell us, as short
as you can, what did you see?

GUNNER.  I cant tell you in the presence of ladies.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, you are tiresome.  As if it mattered to anyone what
you saw.  Me!  A married woman that might be your mother.  _[To Lina]_
And I'm sure youre not particular, if youll excuse my saying so.

TARLETON.  Out with it.  What did you see?

GUNNER.  I saw your daughter with my own eyes--oh well, never mind
what I saw.

BENTLEY.  _[almost crying with anxiety]_  You beastly rotter, I'll get
Joey to give you such a hiding--

TARLETON.  You cant leave it at that, you know.  What did you see my
daughter doing?

GUNNER.  After all, why shouldnt she do it?  The Russian students do
it.  Women should be as free as men.  I'm a fool.  I'm so full of your
bourgeois morality that I let myself be shocked by the application of
my own revolutionary principles.  If she likes the man why shouldnt
she tell him so?

MRS TARLETON.  I do wonder at you, John, letting him talk like this
before everybody.  _[Turning rather tartly to Lina]_  Would you mind
going away to the drawing-room just for a few minutes, Miss
Chipenoska.  This is a private family matter, if you dont mind.

LINA.  I should have gone before, Mrs Tarleton, if there had been
anyone to protect Mr Tarleton and the young gentleman.

TARLETON.  Youre quite right, Miss Lina:  you must stand by.  I could
have tackled him this morning; but since you put me through those
exercises I'd rather die than even shake hands with a man, much less
fight him.

GUNNER.  It's all of a piece here.  The men effeminate, the women
unsexed--

TARLETON.  Dont begin again, old chap.  Keep it for Trafalgar Square.

HYPATIA'S VOICE OUTSIDE.  No, no.  _[She breaks off in a stifled half
laugh, half scream, and is seen darting across the garden with
Percival in hot pursuit.  Immediately afterwards she appears again,
and runs into the pavilion.  Finding it full of people, including a
stranger, she stops; but Percival, flushed and reckless, rushes in and
seizes her before he, too, realizes that they are not alone.  He
releases her in confusion]._

_Dead silence.  They are all afraid to look at one another except Mrs
Tarleton, who stares sternly at Hypatia.  Hypatia is the first to
recover her presence of mind._

HYPATIA.  Excuse me rushing in like this.  Mr Percival has been
chasing me down the hill.

GUNNER.  Who chased him up it?  Dont be ashamed.  Be fearless.  Be
truthful.

TARLETON.  Gunner:  will you go to Paris for a fortnight?  I'll pay
your expenses.

HYPATIA.  What do you mean?

GUNNER.  There was a silent witness in the Turkish bath.

TARLETON.  I found him hiding there.  Whatever went on here, he saw
and heard.  Thats what he means.

PERCIVAL.  _[sternly approaching Gunner, and speaking with deep but
contained indignation]_  Am I to understand you as daring to put
forward the monstrous and blackguardly lie that this lady behaved
improperly in my presence?

GUNNER.  _[turning white]_  You know what I saw and heard.

_Hypatia, with a gleam of triumph in her eyes, slips noiselessly into
the swing chair, and watches Percival and Gunner, swinging slightly,
but otherwise motionless._

PERCIVAL.  I hope it is not necessary for me to assure you all that
there is not one word of truth--not one grain of substance--in this
rascally calumny, which no man with a spark of decent feeling would
have uttered even if he had been ignorant enough to believe it.  Miss
Tarleton's conduct, since I have had the honor of knowing her, has
been, I need hardly say, in every respect beyond reproach.  _[To
Gunner]_  As for you, sir, youll have the goodness to come out with me
immediately.  I have some business with you which cant be settled in
Mrs Tarleton's presence or in her house.

GUNNER.  _[painfully frightened]_  Why should I go out with you?

PERCIVAL.  Because I intend that you shall.

GUNNER.  I wont be bullied by you.  _[Percival makes a threatening
step towards him]._  Police!  _[He tries to bolt; but Percival seizes
him]._  Leave me go, will you?  What right have you to lay hands on
me?

TARLETON.  Let him run for it, Mr Percival.  Hes very poor company.
We shall be well rid of him.  Let him go.

PERCIVAL.  Not until he has taken back and made the fullest apology
for the abominable lie he has told.  He shall do that or he shall
defend himself as best he can against the most thorough thrashing I'm
capable of giving him.  _[Releasing Gunner, but facing him ominously]_
Take your choice.  Which is it to be?

GUNNER.  Give me a fair chance.  Go and stick at a desk from nine to
six for a month, and let me have your grub and your sport and your
lessons in boxing, and I'll fight you fast enough.  You know I'm no
good or you darent bully me like this.

PERCIVAL.  You should have thought of that before you attacked a lady
with a dastardly slander.  I'm waiting for your decision.  I'm rather
in a hurry, please.

GUNNER.  I never said anything against the lady.

MRS TARLETON.  |    Oh, listen to that!
               |
BENTLEY.       |    What a liar!
               |
HYPATIA.       |    Oh!
               |
TARLETON.      |    Oh, come!

PERCIVAL.  We'll have it in writing, if you dont mind.  _[Pointing to
the writing table]_  Sit down; and take that pen in your hand.
_[Gunner looks irresolutely a little way round; then obeys]._  Now
write.  "I," whatever your name is--

GUNNER _[after a vain attempt]_  I cant.  My hand's shaking too much.
You see it's no use.  I'm doing my best.  I cant.

PERCIVAL.  Mr Summerhays will write it:  you can sign it.

BENTLEY.  _[insolently to Gunner]_  Get up. _[Gunner obeys; and
Bentley, shouldering him aside towards Percival, takes his place and
prepares to write]._

PERCIVAL.  Whats your name?

GUNNER.  John Brown.

TARLETON.  Oh come!  Couldnt you make it Horace Smith? or Algernon
Robinson?

GUNNER.  _[agitatedly]_  But my name is John Brown.  There are really
John Browns.  How can I help it if my name's a common one?

BENTLEY.  Shew us a letter addressed to you.

GUNNER.  How can I?  I never get any letters:  I'm only a clerk.  I
can shew you J. B. on my handkerchief.  _[He takes out a not very
clean one]._

BENTLEY.  _[with disgust]_  Oh, put it up again.  Let it go at John
Brown.

PERCIVAL.  Where do you live?

GUNNER.  4 Chesterfield Parade, Kentish Town, N.W.

PERCIVAL.  _[dictating]_  I, John Brown, of 4 Chesterfield Parade,
Kentish Town, do hereby voluntarily confess that on the 31st May 1909
I-- _[To Tarleton]_  What did he do exactly?

TARLETON.  _[dictating]_  --I trespassed on the land of John Tarleton
at Hindhead, and effected an unlawful entry into his house, where I
secreted myself in a portable Turkish bath--

BENTLEY.  Go slow, old man.  Just a moment.  "Turkish bath"--yes?

TARLETON.  _[continuing]_  --with a pistol, with which I threatened to
take the life of the said John Tarleton--

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, John!  You might have been killed.

TARLETON.  --and was prevented from doing so only by the timely
arrival of the celebrated Miss Lina Szczepanowska.

MRS TARLETON.  Is she celebrated?  _[Apologetically]_  I never
dreamt--

BENTLEY.  Look here:  I'm awfully sorry; but I cant spell
Szczepanowska.

PERCIVAL.  I think it's S, z, c, z-- _[Lina gives him her
visiting-card]._  Thank you.  _[He throws it on Bentley's blotter]._

BENTLEY.  Thanks awfully.  _[He writes the name]._

TARLETON.  _[to Percival]_  Now it's your turn.

PERCIVAL.  _[dictating]_  I further confess that I was guilty of
uttering an abominable calumny concerning Miss Hypatia Tarleton, for
which there was not a shred of foundation.

_Impressive silence whilst Bentley writes._

BENTLEY.  "foundation"?

PERCIVAL.  I apologize most humbly to the lady and her family for my
conduct--  _[he waits for Bentley to write]._

BENTLEY.  "conduct"?

PERCIVAL.  --and I promise Mr Tarleton not to repeat it, and to amend
my life--

BENTLEY.  "amend my life"?

PERCIVAL.  --and to do what in me lies to prove worthy of his kindness
in giving me another chance--

BENTLEY.  "another chance"?

PERCIVAL.  --and refraining from delivering me up to the punishment I
so richly deserve.

BENTLEY.  "richly deserve."

PERCIVAL.  _[to Hypatia]_  Does that satisfy you, Miss Tarleton?

HYPATIA.  Yes:  that will teach him to tell lies next time.

BENTLEY.  _[rising to make place for Gunner and handing him the pen]_
You mean it will teach him to tell the truth next time.

TARLETON.  Ahem!  Do you, Patsy?

PERCIVAL.  Be good enough to sign.  _[Gunner sits down helplessly and
dips the pen in the ink]._  I hope what you are signing is no mere
form of words to you, and that you not only say you are sorry, but
that you are sorry.

_Lord Summerhays and Johnny come in through the pavilion door._

MRS TARLETON.  Stop.  Mr Percival:  I think, on Hypatia's account,
Lord Summerhays ought to be told about this.

_Lord Summerhays, wondering what the matter is, comes forward between
Percival and Lina.  Johnny stops beside Hypatia._

PERCIVAL.  Certainly.

TARLETON.  _[uneasily]_  Take my advice, and cut it short.  Get rid of
him.

MRS TARLETON.  Hypatia ought to have her character cleared.

TARLETON.  You let well alone, Chickabiddy.  Most of our characters
will bear a little careful dusting; but they wont bear scouring.
Patsy is jolly well out of it.  What does it matter, anyhow?

PERCIVAL.  Mr Tarleton:  we have already said either too much or not
enough.  Lord Summerhays:  will you be kind enough to witness the
declaration this man has just signed?

GUNNER.  I havnt yet.  Am I to sign now?

PERCIVAL.  Of course.  _[Gunner, who is now incapable of doing
anything on his own initiative, signs]._  Now stand up and read your
declaration to this gentleman.  _[Gunner makes a vague movement and
looks stupidly round.  Percival adds peremptorily]_  Now, please.

GUNNER _[rising apprehensively and reading in a hardly audible voice,
like a very sick man]_  I, John Brown, of 4 Chesterfield Parade,
Kentish Town, do hereby voluntarily confess that on the 31st May 1909
I trespassed on the land of John Tarleton at Hindhead, and effected an
unlawful entry into his house, where I secreted myself in a portable
Turkish bath, with a pistol, with which I threatened to take the life
of the said John Tarleton, and was prevented from doing so only by the
timely arrival of the celebrated Miss Lena Sh-Sh-sheepanossika.  I
further confess that I was guilty of uttering an abominable calumny
concerning Miss Hypatia Tarleton, for which there was not a shred of
foundation.  I apologize most humbly to the lady and her family for my
conduct; and I promise Mr Tarleton not to repeat it, and to amend my
life, and to do what in me lies to prove worthy of his kindness in
giving me another chance and refraining from delivering me up to the
punishment I so richly deserve.

_A short and painful silence follows.  Then Percival speaks._

PERCIVAL.  Do you consider that sufficient, Lord Summerhays?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Oh quite, quite.

PERCIVAL. _[to Hypatia]_  Lord Summerhays would probably like to hear
you say that you are satisfied, Miss Tarleton.

HYPATIA.  _[coming out of the swing, and advancing between Percival
and Lord Summerhays]_  I must say that you have behaved like a perfect
gentleman, Mr. Percival.

PERCIVAL.  _[first bowing to Hypatia, and then turning with cold
contempt to Gunner, who is standing helpless]_  We need not trouble
you any further.  _[Gunner turns vaguely towards the pavilion]._

JOHNNY _[with less refined offensiveness, pointing to the pavilion]_
Thats your way.  The gardener will shew you the shortest way into the
road.  Go the shortest way.

GUNNER.  _[oppressed and disconcerted, hardly knows how to get out of
the room]_  Yes, sir.  I-- _[He turns again, appealing to Tarleton]_
Maynt I have my mother's photographs back again?  _[Mrs Tarleton
pricks up her ears]._

TARLETON.  Eh?  What?  Oh, the photographs!  Yes, yes, yes:  take
them.  _[Gunner takes them from the table, and is creeping away, when
Mrs Tarleton puts out her hand and stops him]._

MRS TARLETON.  Whats this, John?  What were you doing with his
mother's photographs?

TARLETON.  Nothing, nothing.  Never mind, Chickabiddy:  it's all
right.

MRS TARLETON.  _[snatching the photographs from Gunner's irresolute
fingers, and recognizing them at a glance]_  Lucy Titmus!  Oh John,
John!

TARLETON.  _[grimly, to Gunner]_  Young man:  youre a fool; but youve
just put the lid on this job in a masterly manner.  I knew you would.
I told you all to let well alone.  You wouldnt; and now you must take
the consequences--or rather _I_ must take them.

MRS TARLETON.  _[to Gunner]_  Are you Lucy's son?

GUNNER.  Yes.

MRS TARLETON.  And why didnt you come to me?  I didnt turn my back on
your mother when she came to me in her trouble.  Didnt you know that?

GUNNER.  No.  She never talked to me about anything.

TARLETON.  How could she talk to her own son?  Shy, Summerhays, shy.
Parent and child.  Shy.  _[He sits down at the end of the writing
table nearest the sideboard like a man resigned to anything that fate
may have in store for him]._

MRS TARLETON.  Then how did you find out?

GUNNER.  From her papers after she died.

MRS TARLETON.  _[shocked]_  Is Lucy dead?  And I never knew!  _[With
an effusion of tenderness]_  And you here being treated like that,
poor orphan, with nobody to take your part!  Tear up that foolish
paper, child; and sit down and make friends with me.

JOHNNY.        |    Hallo, mother this is all very well, you know--
               |
PERCIVAL.      |    But may I point out, Mrs Tarleton, that--
               |
BENTLEY.       |    Do you mean that after what he said of--
               |
HYPATIA.       |    Oh, look here, mamma:  this is really--

MRS TARLETON.  Will you please speak one at a time?

_Silence._

PERCIVAL _[in a very gentlemanly manner]_  Will you allow me to remind
you, Mrs Tarleton, that this man has uttered a most serious and
disgraceful falsehood concerning Miss Tarleton and myself?

MRS TARLETON.  I dont believe a word of it.  If the poor lad was there
in the Turkish bath, who has a better right to say what was going on
here than he has?  You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Patsy; and so
ought you too, Mr Percival, for encouraging her.  _[Hypatia retreats
to the pavilion, and exchanges grimaces with Johnny, shamelessly
enjoying Percival's sudden reverse.  They know their mother]._

PERCIVAL.  _[gasping]_  Mrs Tarleton:  I give you my word of honor--

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, go along with you and your word of honor.  Do you
think I'm a fool?  I wonder you can look the lad in the face after
bullying him and making him sign those wicked lies; and all the time
you carrying on with my daughter before youd been half an hour in my
house.  Fie, for shame!

PERCIVAL.  Lord Summerhays:  I appeal to you.  Have I done the correct
thing or not?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Youve done your best, Mr Percival.  But the correct
thing depends for its success on everybody playing the game very
strictly.  As a single-handed game, it's impossible.

BENTLEY.  _[suddenly breaking out lamentably]_  Joey:  have you taken
Hypatia away from me?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[severely]_  Bentley!  Bentley!  Control yourself,
sir.

TARLETON.  Come, Mr Percival! the shutters are up on the gentlemanly
business.  Try the truth.

PERCIVAL.  I am in a wretched position.  If I tell the truth nobody
will believe me.

TARLETON.  Oh yes they will.  The truth makes everybody believe it.

PERCIVAL.  It also makes everybody pretend not to believe it.  Mrs
Tarleton:  youre not playing the game.

MRS TARLETON.  I dont think youve behaved at all nicely, Mr Percival.

BENTLEY.  I wouldnt have played you such a dirty trick, Joey.
_[Struggling with a sob]_  You beast.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Bentley:  you must control yourself.  Let me say at
the same time, Mr Percival, that my son seems to have been mistaken in
regarding you either as his friend or as a gentleman.

PERCIVAL.  Miss Tarleton:  I'm suffering this for your sake.  I ask
you just to say that I am not to blame.  Just that and nothing more.

HYPATIA.  _[gloating mischievously over his distress]_  You chased me
through the heather and kissed me.  You shouldnt have done that if you
were not in earnest.

PERCIVAL.  Oh, this is really the limit.  _[Turning desperately to
Gunner]_  Sir:  I appeal to you.  As a gentleman! as a man of honor!
as a man bound to stand by another man!  You were in that Turkish
bath.  You saw how it began.  Could any man have behaved more
correctly than I did?  Is there a shadow of foundation for the
accusations brought against me?

GUNNER.  _[sorely perplexed]_  Well, what do you want me to say?

JOHNNY.  He has said what he had to say already, hasnt he?  Read that
paper.

GUNNER.  When I tell the truth, you make me go back on it.  And now
you want me to go back on myself!  What is a man to do?

PERCIVAL.  _[patiently]_  Please try to get your mind clear, Mr Brown.
I pointed out to you that you could not, as a gentleman, disparage a
lady's character.  You agree with me, I hope.

GUNNER.  Yes:  that sounds all right.

PERCIVAL.  But youre also bound to tell the truth.  Surely youll not
deny that.

GUNNER.  Who's denying it?  I say nothing against it.

PERCIVAL.  Of course not.  Well, I ask you to tell the truth simply
and unaffectedly.  Did you witness any improper conduct on my part
when you were in the bath?

GUNNER.  No, sir.

JOHNNY.        |    Then what do you mean by saying that--
               |
HYPATIA.       |    Do you mean to say that I--
               |
BENTLEY.       |    Oh, you are a rotter.  Youre afraid--

TARLETON.  _[rising]_  Stop.  _[Silence]._  Leave it at that.  Enough
said.  You keep quiet, Johnny.  Mr Percival:  youre whitewashed.  So
are you, Patsy.  Honors are easy.  Lets drop the subject.  The next
thing to do is to open a subscription to start this young man on a
ranch in some far country thats accustomed to be in a disturbed state.
He--

MRS TARLETON.  Now stop joking the poor lad, John:  I wont have it.
Has been worried to death between you all.  _[To Gunner]_  Have you
had your tea?

GUNNER.  Tea?  No:  it's too early.  I'm all right; only I had no
dinner:  I didnt think I'd want it.  I didnt think I'd be alive.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, what a thing to say!  You mustnt talk like that.

JOHNNY.  Hes out of his mind.  He thinks it's past dinner-time.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, youve no sense, Johnny.  He calls his lunch his
dinner, and has his tea at half-past six.  Havnt you, dear?

GUNNER.  _[timidly]_  Hasnt everybody?

JOHNNY.  _[laughing]_  Well, by George, thats not bad.

MRS TARLETON.  Now dont be rude, Johnny:  you know I dont like it.
_[To Gunner]_  A cup of tea will pick you up.

GUNNER.  I'd rather not.  I'm all right.

TARLETON.  _[going to the sideboard]_  Here! try a mouthful of sloe
gin.

GUNNER.  No, thanks.  I'm a teetotaler.  I cant touch alcohol in any
form.

TARLETON.  Nonsense!  This isnt alcohol.  Sloe gin.  Vegetarian, you
know.

GUNNER.  _[hesitating]_  Is it a fruit beverage?

TARLETON.  Of course it is.  Fruit beverage.  Here you are.  _[He
gives him a glass of sloe gin]._

GUNNER.  _[going to the sideboard]_  Thanks.  _[he begins to drink it
confidently; but the first mouthful startles and almost chokes him]._
It's rather hot.

TARLETON.  Do you good.  Dont be afraid of it.

MRS TARLETON.  _[going to him]_  Sip it, dear.  Dont be in a hurry.

_Gunner sips slowly, each sip making his eyes water._

JOHNNY.  _[coming forward into the place left vacant by Gunner's visit
to the sideboard]_  Well, now that the gentleman has been attended to,
I should like to know where we are.  It may be a vulgar business
habit; but I confess I like to know where I am.

TARLETON.  I dont.  Wherever you are, youre there anyhow.  I tell you
again, leave it at that.

BENTLEY.  I want to know too.  Hypatia's engaged to me.

HYPATIA.  Bentley:  if you insult me again--if you say another word,
I'll leave the house and not enter it until you leave it.

JOHNNY.  Put that in your pipe and smoke it, my boy.

BENTLEY.  _[inarticulate with fury and suppressed tears]_  Oh!
Beasts!  Brutes!

MRS TARLETON.  Now dont hurt his feelings, poor little lamb!

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[very sternly]_  Bentley:  you are not behaving
well.  You had better leave us until you have recovered yourself.

_Bentley goes out in disgrace, but gets no further than half way to
the pavilion door, when, with a wild sob, he throws himself on the
floor and begins to yell._

MRS TARLETON.  |    _[running to him]_  Oh, poor child,
               |    poor child!  Dont cry, duckie:
               |    he didnt mean it:  dont cry.
               |
LORD SUMMERHAYS|    Stop that infernal noise, sir:  do you
               |    hear?  Stop it instantly.
               |
JOHNNY.        |    Thats the game he tried on me.
               |    There you are!  Now, mother!
               |    Now, Patsy!  You see for yourselves.
               |
HYPATIA.       |    _[covering her ears]_  Oh you little
               |    wretch!  Stop him, Mr Percival.  Kick him.
               |
TARLETON.      |    Steady on, steady on.  Easy, Bunny, easy.

LINA.  Leave him to me, Mrs Tarleton.  Stand clear, please.

_She kneels opposite Bentley; quickly lifts the upper half of him from
the ground; dives under him; rises with his body hanging across her
shoulders; and runs out with him._

BENTLEY.  _[in scared, sobered, humble tones as he is borne off]_
What are you doing?  Let me down.  Please, Miss Szczepanowska--
_[they pass out of hearing]._

_An awestruck silence falls on the company as they speculate on
Bentley's fate._

JOHNNY.  I wonder what shes going to do with him.

HYPATIA.  Spank him, I hope.  Spank him hard.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I hope so.  I hope so.  Tarleton:  I'm beyond
measure humiliated and annoyed by my son's behavior in your house.  I
had better take him home.

TARLETON.  Not at all:  not at all.  Now, Chickabiddy:  as Miss Lina
has taken away Ben, suppose you take away Mr Brown for a while.

GUNNER.  _[with unexpected aggressiveness]_  My name isnt Brown.
_[They stare at him:  he meets their stare defiantly, pugnacious with
sloe gin; drains the last drop from his glass; throws it on the
sideboard; and advances to the writing table]._   My name's Baker:
Julius Baker.  Mister Baker.  If any man doubts it, I'm ready for him.

MRS TARLETON.  John:  you shouldnt have given him that sloe gin.  It's
gone to his head.

GUNNER.  Dont you think it.  Fruit beverages dont go to the head; and
what matter if they did?  I say nothing to you, maam:  I regard you
with respect and affection.  _[Lachrymosely]_  You were very good to
my mother:  my poor mother!  _[Relapsing into his daring mood]_  But I
say my name's Baker; and I'm not to be treated as a child or made a
slave of by any man.  Baker is my name.  Did you think I was going to
give you my real name?  Not likely.  Not me.

TARLETON.  So you thought of John Brown.  That was clever of you.

GUNNER.  Clever!  Yes:  we're not all such fools as you think:  we
clerks.  It was the bookkeeper put me up to that.  It's the only name
that nobody gives as a false name, he said.  Clever, eh?  I should
think so.

MRS TARLETON.  Come now, Julius--

GUNNER.  _[reassuring her gravely]_  Dont you be alarmed, maam.  I
know what is due to you as a lady and to myself as a gentleman.  I
regard you with respect and affection.  If you had been my mother, as
you ought to have been, I should have had more chance.  But you shall
have no cause to be ashamed of me.  The strength of a chain is no
greater than its weakest link; but the greatness of a poet is the
greatness of his greatest moment.  Shakespear used to get drunk.
Frederick the Great ran away from a battle.  But it was what they
could rise to, not what they could sink to, that made them great.
They werent good always; but they were good on their day.  Well, on my
day--on my day, mind you--I'm good for something too.  I know that Ive
made a silly exhibition of myself here.  I know I didnt rise to the
occasion.  I know that if youd been my mother, youd have been ashamed
of me.  I lost my presence of mind:  I was a contemptible coward.  But
_[slapping himself on the chest]_  I'm not the man I was then.  This
is my day.  Ive seen the tenth possessor of a foolish face carried out
kicking and screaming by a woman.  _[To Percival]_  You crowed pretty
big over me.  You hypnotized me.  But when you were put through the
fire yourself, you were found wanting.  I tell you straight I dont
give a damn for you.

MRS TARLETON.  No:  thats naughty.  You shouldnt say that before me.

GUNNER.  I would cut my tongue out sooner than say anything vulgar in
your presence; for I regard you with respect and affection.  I was not
swearing.  I was affirming my manhood.

MRS TARLETON.  What an idea!  What puts all these things into your
head?

GUNNER.  Oh, dont you think, because I'm a clerk, that I'm not one of
the intellectuals.  I'm a reading man, a thinking man.  I read in a
book--a high class six shilling book--this precept:  Affirm your
manhood.  It appealed to me.  Ive always remembered it.  I believe in
it.  I feel I must do it to recover your respect after my cowardly
behavior.  Therefore I affirm it in your presence.  I tell that man
who insulted me that I dont give a damn for him.  And neither I do.

TARLETON.  I say, Summerhays:  did you have chaps of this sort in
Jinghiskahn?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Oh yes:  they exist everywhere:  they are a most
serious modern problem.

GUNNER.  Yes.  Youre right.  _[Conceitedly]_  I'm a problem.  And I
tell you that when we clerks realize that we're problems! well, look
out:  thats all.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[suavely, to Gunner]_  You read a great deal, you
say?

GUNNER.  Ive read more than any man in this room, if the truth were
known, I expect.  Thats whats going to smash up your Capitalism.  The
problems are beginning to read.  Ha!  We're free to do that here in
England.  What would you do with me in Jinghiskahn if you had me
there?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Well, since you ask me so directly, I'll tell you.
I should take advantage of the fact that you have neither sense enough
nor strength enough to know how to behave yourself in a difficulty of
any sort.  I should warn an intelligent and ambitious policeman that
you are a troublesome person.  The intelligent and ambitious policeman
would take an early opportunity of upsetting your temper by ordering
you to move on, and treading on your heels until you were provoked
into obstructing an officer in the discharge of his duty.  Any trifle
of that sort would be sufficient to make a man like you lose your
self-possession and put yourself in the wrong.  You would then be
charged and imprisoned until things quieted down.

GUNNER.  And you call that justice!

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  No.  Justice was not my business.  I had to govern a
province; and I took the necessary steps to maintain order in it.  Men
are not governed by justice, but by law or persuasion.  When they
refuse to be governed by law or persuasion, they have to be governed
by force or fraud, or both.  I used both when law and persuasion
failed me.  Every ruler of men since the world began has done so, even
when he has hated both fraud and force as heartily as I do.  It is as
well that you should know this, my young friend; so that you may
recognize in time that anarchism is a game at which the police can
beat you.  What have you to say to that?

GUNNER.  What have I to say to it!  Well, I call it scandalous:  thats
what I have to say to it.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Precisely:  thats all anybody has to say to it,
except the British public, which pretends not to believe it.  And now
let me ask you a sympathetic personal question.  Havnt you a headache?

GUNNER.  Well, since you ask me, I have.  Ive overexcited myself.

MRS TARLETON.  Poor lad!  No wonder, after all youve gone through!
You want to eat a little and to lie down.  You come with me.  I want
you to tell me about your poor dear mother and about yourself.  Come
along with me.  _[She leads the way to the inner door]._

GUNNER.  _[following her obediently]_  Thank you kindly, madam.  _[She
goes out.  Before passing out after her, he partly closes the door and
stops an the landing for a moment to say]_  Mind:  I'm not knuckling
down to any man here.  I knuckle down to Mrs Tarleton because shes a
woman in a thousand.  I affirm my manhood all the same.  Understand:
I dont give a damn for the lot of you.  _[He hurries out, rather
afraid of the consequences of this defiance, which has provoked Johnny
to an impatient movement towards him]._

HYPATIA.  Thank goodness hes gone!  Oh, what a bore!  WHAT a bore!!!
Talk, talk, talk!

TARLETON.  Patsy:  it's no good.  We're going to talk.  And we're
going to talk about you.

JOHNNY.  It's no use shirking it, Pat.  We'd better know where we are.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Come, Miss Tarleton.  Wont you sit down?  I'm very
tired of standing.  _[Hypatia comes from the pavilion and takes a
chair at the worktable.  Lord Summerhays takes the opposite chair, on
her right.  Percival takes the chair Johnny placed for Lina on her
arrival.  Tarleton sits down at the end of the writing table.  Johnny
remains standing.  Lord Summerhays continues, with a sigh of relief at
being seated.]_  We shall now get the change of subject we are all
pining for.

JOHNNY.  _[puzzled]_  Whats that?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  The great question.  The question that men and women
will spend hours over without complaining.  The question that occupies
all the novel readers and all the playgoers.  The question they never
get tired of.

JOHNNY.  But what question?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  The question which particular young man some young
woman will mate with.

PERCIVAL.  As if it mattered!

HYPATIA.  _[sharply]_  Whats that you said?

PERCIVAL.  I said:  As if it mattered.

HYPATIA.  I call that ungentlemanly.

PERCIVAL.  Do you care about that? you who are so magnificently
unladylike!

JOHNNY.  Look here, Mr Percival:  youre not supposed to insult my
sister.

HYPATIA.  Oh, shut up, Johnny.  I can take care of myself.  Dont you
interfere.

JOHNNY.  Oh, very well.  If you choose to give yourself away like
that--to allow a man to call you unladylike and then to be unladylike,
Ive nothing more to say.

HYPATIA.  I think Mr Percival is most ungentlemanly; but I wont be
protected.  I'll not have my affairs interfered with by men on
pretence of protecting me.  I'm not your baby.  If I interfered
between you and a woman, you would soon tell me to mind my own
business.

TARLETON.  Children:  dont squabble.  Read Dr Watts.  Behave
yourselves.

JOHNNY.  Ive nothing more to say; and as I dont seem to be wanted
here, I shall take myself off.  _[He goes out with affected calm
through the pavilion]._

TARLETON.  Summerhays:  a family is an awful thing, an impossible
thing.  Cat and dog.  Patsy:  I'm ashamed of you.

HYPATIA.  I'll make it up with Johnny afterwards; but I really cant
have him here sticking his clumsy hoof into my affairs.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  The question is, Mr Percival, are you really a
gentleman, or are you not?

PERCIVAL.  Was Napoleon really a gentleman or was he not?  He made the
lady get out of the way of the porter and said, "Respect the burden,
madam."  That was behaving like a very fine gentleman; but he kicked
Volney for saying that what France wanted was the Bourbons back again.
That was behaving rather like a navvy.  Now I, like Napoleon, am not
all one piece.  On occasion, as you have all seen, I can behave like a
gentleman.  On occasion, I can behave with a brutal simplicity which
Miss Tarleton herself could hardly surpass.

TARLETON.  Gentleman or no gentleman, Patsy:  what are your
intentions?

HYPATIA.  My intentions!  Surely it's the gentleman who should be
asked his intentions.

TARLETON.  Come now, Patsy! none of that nonsense.  Has Mr Percival
said anything to you that I ought to know or that Bentley ought to
know?  Have you said anything to Mr Percival?

HYPATIA.  Mr Percival chased me through the heather and kissed me.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  As a gentleman, Mr Percival, what do you say to
that?

PERCIVAL.  As a gentleman, I do not kiss and tell.  As a mere man:  a
mere cad, if you like, I say that I did so at Miss Tarleton's own
suggestion.

HYPATIA.  Beast!

PERCIVAL.  I dont deny that I enjoyed it.  But I did not initiate it.
And I began by running away.

TARLETON.  So Patsy can run faster than you, can she?

PERCIVAL.  Yes, when she is in pursuit of me.  She runs faster and
faster.  I run slower and slower.  And these woods of yours are full
of magic.  There was a confounded fern owl.  Did you ever hear the
churr of a fern owl?  Did you ever hear it create a sudden silence by
ceasing?  Did you ever hear it call its mate by striking its wings
together twice and whistling that single note that no nightingale can
imitate?  That is what happened in the woods when I was running away.
So I turned; and the pursuer became the pursued.

HYPATIA.  I had to fight like a wild cat.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Please dont tell us this.  It's not fit for old
people to hear.

TARLETON.  Come:  how did it end?

HYPATIA.  It's not ended yet.

TARLETON.  How is it going to end?

HYPATIA.  Ask him.

TARLETON.  How is it going to end, Mr Percival?

PERCIVAL.  I cant afford to marry, Mr Tarleton.  Ive only a thousand a
year until my father dies.  Two people cant possibly live on that.

TARLETON.  Oh, cant they?  When _I_ married, I should have been jolly
glad to have felt sure of the quarter of it.

PERCIVAL.  No doubt; but I am not a cheap person, Mr Tarleton.  I was
brought up in a household which cost at least seven or eight times
that; and I am in constant money difficulties because I simply dont
know how to live on the thousand a year scale.  As to ask a woman to
share my degrading poverty, it's out of the question.  Besides, I'm
rather young to marry.  I'm only 28.

HYPATIA.  Papa:  buy the brute for me.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[shrinking]_  My dear Miss Tarleton:  dont be so
naughty.  I know how delightful it is to shock an old man; but there
is a point at which it becomes barbarous.  Dont.  Please dont.

HYPATIA.  Shall I tell Papa about you?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Tarleton:  I had better tell you that I once asked
your daughter to become my widow.

TARLETON.  _[to Hypatia]_  Why didnt you accept him, you young idiot?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I was too old.

TARLETON.  All this has been going on under my nose, I suppose.  You
run after young men; and old men run after you.  And I'm the last
person in the world to hear of it.

HYPATIA.  How could I tell you?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Parents and children, Tarleton.

TARLETON.  Oh, the gulf that lies between them! the impassable,
eternal gulf!  And so I'm to buy the brute for you, eh?

HYPATIA.  If you please, papa.

TARLETON.  Whats the price, Mr Percival?

PERCIVAL.  We might do with another fifteen hundred if my father would
contribute.  But I should like more.

TARLETON.  It's purely a question of money with you, is it?

PERCIVAL.  _[after a moment's consideration]_  Practically yes:  it
turns on that.

TARLETON.  I thought you might have some sort of preference for Patsy,
you know.

PERCIVAL.  Well, but does that matter, do you think?  Patsy fascinates
me, no doubt.  I apparently fascinate Patsy.  But, believe me, all
that is not worth considering.  One of my three fathers (the priest)
has married hundreds of couples:  couples selected by one another,
couples selected by the parents, couples forced to marry one another
by circumstances of one kind or another; and he assures me that if
marriages were made by putting all the men's names into one sack and
the women's names into another, and having them taken out by a
blindfolded child like lottery numbers, there would be just as high a
percentage of happy marriages as we have here in England.  He said
Cupid was nothing but the blindfolded child:  pretty idea that, I
think!  I shall have as good a chance with Patsy as with anyone else.
Mind:  I'm not bigoted about it.  I'm not a doctrinaire:  not the
slave of a theory.  You and Lord Summerhays are experienced married
men.  If you can tell me of any trustworthy method of selecting a
wife, I shall be happy to make use of it.  I await your suggestions.
_[He looks with polite attention to Lord Summerhays, who, having
nothing to say, avoids his eye.  He looks to Tarleton, who purses his
lips glumly and rattles his money in his pockets without a word]._
Apparently neither of you has anything to suggest.  Then Patsy will do
as well as another, provided the money is forthcoming.

HYPATIA.  Oh, you beauty, you beauty!

TARLETON.  When I married Patsy's mother, I was in love with her.

PERCIVAL.  For the first time?

TARLETON.  Yes:  for the first time.

PERCIVAL.  For the last time?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  _[revolted]_  Sir:  you are in the presence of his
daughter.

HYPATIA.  Oh, dont mind me.  I dont care.  I'm accustomed to Papa's
adventures.

TARLETON.  _[blushing painfully]_  Patsy, my child:  that was not--not
delicate.

HYPATIA.  Well, papa, youve never shewn any delicacy in talking to me
about my conduct; and I really dont see why I shouldnt talk to you
about yours.  It's such nonsense!  Do you think young people dont
know?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  I'm sure they dont feel.  Tarleton:  this is too
horrible, too brutal.  If neither of these young people have
any--any--any--

PERCIVAL.  Shall we say paternal sentimentality?  I'm extremely sorry
to shock you; but you must remember that Ive been educated to discuss
human affairs with three fathers simultaneously.  I'm an adult person.
Patsy is an adult person.  You do not inspire me with veneration.
Apparently you do not inspire Patsy with veneration.  That may
surprise you.  It may pain you.  I'm sorry.  It cant be helped.  What
about the money?

TARLETON.  You dont inspire me with generosity, young man.

HYPATIA.  _[laughing with genuine amusement]_  He had you there, Joey.

TARLETON.  I havnt been a bad father to you, Patsy.

HYPATIA.  I dont say you have, dear.  If only I could persuade you Ive
grown up, we should get along perfectly.

TARLETON.  Do you remember Bill Burt?

HYPATIA.  Why?

TARLETON.  _[to the others]_  Bill Burt was a laborer here.  I was
going to sack him for kicking his father.  He said his father had
kicked him until he was big enough to kick back.  Patsy begged him
off.  I asked that man what it felt like the first time he kicked his
father, and found that it was just like kicking any other man.  He
laughed and said that it was the old man that knew what it felt like.
Think of that, Summerhays! think of that!

HYPATIA.  I havnt kicked you, papa.

TARLETON.  Youve kicked me harder than Bill Burt ever kicked.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It's no use, Tarleton.  Spare yourself.  Do you
seriously expect these young people, at their age, to sympathize with
what this gentleman calls your paternal sentimentality?

TARLETON.  _[wistfully]_  Is it nothing to you but paternal
sentimentality, Patsy?

HYPATIA.  Well, I greatly prefer your superabundant vitality, papa.

TARLETON.  _[violently]_  Hold your tongue, you young devil.  The
young are all alike:  hard, coarse, shallow, cruel, selfish,
dirty-minded.  You can clear out of my house as soon as you can coax
him to take you; and the sooner the better.  _[To Percival]_  I think
you said your price was fifteen hundred a year.  Take it.  And I wish
you joy of your bargain.

PERCIVAL.  If you wish to know who I am--

TARLETON.  I dont care a tinker's curse who you are or what you are.
Youre willing to take that girl off my hands for fifteen hundred a
year:  thats all that concerns me.  Tell her who you are if you like:
it's her affair, not mine.

HYPATIA.  Dont answer him, Joey:  it wont last.  Lord Summerhays, I'm
sorry about Bentley; but Joey's the only man for me.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It may--

HYPATIA.  Please dont say it may break your poor boy's heart.  It's
much more likely to break yours.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Oh!

TARLETON.  _[springing to his feet]_  Leave the room.  Do you hear:
leave the room.

PERCIVAL.  Arnt we getting a little cross?  Dont be angry, Mr
Tarleton.  Read Marcus Aurelius.

TARLETON.  Dont you dare make fun of me.  Take your aeroplane out of
my vinery and yourself out of my house.

PERCIVAL.  _[rising, to Hypatia]_  I'm afraid I shall have to dine at
the Beacon, Patsy.

HYPATIA.  _[rising]_  Do.  I dine with you.

TARLETON.  Did you hear me tell you to leave the room?

HYPATIA.  I did.  _[To Percival]_  You see what living with one's
parents means, Joey.  It means living in a house where you can be
ordered to leave the room.  Ive got to obey:  it's his house, not
mine.

TARLETON.  Who pays for it?  Go and support yourself as I did if you
want to be independent.

HYPATIA.  I wanted to and you wouldnt let me.  How can I support
myself when I'm a prisoner?

TARLETON.  Hold your tongue.

HYPATIA.  Keep your temper.

PERCIVAL.  _[coming between them]_  Lord Summerhays:  youll join me,
I'm sure, in pointing out to both father and daughter that they have
now reached that very common stage in family life at which anything
but a blow would be an anti-climax.  Do you seriously want to beat
Patsy, Mr Tarleton?

TARLETON.  Yes.  I want to thrash the life out of her.  If she doesnt
get out of my reach, I'll do it.  _[He sits down and grasps the
writing table to restrain himself]._

HYPATIA.  _[coolly going to him and leaning with her breast on his
writhing shoulders]_  Oh, if you want to beat me just to relieve your
feelings--just really and truly for the fun of it and the satisfaction
of it, beat away.  I dont grudge you that.

TARLETON.  _[almost in hysterics]_  I used to think that this sort of
thing went on in other families but that it never could happen in
ours.  And now-- _[He is broken with emotion, and continues
lamentably]_  I cant say the right thing.  I cant do the right thing.
I dont know what is the right thing.  I'm beaten; and she knows it.
Summerhays:  tell me what to do.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  When my council in Jinghiskahn reached the point of
coming to blows, I used to adjourn the sitting.  Let us postpone the
discussion.  Wait until Monday:  we shall have Sunday to quiet down
in.  Believe me, I'm not making fun of you; but I think theres
something in this young gentleman's advice.  Read something.

TARLETON.  I'll read King Lear.

HYPATIA.  Dont.  I'm very sorry, dear.

TARLETON.  Youre not.  Youre laughing at me.  Serve me right!  Parents
and children!  No man should know his own child.  No child should know
its own father.  Let the family be rooted out of civilization!  Let
the human race be brought up in institutions!

HYPATIA.  Oh yes.  How jolly!  You and I might be friends then; and
Joey could stay to dinner.

TARLETON.  Let him stay to dinner.  Let him stay to breakfast.  Let
him spend his life here.  Dont you say I drove him out.  Dont you say
I drove you out.

PERCIVAL.  I really have no right to inflict myself on you.  Dropping
in as I did--

TARLETON.  Out of the sky.  Ha!  Dropping in.  The new sport of
aviation.  You just see a nice house; drop in; scoop up the man's
daughter; and off with you again.

_Bentley comes back, with his shoulders hanging as if he too had been
exercised to the last pitch of fatigue.  He is very sad.  They stare
at him as he gropes to Percival's chair._

BENTLEY.  I'm sorry for making a fool of myself.  I beg your pardon.
Hypatia:  I'm awfully sorry; but Ive made up my mind that I'll never
marry.  _[He sits down in deep depression]._

HYPATIA.  _[running to him]_  How nice of you, Bentley!  Of course you
guessed I wanted to marry Joey.  What did the Polish lady do to you?

BENTLEY.  _[turning his head away]_  I'd rather not speak of her, if
you dont mind.

HYPATIA.  Youve fallen in love with her.  _[She laughs]._

BENTLEY.  It's beastly of you to laugh.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Youre not the first to fall today under the lash of
that young lady's terrible derision, Bentley.

_Lina, her cap on, and her goggles in her hand, comes impetuously
through the inner door._

LINA.  _[on the steps]_  Mr Percival:  can we get that aeroplane
started again?  _[She comes down and runs to the pavilion door]._  I
must get out of this into the air:  right up into the blue.

PERCIVAL.  Impossible.  The frame's twisted.  The petrol has given
out:  thats what brought us down.  And how can we get a clear run to
start with among these woods?

LINA.  _[swooping back through the middle of the pavilion]_  We can
straighten the frame.  We can buy petrol at the Beacon.  With a few
laborers we can get her out on to the Portsmouth Road and start her
along that.

TARLETON.  _[rising]_  But why do you want to leave us, Miss Szcz?

LINA.  Old pal:  this is a stuffy house.  You seem to think of nothing
but making love.  All the conversation here is about love-making.  All
the pictures are about love-making.  The eyes of all of you are
sheep's eyes.  You are steeped in it, soaked in it:  the very texts on
the walls of your bedrooms are the ones about love.  It is disgusting.
It is not healthy.  Your women are kept idle and dressed up for no
other purpose than to be made love to.  I have not been here an hour;
and already everybody makes love to me as if because I am a woman it
were my profession to be made love to.  First you, old pal.  I forgave
you because you were nice about your wife.

HYPATIA.  Oh! oh! oh!  Oh, papa!

LINA.  Then you, Lord Summerhays, come to me; and all you have to say
is to ask me not to mention that you made love to me in Vienna two
years ago.  I forgave you because I thought you were an ambassador;
and all ambassadors make love and are very nice and useful to people
who travel.  Then this young gentleman.  He is engaged to this young
lady; but no matter for that:  he makes love to me because I carry him
off in my arms when he cries.  All these I bore in silence.  But now
comes your Johnny and tells me I'm a ripping fine woman, and asks me
to marry him.  I, Lina Szczepanowska, MARRY him!!!!!  I do not mind
this boy:  he is a child:  he loves me:  I should have to give him
money and take care of him:  that would be foolish, but honorable.  I
do not mind you, old pal:  you are what you call an old--ouf! but you
do not offer to buy me:  you say until we are tired--until you are so
happy that you dare not ask for more.  That is foolish too, at your
age; but it is an adventure:  it is not dishonorable.  I do not mind
Lord Summerhays:  it was in Vienna:  they had been toasting him at a
great banquet:  he was not sober.  That is bad for the health; but it
is not dishonorable.  But your Johnny!  Oh, your Johnny! with his
marriage.  He will do the straight thing by me.  He will give me a
home, a position.  He tells me I must know that my present position is
not one for a nice woman.  This to me, Lina Szczepanowska!  I am an
honest woman:  I earn my living.  I am a free woman:  I live in my own
house.  I am a woman of the world:  I have thousands of friends:
every night crowds of people applaud me, delight in me, buy my
picture, pay hard-earned money to see me.  I am strong:  I am skilful:
I am brave:  I am independent:  I am unbought:  I am all that a woman
ought to be; and in my family there has not been a single drunkard for
four generations.  And this Englishman! this linendraper! he dares to
ask me to come and live with him in this rrrrrrrabbit hutch, and take
my bread from his hand, and ask him for pocket money, and wear soft
clothes, and be his woman! his wife!  Sooner than that, I would stoop
to the lowest depths of my profession.  I would stuff lions with food
and pretend to tame them.  I would deceive honest people's eyes with
conjuring tricks instead of real feats of strength and skill.  I would
be a clown and set bad examples of conduct to little children.  I
would sink yet lower and be an actress or an opera singer, imperilling
my soul by the wicked lie of pretending to be somebody else.  All this
I would do sooner than take my bread from the hand of a man and make
him the master of my body and soul.  And so you may tell your Johnny
to buy an Englishwoman:  he shall not buy Lina Szczepanowska; and I
will not stay in the house where such dishonor is offered me.  Adieu.
_[She turns precipitately to go, but is faced in the pavilion doorway
by Johnny, who comes in slowly, his hands in his pockets, meditating
deeply]._

JOHNNY.  _[confidentially to Lina]_  You wont mention our little
conversation, Miss Shepanoska.  It'll do no good; and I'd rather you
didnt.

TARLETON.  Weve just heard about it, Johnny.

JOHNNY.  _[shortly, but without ill-temper]_  Oh:  is that so?

HYPATIA.  The cat's out of the bag, Johnny, about everybody.  They
were all beforehand with you:  papa, Lord Summerhays, Bentley and all.
Dont you let them laugh at you.

JOHNNY.  _[a grin slowly overspreading his countenance]_  Well, theres
no use my pretending to be surprised at you, Governor, is there?  I
hope you got it as hot as I did.  Mind, Miss Shepanoska:  it wasnt
lost on me.  I'm a thinking man.  I kept my temper.  Youll admit that.

LINA.  _[frankly]_  Oh yes.  I do not quarrel.  You are what is called
a chump; but you are not a bad sort of chump.

JOHNNY.  Thank you.  Well, if a chump may have an opinion, I should
put it at this.  You make, I suppose, ten pounds a night off your own
bat, Miss Lina?

LINA.  _[scornfully]_  Ten pounds a night!  I have made ten pounds a
minute.

JOHNNY.  _[with increased respect]_  Have you indeed?  I didnt know:
youll excuse my mistake, I hope.  But the principle is the same.  Now
I trust you wont be offended at what I'm going to say; but Ive thought
about this and watched it in daily experience; and you may take it
from me that the moment a woman becomes pecuniarily independent, she
gets hold of the wrong end of the stick in moral questions.

LINA.  Indeed!  And what do you conclude from that, Mister Johnny?

JOHNNY.  Well, obviously, that independence for women is wrong and
shouldnt be allowed.  For their own good, you know.  And for the good
of morality in general.  You agree with me, Lord Summerhays, dont you?

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  It's a very moral moral, if I may so express myself.

_Mrs Tarleton comes in softly through the inner door._

MRS TARLETON.  Dont make too much noise.  The lad's asleep.

TARLETON.  Chickabiddy:  we have some news for you.

JOHNNY.  _[apprehensively]_  Now theres no need, you know, Governor,
to worry mother with everything that passes.

MRS TARLETON.  _[coming to Tarleton]_  Whats been going on?  Dont you
hold anything back from me, John.  What have you been doing?

TARLETON.  Bentley isnt going to marry Patsy.

MRS TARLETON.  Of course not.  Is that your great news?  I never
believed she'd marry him.

TARLETON.  Theres something else.  Mr Percival here--

MRS TARLETON.  _[to Percival]_  Are you going to marry Patsy?

PERCIVAL _[diplomatically]_  Patsy is going to marry me, with your
permission.

MRS TARLETON.  Oh, she has my permission:  she ought to have been
married long ago.

HYPATIA.  Mother!

TARLETON.  Miss Lina here, though she has been so short a time with
us, has inspired a good deal of attachment in--I may say in almost all
of us.  Therefore I hope she'll stay to dinner, and not insist on
flying away in that aeroplane.

PERCIVAL.  You must stay, Miss Szczepanowska.  I cant go up again this
evening.

LINA.  Ive seen you work it.  Do you think I require any help?  And
Bentley shall come with me as a passenger.

BENTLEY.  _[terrified]_  Go up in an aeroplane!  I darent.

LINA.  You must learn to dare.

BENTLEY.  _[pale but heroic]_  All right.  I'll come.

LORD SUMMERHAYS|    No, no, Bentley, impossible.  I
               |    shall not allow it.
               |
MRS TARLETON.  |    Do you want to kill the child?  He shant go.

BENTLEY.  I will.  I'll lie down and yell until you let me go.  I'm
not a coward.  I wont be a coward.

LORD SUMMERHAYS.  Miss Szczepanowska:  my son is very dear to me.  I
implore you to wait until tomorrow morning.

LINA.  There may be a storm tomorrow.  And I'll go:  storm or no
storm.  I must risk my life tomorrow.

BENTLEY.  I hope there will be a storm.

LINA.  _[grasping his arm]_  You are trembling.

BENTLEY.  Yes:  it's terror, sheer terror.  I can hardly see.  I can
hardly stand.  But I'll go with you.

LINA.  _[slapping him on the back and knocking a ghastly white smile
into his face]_  You shall.  I like you, my boy.  We go tomorrow,
together.

BENTLEY.  Yes:  together:  tomorrow.

TARLETON.  Well, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.  Read
the old book.

MRS TARLETON.  Is there anything else?

TARLETON.  Well, I--er _[he addresses Lina, and stops]._  I--er _[he
addresses Lord Summerhays, and stops]._  I--er _[he gives it up]._
Well, I suppose--er--I suppose theres nothing more to be said.

HYPATIA.  _[fervently]_  Thank goodness!

========================================
========================================

A TREATISE ON PARENTS AND CHILDREN

By Bernard Shaw



CONTENTS

     Parents and Children
     Trailing Clouds of Glory
     The Child is Father to the Man
     What is a Child?
     The Sin of Nadab and Abihu
     The Manufacture of Monsters
     Small and Large Families
     Children as Nuisances
     Child Fanciers
     Childhood as a State of Sin
     School
     My Scholastic Acquirements
     Schoolmasters of Genius
     What We Do Not Teach, and Why
     Taboo in Schools
     Alleged Novelties in Modern Schools
     What is to be Done?
     Children's Rights and Duties
     Should Children Earn their Living?
     Children's Happiness
     The Horror of the Perpetual Holiday
     University Schoolboyishness
     The New Laziness
     The Infinite School Task
     The Rewards and Risks of Knowledge
     English Physical Hardihood and Spiritual Cowardice
     The Risks of Ignorance and Weakness
     The Common Sense of Toleration
     The Sin of Athanasius
     The Experiment Experimenting
     Why We Loathe Learning and Love Sport
     Antichrist
     Under the Whip
     Technical Instruction
     Docility and Dependence
     The Abuse of Docility
     The Schoolboy and the Homeboy
     The Comings of Age of Children
     The Conflict of Wills
     The Demagogue's Opportunity
     Our Quarrelsomeness
     We Must Reform Society before we can Reform Ourselves
     The Pursuit of Manners
     Not too much Wind on the Heath, Brother
     Wanted:  a Child's Magna Charta
     The Pursuit of Learning
     Children and Game:  a Proposal
     The Parents' Intolerable Burden
     Mobilization
     Children's Rights and Parents' Wrongs
     How Little We Know About Our Parents
     Our Abandoned Mothers
     Family Affection
     The Fate of the Family
     Family Mourning
     Art Teaching
     The Impossibility of Secular Education
     Natural Selection as a Religion
     Moral Instruction Leagues
     The Bible
     Artist Idolatry
     "The Machine"
     The Provocation to Anarchism
     Imagination
     Government by Bullies




PARENTS AND CHILDREN



Trailing Clouds of Glory

Childhood is a stage in the process of that continual remanufacture of
the Life Stuff by which the human race is perpetuated. The Life Force
either will not or cannot achieve immortality except in very low
organisms: indeed it is by no means ascertained that even the amoeba is
immortal. Human beings visibly wear out, though they last longer than
their friends the dogs. Turtles, parrots, and elephants are believed to
be capable of outliving the memory of the oldest human inhabitant. But
the fact that new ones are born conclusively proves that they are not
immortal. Do away with death and you do away with the need for birth: in
fact if you went on breeding, you would finally have to kill old people
to make room for young ones.

Now death is not necessarily a failure of energy on the part of the Life
Force. People with no imagination try to make things which will last for
ever, and even want to live for ever themselves. But the intelligently
imaginative man knows very well that it is waste of labor to make a
machine that will last ten years, because it will probably be superseded
in half that time by an improved machine answering the same purpose.
He also knows that if some devil were to convince us that our dream
of personal immortality is no dream but a hard fact, such a shriek of
despair would go up from the human race as no other conceivable horror
could provoke. With all our perverse nonsense as to John Smith living
for a thousand million eons and for ever after, we die voluntarily,
knowing that it is time for us to be scrapped, to be remanufactured, to
come back, as Wordsworth divined, trailing ever brightening clouds of
glory. We must all be born again, and yet again and again. We should
like to live a little longer just as we should like 50 pounds: that is,
we should take it if we could get it for nothing; but that sort of idle
liking is not will. It is amazing--considering the way we talk--how
little a man will do to get 50 pounds: all the 50-pound notes I have
ever known of have been more easily earned than a laborious sixpence;
but the difficulty of inducing a man to make any serious effort to
obtain 50 pounds is nothing to the difficulty of inducing him to make a
serious effort to keep alive. The moment he sees death approach, he gets
into bed and sends for a doctor. He knows very well at the back of
his conscience that he is rather a poor job and had better be
remanufactured. He knows that his death will make room for a birth; and
he hopes that it will be a birth of something that he aspired to be and
fell short of. He knows that it is through death and rebirth that
this corruptible shall become incorruptible, and this mortal put on
immortality. Practise as you will on his ignorance, his fears, and his
imagination, with bribes of paradises and threats of hells, there is
only one belief that can rob death of its sting and the grave of its
victory; and that is the belief that we can lay down the burden of our
wretched little makeshift individualities for ever at each lift towards
the goal of evolution, which can only be a being that cannot be improved
upon. After all, what man is capable of the insane self-conceit of
believing that an eternity of himself would be tolerable even to
himself? Those who try to believe it postulate that they shall be made
perfect first. But if you make me perfect I shall no longer be myself,
nor will it be possible for me to conceive my present imperfections (and
what I cannot conceive I cannot remember); so that you may just as well
give me a new name and face the fact that I am a new person and that
the old Bernard Shaw is as dead as mutton. Thus, oddly enough, the
conventional belief in the matter comes to this: that if you wish to
live for ever you must be wicked enough to be irretrievably damned,
since the saved are no longer what they were, and in hell alone do
people retain their sinful nature: that is to say, their individuality.
And this sort of hell, however convenient as a means of intimidating
persons who have practically no honor and no conscience, is not a fact.
Death is for many of us the gate of hell; but we are inside on the way
out, not outside on the way in. Therefore let us give up telling one
another idle stories, and rejoice in death as we rejoice in birth; for
without death we cannot be born again; and the man who does not wish
to be born again and born better is fit only to represent the City of
London in Parliament, or perhaps the university of Oxford.




The Child is Father to the Man

Is he? Then in the name of common sense why do we always treat children
on the assumption that the man is father to the child? Oh, these
fathers! And we are not content with fathers: we must have godfathers,
forgetting that the child is godfather to the man. Has it ever struck
you as curious that in a country where the first article of belief is
that every child is born with a godfather whom we all call "our father
which art in heaven," two very limited individual mortals should
be allowed to appear at its baptism and explain that they are its
godparents, and that they will look after its salvation until it is no
longer a child. I had a godmother who made herself responsible in this
way for me. She presented me with a Bible with a gilt clasp and edges,
larger than the Bibles similarly presented to my sisters, because my sex
entitled me to a heavier article. I must have seen that lady at least
four times in the twenty years following. She never alluded to my
salvation in any way. People occasionally ask me to act as godfather to
their children with a levity which convinces me that they have not the
faintest notion that it involves anything more than calling the helpless
child George Bernard without regard to the possibility that it may grow
up in the liveliest abhorrence of my notions.

A person with a turn for logic might argue that if God is the Father of
all men, and if the child is father to the man, it follows that the true
representative of God at the christening is the child itself. But such
posers are unpopular, because they imply that our little customs, or,
as we often call them, our religion, mean something, or must originally
have meant something, and that we understand and believe that something.

However, my business is not to make confusion worse confounded, but to
clear it up. Only, it is as well to begin by a sample of current thought
and practice which shews that on the subject of children we are very
deeply confused. On the whole, whatever our theory or no theory may
be, our practice is to treat the child as the property of its immediate
physical parents, and to allow them to do what they like with it as far
as it will let them. It has no rights and no liberties: in short, its
condition is that which adults recognize as the most miserable and
dangerous politically possible for themselves: namely, the condition of
slavery. For its alleviation we trust to the natural affection of the
parties, and to public opinion. A father cannot for his own credit let
his son go in rags. Also, in a very large section of the population,
parents finally become dependent on their children. Thus there are
checks on child slavery which do not exist, or are less powerful, in the
case of manual and industrial slavery. Sensationally bad cases fall into
two classes, which are really the same class: namely, the children
whose parents are excessively addicted to the sensual luxury of petting
children, and the children whose parents are excessively addicted to the
sensual luxury of physically torturing them. There is a Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children which has effectually made an end of
our belief that mothers are any more to be trusted than stepmothers, or
fathers than slave-drivers. And there is a growing body of law designed
to prevent parents from using their children ruthlessly to make money
for the household. Such legislation has always been furiously resisted
by the parents, even when the horrors of factory slavery were at
their worst; and the extension of such legislation at present would be
impossible if it were not that the parents affected by it cannot control
a majority of votes in Parliament. In domestic life a great deal of
service is done by children, the girls acting as nursemaids and general
servants, and the lads as errand boys. In the country both boys and
girls do a substantial share of farm labor. This is why it is necessary
to coerce poor parents to send their children to school, though in the
relatively small class which keeps plenty of servants it is impossible
to induce parents to keep their children at home instead of paying
schoolmasters to take them off their hands.

It appears then that the bond of affection between parents and children
does not save children from the slavery that denial of rights involves
in adult political relations. It sometimes intensifies it, sometimes
mitigates it; but on the whole children and parents confront one another
as two classes in which all the political power is on one side; and
the results are not at all unlike what they would be if there were no
immediate consanguinity between them, and one were white and the other
black, or one enfranchised and the other disenfranchised, or one ranked
as gentle and the other simple. Not that Nature counts for nothing in
the case and political rights for everything. But a denial of political
rights, and the resultant delivery of one class into the mastery of
another, affects their relations so extensively and profoundly that it
is impossible to ascertain what the real natural relations of the two
classes are until this political relation is abolished.




What is a Child?

An experiment. A fresh attempt to produce the just man made perfect:
that is, to make humanity divine. And you will vitiate the experiment
if you make the slightest attempt to abort it into some fancy figure of
your own: for example, your notion of a good man or a womanly woman.
If you treat it as a little wild beast to be tamed, or as a pet to be
played with, or even as a means to save you trouble and to make money
for you (and these are our commonest ways), it may fight its way through
in spite of you and save its soul alive; for all its instincts will
resist you, and possibly be strengthened in the resistance; but if you
begin with its own holiest aspirations, and suborn them for your own
purposes, then there is hardly any limit to the mischief you may do.
Swear at a child, throw your boots at it, send it flying from the room
with a cuff or a kick; and the experience will be as instructive to the
child as a difficulty with a short-tempered dog or a bull. Francis Place
tells us that his father always struck his children when he found one
within his reach. The effect on the young Places seems to have been
simply to make them keep out of their father's way, which was no doubt
what he desired, as far as he desired anything at all. Francis records
the habit without bitterness, having reason to thank his stars that his
father respected the inside of his head whilst cuffing the outside of
it; and this made it easy for Francis to do yeoman's service to his
country as that rare and admirable thing, a Freethinker: the only
sort of thinker, I may remark, whose thoughts, and consequently whose
religious convictions, command any respect.

Now Mr Place, senior, would be described by many as a bad father; and
I do not contend that he was a conspicuously good one. But as compared
with the conventional good father who deliberately imposes himself on
his son as a god; who takes advantage of childish credulity and parent
worship to persuade his son that what he approves of is right and what
he disapproves of is wrong; who imposes a corresponding conduct on the
child by a system of prohibitions and penalties, rewards and eulogies,
for which he claims divine sanction: compared to this sort of
abortionist and monster maker, I say, Place appears almost as a
Providence. Not that it is possible to live with children any more than
with grown-up people without imposing rules of conduct on them. There
is a point at which every person with human nerves has to say to a child
"Stop that noise." But suppose the child asks why! There are various
answers in use. The simplest: "Because it irritates me," may fail; for
it may strike the child as being rather amusing to irritate you; also
the child, having comparatively no nerves, may be unable to conceive
your meaning vividly enough. In any case it may want to make a noise
more than to spare your feelings. You may therefore have to explain
that the effect of the irritation will be that you will do something
unpleasant if the noise continues. The something unpleasant may be only
a look of suffering to rouse the child's affectionate sympathy (if it
has any), or it may run to forcible expulsion from the room with plenty
of unnecessary violence; but the principle is the same: there are no
false pretences involved: the child learns in a straightforward way that
it does not pay to be inconsiderate. Also, perhaps, that Mamma, who made
the child learn the Sermon on the Mount, is not really a Christian.




The Sin of Nadab and Abihu

But there is another sort of answer in wide use which is neither
straightforward, instructive, nor harmless. In its simplest form it
substitutes for "Stop that noise," "Dont be naughty," which means that
the child, instead of annoying you by a perfectly healthy and natural
infantile procedure, is offending God. This is a blasphemous lie; and
the fact that it is on the lips of every nurserymaid does not excuse it
in the least. Dickens tells us of a nurserymaid who elaborated it into
"If you do that, angels wont never love you." I remember a servant who
used to tell me that if I were not good, by which she meant if I did
not behave with a single eye to her personal convenience, the cock would
come down the chimney. Less imaginative but equally dishonest people
told me I should go to hell if I did not make myself agreeable to them.
Bodily violence, provided it be the hasty expression of normal provoked
resentment and not vicious cruelty, cannot harm a child as this sort of
pious fraud harms it. There is a legal limit to physical cruelty; and
there are also human limits to it. There is an active Society which
brings to book a good many parents who starve and torture and overwork
their children, and intimidates a good many more. When parents of this
type are caught, they are treated as criminals; and not infrequently
the police have some trouble to save them from being lynched. The
people against whom children are wholly unprotected are those who devote
themselves to the very mischievous and cruel sort of abortion which is
called bringing up a child in the way it should go. Now nobody knows
the way a child should go. All the ways discovered so far lead to the
horrors of our existing civilizations, described quite justifiably by
Ruskin as heaps of agonizing human maggots, struggling with one another
for scraps of food. Pious fraud is an attempt to pervert that precious
and sacred thing the child's conscience into an instrument of our own
convenience, and to use that wonderful and terrible power called Shame
to grind our own axe. It is the sin of stealing fire from the altar: a
sin so impudently practised by popes, parents, and pedagogues, that one
can hardly expect the nurserymaids to see any harm in stealing a few
cinders when they are worrited.

Into the blackest depths of this violation of children's souls one can
hardly bear to look; for here we find pious fraud masking the violation
of the body by obscene cruelty. Any parent or school teacher who takes
a secret and abominable delight in torture is allowed to lay traps into
which every child must fall, and then beat it to his or her heart's
content. A gentleman once wrote to me and said, with an obvious
conviction that he was being most reasonable and high minded, that the
only thing he beat his children for was failure in perfect obedience and
perfect truthfulness. On these attributes, he said, he must insist. As
one of them is not a virtue at all, and the other is the attribute of a
god, one can imagine what the lives of this gentleman's children would
have been if it had been possible for him to live down to his monstrous
and foolish pretensions. And yet he might have written his letter to The
Times (he very nearly did, by the way) without incurring any danger of
being removed to an asylum, or even losing his reputation for taking
a very proper view of his parental duties. And at least it was not a
trivial view, nor an ill meant one. It was much more respectable than
the general consensus of opinion that if a school teacher can devise a
question a child cannot answer, or overhear it calling omega omeega,
he or she may beat the child viciously. Only, the cruelty must be
whitewashed by a moral excuse, and a pretence of reluctance. It must be
for the child's good. The assailant must say "This hurts me more than
it hurts you." There must be hypocrisy as well as cruelty. The injury to
the child would be far less if the voluptuary said frankly "I beat you
because I like beating you; and I shall do it whenever I can contrive
an excuse for it." But to represent this detestable lust to the child
as Divine wrath, and the cruelty as the beneficent act of God, which is
exactly what all our floggers do, is to add to the torture of the body,
out of which the flogger at least gets some pleasure, the maiming and
blinding of the child's soul, which can bring nothing but horror to
anyone.




The Manufacture of Monsters

This industry is by no means peculiar to China. The Chinese (they say)
make physical monsters. We revile them for it and proceed to make moral
monsters of our own children. The most excusable parents are those who
try to correct their own faults in their offspring. The parent who says
to his child: "I am one of the successes of the Almighty: therefore
imitate me in every particular or I will have the skin off your back"
(a quite common attitude) is a much more absurd figure than the man who,
with a pipe in his mouth, thrashes his boy for smoking. If you must hold
yourself up to your children as an object lesson (which is not at all
necessary), hold yourself up as a warning and not as an example. But
you had much better let the child's character alone. If you once allow
yourself to regard a child as so much material for you to manufacture
into any shape that happens to suit your fancy you are defeating the
experiment of the Life Force. You are assuming that the child does
not know its own business, and that you do. In this you are sure to be
wrong: the child feels the drive of the Life Force (often called the
Will of God); and you cannot feel it for him. Handel's parents no doubt
thought they knew better than their child when they tried to prevent
his becoming a musician. They would have been equally wrong and equally
unsuccessful if they had tried to prevent the child becoming a great
rascal had its genius lain in that direction. Handel would have been
Handel, and Napoleon and Peter of Russia _them_selves in spite of all
the parents in creation, because, as often happens, they were stronger
than their parents. But this does not happen always. Most children
can be, and many are, hopelessly warped and wasted by parents who are
ignorant and silly enough to suppose that they know what a human being
ought to be, and who stick at nothing in their determination to force
their children into their moulds. Every child has a right to its own
bent. It has a right to be a Plymouth Brother though its parents be
convinced atheists. It has a right to dislike its mother or father or
sister or brother or uncle or aunt if they are antipathetic to it. It
has a right to find its own way and go its own way, whether that way
seems wise or foolish to others, exactly as an adult has. It has a right
to privacy as to its own doings and its own affairs as much as if it
were its own father.




Small and Large Families

These rights have now become more important than they used to be,
because the modern practice of limiting families enables them to be
more effectually violated. In a family of ten, eight, six, or even four
children, the rights of the younger ones to a great extent take care of
themselves and of the rights of the elder ones too. Two adult parents,
in spite of a house to keep and an income to earn, can still interfere
to a disastrous extent with the rights and liberties of one child. But
by the time a fourth child has arrived, they are not only outnumbered
two to one, but are getting tired of the thankless and mischievous job
of bringing up their children in the way they think they should go. The
old observation that members of large families get on in the world
holds good because in large families it is impossible for each child to
receive what schoolmasters call "individual attention." The children
may receive a good deal of individual attention from one another in the
shape of outspoken reproach, ruthless ridicule, and violent resistance
to their attempts at aggression; but the parental despots are compelled
by the multitude of their subjects to resort to political rather than
personal rule, and to spread their attempts at moral monster-making over
so many children, that each child has enough freedom, and enough sport
in the prophylactic process of laughing at its elders behind their
backs, to escape with much less damage than the single child. In a large
school the system may be bad; but the personal influence of the head
master has to be exerted, when it is exerted at all, in a public way,
because he has little more power of working on the affections of the
individual scholar in the intimate way that, for example, the mother
of a single child can, than the prime minister has of working on the
affections of any individual voter.




Children as Nuisances

Experienced parents, when children's rights are preached to them, very
naturally ask whether children are to be allowed to do what they like.
The best reply is to ask whether adults are to be allowed to do what
they like. The two cases are the same. The adult who is nasty is not
allowed to do what he likes: neither can the child who likes to be
nasty. There is no difference in principle between the rights of a
child and those of an adult: the difference in their cases is one of
circumstance. An adult is not supposed to be punished except by process
of law; nor, when he is so punished, is the person whom he has injured
allowed to act as judge, jury, and executioner. It is true that
employers do act in this way every day to their workpeople; but this is
not a justified and intended part of the situation: it is an abuse
of Capitalism which nobody defends in principle. As between child and
parent or nurse it is not argued about because it is inevitable. You
cannot hold an impartial judicial inquiry every time a child misbehaves
itself. To allow the child to misbehave without instantly making it
unpleasantly conscious of the fact would be to spoil it. The adult has
therefore to take action of some sort with nothing but his conscience
to shield the child from injustice or unkindness. The action may be a
torrent of scolding culminating in a furious smack causing terror
and pain, or it may be a remonstrance causing remorse, or it may be a
sarcasm causing shame and humiliation, or it may be a sermon causing the
child to believe that it is a little reprobate on the road to hell. The
child has no defence in any case except the kindness and conscience of
the adult; and the adult had better not forget this; for it involves a
heavy responsibility.

And now comes our difficulty. The responsibility, being so heavy, cannot
be discharged by persons of feeble character or intelligence. And yet
people of high character and intelligence cannot be plagued with the
care of children. A child is a restless, noisy little animal, with
an insatiable appetite for knowledge, and consequently a maddening
persistence in asking questions. If the child is to remain in the room
with a highly intelligent and sensitive adult, it must be told, and if
necessary forced, to sit still and not speak, which is injurious to
its health, unnatural, unjust, and therefore cruel and selfish beyond
toleration. Consequently the highly intelligent and sensitive adult
hands the child over to a nurserymaid who has no nerves and can
therefore stand more noise, but who has also no scruples, and may
therefore be very bad company for the child.

Here we have come to the central fact of the question: a fact nobody
avows, which is yet the true explanation of the monstrous system of
child imprisonment and torture which we disguise under such hypocrisies
as education, training, formation of character and the rest of it. This
fact is simply that a child is a nuisance to a grown-up person. What
is more, the nuisance becomes more and more intolerable as the grown-up
person becomes more cultivated, more sensitive, and more deeply engaged
in the highest methods of adult work. The child at play is noisy and
ought to be noisy: Sir Isaac Newton at work is quiet and ought to be
quiet. And the child should spend most of its time at play, whilst the
adult should spend most of his time at work. I am not now writing on
behalf of persons who coddle themselves into a ridiculous condition of
nervous feebleness, and at last imagine themselves unable to work
under conditions of bustle which to healthy people are cheerful and
stimulating. I am sure that if people had to choose between living where
the noise of children never stopped and where it was never heard, all
the goodnatured and sound people would prefer the incessant noise to the
incessant silence. But that choice is not thrust upon us by the nature
of things. There is no reason why children and adults should not see
just as much of one another as is good for them, no more and no less.
Even at present you are not compelled to choose between sending your
child to a boarding school (which means getting rid of it altogether on
more or less hypocritical pretences) and keeping it continually at home.
Most working folk today either send their children to day schools or
turn them out of doors. This solves the problem for the parents. It does
not solve it for the children, any more than the tethering of a goat in
a field or the chasing of an unlicensed dog into the streets solves
it for the goat or the dog; but it shews that in no class are people
willing to endure the society of their children, and consequently
that it is an error to believe that the family provides children with
edifying adult society, or that the family is a social unit. The family
is in that, as in so many other respects, a humbug. Old people and young
people cannot walk at the same pace without distress and final loss of
health to one of the parties. When they are sitting indoors they cannot
endure the same degrees of temperature and the same supplies of
fresh air. Even if the main factors of noise, restlessness, and
inquisitiveness are left out of account, children can stand with
indifference sights, sounds, smells, and disorders that would make an
adult of fifty utterly miserable; whilst on the other hand such
adults find a tranquil happiness in conditions which to children mean
unspeakable boredom. And since our system is nevertheless to pack them
all into the same house and pretend that they are happy, and that this
particular sort of happiness is the foundation of virtue, it is found
that in discussing family life we never speak of actual adults or actual
children, or of realities of any sort, but always of ideals such as
The Home, a Mother's Influence, a Father's Care, Filial Piety, Duty,
Affection, Family Life, etc. etc., which are no doubt very comforting
phrases, but which beg the question of what a home and a mother's
influence and a father's care and so forth really come to in practice.
How many hours a week of the time when his children are out of bed does
the ordinary bread-winning father spend in the company of his children
or even in the same building with them? The home may be a thieves'
kitchen, the mother a procuress, the father a violent drunkard; or the
mother and father may be fashionable people who see their children three
or four times a year during the holidays, and then not oftener than
they can help, living meanwhile in daily and intimate contact with their
valets and lady's-maids, whose influence and care are often dominant in
the household. Affection, as distinguished from simple kindliness, may
or may not exist: when it does it either depends on qualities in the
parties that would produce it equally if they were of no kin to one
another, or it is a more or less morbid survival of the nursing passion;
for affection between adults (if they are really adult in mind and not
merely grown-up children) and creatures so relatively selfish and cruel
as children necessarily are without knowing it or meaning it, cannot be
called natural: in fact the evidence shews that it is easier to love the
company of a dog than of a commonplace child between the ages of six and
the beginnings of controlled maturity; for women who cannot bear to be
separated from their pet dogs send their children to boarding schools
cheerfully. They may say and even believe that in allowing their
children to leave home they are sacrificing themselves for their
children's good; but there are very few pet dogs who would not be
the better for a month or two spent elsewhere than in a lady's lap or
roasting on a drawingroom hearthrug. Besides, to allege that children
are better continually away from home is to give up the whole popular
sentimental theory of the family; yet the dogs are kept and the children
are banished.




Child Fanciers

There is, however, a good deal of spurious family affection. There is
the clannishness that will make a dozen brothers and sisters who quarrel
furiously among themselves close up their ranks and make common cause
against a brother-in-law or a sister-in-law. And there is a strong sense
of property in children, which often makes mothers and fathers bitterly
jealous of allowing anyone else to interfere with their children, whom
they may none the less treat very badly. And there is an extremely
dangerous craze for children which leads certain people to establish
orphanages and baby farms and schools, seizing any pretext for filling
their houses with children exactly as some eccentric old ladies and
gentlemen fill theirs with cats. In such places the children are the
victims of all the caprices of doting affection and all the excesses
of lascivious cruelty. Yet the people who have this morbid craze seldom
have any difficulty in finding victims. Parents and guardians are so
worried by children and so anxious to get rid of them that anyone who
is willing to take them off their hands is welcomed and whitewashed.
The very people who read with indignation of Squeers and Creakle in the
novels of Dickens are quite ready to hand over their own children
to Squeers and Creakle, and to pretend that Squeers and Creakle
are monsters of the past. But read the autobiography of Stanley the
traveller, or sit in the company of men talking about their school-days,
and you will soon find that fiction, which must, if it is to be sold and
read, stop short of being positively sickening, dare not tell the whole
truth about the people to whom children are handed over on educational
pretexts. Not very long ago a schoolmaster in Ireland was murdered by
his boys; and for reasons which were never made public it was at
first decided not to prosecute the murderers. Yet all these flogging
schoolmasters and orphanage fiends and baby farmers are "lovers of
children." They are really child fanciers (like bird fanciers or dog
fanciers) by irresistible natural predilection, never happy unless they
are surrounded by their victims, and always certain to make their living
by accepting the custody of children, no matter how many alternative
occupations may be available. And bear in mind that they are only
the extreme instances of what is commonly called natural affection,
apparently because it is obviously unnatural.

The really natural feeling of adults for children in the long prosaic
intervals between the moments of affectionate impulse is just that
feeling that leads them to avoid their care and constant company as a
burden beyond bearing, and to pretend that the places they send them to
are well conducted, beneficial, and indispensable to the success of the
children in after life. The true cry of the kind mother after her little
rosary of kisses is "Run away, darling." It is nicer than "Hold
your noise, you young devil; or it will be the worse for you"; but
fundamentally it means the same thing: that if you compel an adult and
a child to live in one another's company either the adult or the child
will be miserable. There is nothing whatever unnatural or wrong or
shocking in this fact; and there is no harm in it if only it be sensibly
faced and provided for. The mischief that it does at present is
produced by our efforts to ignore it, or to smother it under a heap of
sentimental lies and false pretences.




Childhood as a State of Sin

Unfortunately all this nonsense tends to accumulate as we become more
sympathetic. In many families it is still the custom to treat childhood
frankly as a state of sin, and impudently proclaim the monstrous
principle that little children should be seen and not heard, and to
enforce a set of prison rules designed solely to make cohabitation
with children as convenient as possible for adults without the smallest
regard for the interests, either remote or immediate, of the
children. This system tends to produce a tough, rather brutal, stupid,
unscrupulous class, with a fixed idea that all enjoyment consists in
undetected sinning; and in certain phases of civilization people of this
kind are apt to get the upper hand of more amiable and conscientious
races and classes. They have the ferocity of a chained dog, and are
proud of it. But the end of it is that they are always in chains,
even at the height of their military or political success: they
win everything on condition that they are afraid to enjoy it. Their
civilizations rest on intimidation, which is so necessary to them that
when they cannot find anybody brave enough to intimidate them they
intimidate themselves and live in a continual moral and political panic.
In the end they get found out and bullied. But that is not the point
that concerns us here, which is, that they are in some respects better
brought up than the children of sentimental people who are always
anxious and miserable about their duty to their children, and who end
by neither making their children happy nor having a tolerable life for
themselves. A selfish tyrant you know where to have, and he (or she) at
least does not confuse your affections; but a conscientious and kindly
meddler may literally worry you out of your senses. It is fortunate that
only very few parents are capable of doing what they conceive their duty
continuously or even at all, and that still fewer are tough enough to
ride roughshod over their children at home.




School

But please observe the limitation "at home." What private amateur
parental enterprise cannot do may be done very effectively by organized
professional enterprise in large institutions established for the
purpose. And it is to such professional enterprise that parents hand
over their children when they can afford it. They send their children
to school; and there is, on the whole, nothing on earth intended for
innocent people so horrible as a school. To begin with, it is a prison.
But it is in some respects more cruel than a prison. In a prison, for
instance, you are not forced to read books written by the warders and
the governor (who of course would not be warders and governors if they
could write readable books), and beaten or otherwise tormented if you
cannot remember their utterly unmemorable contents. In the prison you
are not forced to sit listening to turnkeys discoursing without charm or
interest on subjects that they dont understand and dont care about, and
are therefore incapable of making you understand or care about. In a
prison they may torture your body; but they do not torture your brains;
and they protect you against violence and outrage from your fellow
prisoners. In a school you have none of these advantages. With the
world's bookshelves loaded with fascinating and inspired books, the very
manna sent down from Heaven to feed your souls, you are forced to read
a hideous imposture called a school book, written by a man who cannot
write: a book from which no human being can learn anything: a book
which, though you may decipher it, you cannot in any fruitful sense
read, though the enforced attempt will make you loathe the sight of
a book all the rest of your life. With millions of acres of woods and
valleys and hills and wind and air and birds and streams and fishes and
all sorts of instructive and healthy things easily accessible, or with
streets and shop windows and crowds and vehicles and all sorts of city
delights at the door, you are forced to sit, not in a room with some
human grace and comfort or furniture and decoration, but in a stalled
pound with a lot of other children, beaten if you talk, beaten if you
move, beaten if you cannot prove by answering idiotic questions that
even when you escaped from the pound and from the eye of your gaoler,
you were still agonizing over his detestable sham books instead of
daring to live. And your childish hatred of your gaoler and flogger is
nothing to his adult hatred of you; for he is a slave forced to endure
your society for his daily bread. You have not even the satisfaction of
knowing how you are torturing him and how he loathes you; and you give
yourself unnecessary pains to annoy him with furtive tricks and spiteful
doing of forbidden things. No wonder he is sometimes provoked to
fiendish outbursts of wrath. No wonder men of downright sense, like Dr
Johnson, admit that under such circumstances children will not learn
anything unless they are so cruelly beaten that they make desperate
efforts to memorize words and phrases to escape flagellation. It is a
ghastly business, quite beyond words, this schooling.

And now I hear cries of protest arising all round. First my own
schoolmasters, or their ghosts, asking whether I was cruelly beaten at
school? No; but then I did not learn anything at school. Dr Johnson's
schoolmaster presumably did care enough whether Sam learned anything to
beat him savagely enough to force him to lame his mind--for
Johnson's great mind _was_ lamed--by learning his lessons. None of my
schoolmasters really cared a rap (or perhaps it would be fairer to them
to say that their employers did not care a rap and therefore did not
give them the necessary caning powers) whether I learnt my lessons or
not, provided my father paid my schooling bill, the collection of which
was the real object of the school. Consequently I did not learn my
school lessons, having much more important ones in hand, with the result
that I have not wasted my life trifling with literary fools in taverns
as Johnson did when he should have been shaking England with the thunder
of his spirit. My schooling did me a great deal of harm and no good
whatever: it was simply dragging a child's soul through the dirt; but I
escaped Squeers and Creakle just as I escaped Johnson and Carlyle. And
this is what happens to most of us. We are not effectively coerced to
learn: we stave off punishment as far as we can by lying and trickery
and guessing and using our wits; and when this does not suffice we
scribble impositions, or suffer extra imprisonments--"keeping in" was
the phrase in my time--or let a master strike us with a cane and fall
back on our pride at being able to hear it physically (he not being
allowed to hit us too hard) to outface the dishonor we should have been
taught to die rather than endure. And so idleness and worthlessness on
the one hand and a pretence of coercion on the other became a despicable
routine. If my schoolmasters had been really engaged in educating me
instead of painfully earning their bread by keeping me from annoying my
elders they would have turned me out of the school, telling me that I
was thoroughly disloyal to it; that I had no intention of learning; that
I was mocking and distracting the boys who did wish to learn; that I was
a liar and a shirker and a seditious little nuisance; and that nothing
could injure me in character and degrade their occupation more than
allowing me (much less forcing me) to remain in the school under such
conditions. But in order to get expelled, it was necessary commit
a crime of such atrocity that the parents of other boys would
have threatened to remove their sons sooner than allow them to be
schoolfellows with the delinquent. I can remember only one case in which
such a penalty was threatened; and in that case the culprit, a boarder,
had kissed a housemaid, or possibly, being a handsome youth, been kissed
by her. She did not kiss me; and nobody ever dreamt of expelling me. The
truth was, a boy meant just so much a year to the institution. That was
why he was kept there against his will. That was why he was kept there
when his expulsion would have been an unspeakable relief and benefit
both to his teachers and himself.

It may be argued that if the uncommercial attitude had been taken,
and all the disloyal wasters and idlers shewn sternly to the door,
the school would not have been emptied, but filled. But so honest an
attitude was impossible. The masters must have hated the school much
more than the boys did. Just as you cannot imprison a man without
imprisoning a warder to see that he does not escape, the warder being
tied to the prison as effectually by the fear of unemployment and
starvation as the prisoner is by the bolts and bars, so these poor
schoolmasters, with their small salaries and large classes, were as much
prisoners as we were, and much more responsible and anxious ones. They
could not impose the heroic attitude on their employers; nor would they
have been able to obtain places as schoolmasters if their habits had
been heroic. For the best of them their employment was provisional: they
looked forward to escaping from it into the pulpit. The ablest and most
impatient of them were often so irritated by the awkward, slow-witted,
slovenly boys: that is, the ones that required special consideration and
patient treatment, that they vented their irritation on them ruthlessly,
nothing being easier than to entrap or bewilder such a boy into giving a
pretext for punishing him.




My Scholastic Acquirements

The results, as far as I was concerned, were what might have been
expected. My school made only the thinnest pretence of teaching anything
but Latin and Greek. When I went there as a very small boy I knew a good
deal of Latin grammar which I had been taught in a few weeks privately
by my uncle. When I had been several years at school this same uncle
examined me and discovered that the net result of my schooling was that
I had forgotten what he had taught me, and had learnt nothing else. To
this day, though I can still decline a Latin noun and repeat some of the
old paradigms in the old meaningless way, because their rhythm sticks
to me, I have never yet seen a Latin inscription on a tomb that I could
translate throughout. Of Greek I can decipher perhaps the greater
part of the Greek alphabet. In short, I am, as to classical education,
another Shakespear. I can read French as easily as English; and under
pressure of necessity I can turn to account some scraps of German and
a little operatic Italian; but these I was never taught at school.
Instead, I was taught lying, dishonorable submission to tyranny, dirty
stories, a blasphemous habit of treating love and maternity as
obscene jokes, hopelessness, evasion, derision, cowardice, and all the
blackguard's shifts by which the coward intimidates other cowards. And
if I had been a boarder at an English public school instead of a day boy
at an Irish one, I might have had to add to these, deeper shames still.




Schoolmasters of Genius

And now, if I have reduced the ghosts of my schoolmasters to melancholy
acquiescence in all this (which everybody who has been at an ordinary
school will recognize as true), I have still to meet the much more
sincere protests of the handful of people who have a natural genius for
"bringing up" children. I shall be asked with kindly scorn whether I
have heard of Froebel and Pestalozzi, whether I know the work that is
being done by Miss Mason and the Dottoressa Montessori or, best of all
as I think, the Eurythmics School of Jacques Dalcroze at Hellerau near
Dresden. Jacques Dalcroze, like Plato, believes in saturating his pupils
with music. They walk to music, play to music, work to music, obey drill
commands that would bewilder a guardsman to music, think to music,
live to music, get so clearheaded about music that they can move their
several limbs each in a different metre until they become complicated
living magazines of cross rhythms, and, what is more, make music
for others to do all these things to. Stranger still, though Jacques
Dalcroze, like all these great teachers, is the completest of tyrants,
knowing what is right and that he must and will have the lesson just so
or else break his heart (not somebody else's, observe), yet his school
is so fascinating that every woman who sees it exclaims "Oh, why was I
not taught like this!" and elderly gentlemen excitedly enrol themselves
as students and distract classes of infants by their desperate endeavors
to beat two in a bar with one hand and three with the other, and start
off on earnest walks round the room, taking two steps backward whenever
Monsieur Daleroze calls out "Hop!" Oh yes: I know all about these
wonderful schools that you cannot keep children or even adults out of,
and these teachers whom their pupils not only obey without coercion, but
adore. And if you will tell me roughly how many Masons and Montessoris
and Dalcrozes you think you can pick up in Europe for salaries of from
thirty shillings to five pounds a week, I will estimate your chances
of converting your millions of little scholastic hells into little
scholastic heavens. If you are a distressed gentlewoman starting to make
a living, you can still open a little school; and you can easily buy a
secondhand brass plate inscribed PESTALOZZIAN INSTITUTE and nail it to
your door, though you have no more idea of who Pestalozzi was and what
he advocated or how he did it than the manager of a hotel which began
as a Hydropathic has of the water cure. Or you can buy a cheaper plate
inscribed KINDERGARTEN, and imagine, or leave others to imagine, that
Froebel is the governing genius of your little _creche_. No doubt the
new brass plates are being inscribed Montessori Institute, and will be
used when the Dotteressa is no longer with us by all the Mrs Pipchins
and Mrs Wilfers throughout this unhappy land.

I will go further, and admit that the brass plates may not all be
frauds. I will tell you that one of my friends was led to genuine
love and considerable knowledge of classical literature by an Irish
schoolmaster whom you would call a hedge schoolmaster (he would not be
allowed to teach anything now) and that it took four years of Harrow
to obliterate that knowledge and change the love into loathing. Another
friend of mine who keeps a school in the suburbs, and who deeply
deplores my "prejudice against schoolmasters," has offered to accept my
challenge to tell his pupils that they are as free to get up and go out
of the school at any moment as their parents are to get up and go out
of a theatre where my plays are being performed. Even among my own
schoolmasters I can recollect a few whose classes interested me, and
whom I should certainly have pestered for information and instruction
if I could have got into any decent human relationship with them, and
if they had not been compelled by their position to defend themselves as
carefully against such advances as against furtive attempts to hurt them
accidentally in the football field or smash their hats with a clod from
behind a wall. But these rare cases actually do more harm than good; for
they encourage us to pretend that all schoolmasters are like that.
Of what use is it to us that there are always somewhere two or three
teachers of children whose specific genius for their occupation triumphs
over our tyrannous system and even finds in it its opportunity? For that
matter, it is possible, if difficult, to find a solicitor, or even a
judge, who has some notion of what law means, a doctor with a glimmering
of science, an officer who understands duty and discipline, and a
clergyman with an inkling of religion, though there are nothing like
enough of them to go round. But even the few who, like Ibsen's Mrs
Solness, have "a genius for nursing the souls of little children" are
like angels forced to work in prisons instead of in heaven; and even
at that they are mostly underpaid and despised. That friend of mine who
went from the hedge schoolmaster to Harrow once saw a schoolmaster rush
from an elementary school in pursuit of a boy and strike him. My friend,
not considering that the unfortunate man was probably goaded
beyond endurance, smote the schoolmaster and blackened his eye. The
schoolmaster appealed to the law; and my friend found himself waiting
nervously in the Hammersmith Police Court to answer for his breach of
the peace. In his anxiety he asked a police officer what would happen
to him. "What did you do?" said the officer. "I gave a man a black eye"
said my friend. "Six pounds if he was a gentleman: two pounds if he
wasnt," said the constable. "He was a schoolmaster" said my friend. "Two
pounds" said the officer; and two pounds it was. The blood money was
paid cheerfully; and I have ever since advised elementary schoolmasters
to qualify themselves in the art of self-defence, as the British
Constitution expresses our national estimate of them by allowing us to
blacken three of their eyes for the same price as one of an ordinary
professional man. How many Froebels and Pestalozzis and Miss Masons and
Doctoress Montessoris would you be likely to get on these terms even if
they occurred much more frequently in nature than they actually do?

No: I cannot be put off by the news that our system would be perfect if
it were worked by angels. I do not admit it even at that, just as I do
not admit that if the sky fell we should all catch larks. But I do
not propose to bother about a supply of specific genius which does
not exist, and which, if it did exist, could operate only by at once
recognizing and establishing the rights of children.




What We Do Not Teach, and Why

To my mind, a glance at the subjects now taught in schools ought to
convince any reasonable person that the object of the lessons is to keep
children out of mischief, and not to qualify them for their part in life
as responsible citizens of a free State. It is not possible to maintain
freedom in any State, no matter how perfect its original constitution,
unless its publicly active citizens know a good deal of constitutional
history, law, and political science, with its basis of economics. If
as much pains had been taken a century ago to make us all understand
Ricardo's law of rent as to learn our catechisms, the face of the world
would have been changed for the better. But for that very reason the
greatest care is taken to keep such beneficially subversive
knowledge from us, with the result that in public life we are either
place-hunters, anarchists, or sheep shepherded by wolves.

But it will be observed that these are highly controversial subjects.
Now no controversial subject can be taught dogmatically. He who knows
only the official side of a controversy knows less than nothing of its
nature. The abler a schoolmaster is, the more dangerous he is to his
pupils unless they have the fullest opportunity of hearing another
equally able person do his utmost to shake his authority and convict him
of error.

At present such teaching is very unpopular. It does not exist in
schools; but every adult who derives his knowledge of public affairs
from the newspapers can take in, at the cost of an extra halfpenny, two
papers of opposite politics. Yet the ordinary man so dislikes having his
mind unsettled, as he calls it, that he angrily refuses to allow a paper
which dissents from his views to be brought into his house. Even at his
club he resents seeing it, and excludes it if it happens to run counter
to the opinions of all the members. The result is that his opinions are
not worth considering. A churchman who never reads The Freethinker very
soon has no more real religion than the atheist who never reads The
Church Times. The attitude is the same in both cases: they want to hear
nothing good of their enemies; consequently they remain enemies and
suffer from bad blood all their lives; whereas men who know their
opponents and understand their case, quite commonly respect and like
them, and always learn something from them.

Here, again, as at so many points, we come up against the abuse of
schools to keep people in ignorance and error, so that they may be
incapable of successful revolt against their industrial slavery. The
most important simple fundamental economic truth to impress on a
child in complicated civilizations like ours is the truth that whoever
consumes goods or services without producing by personal effort the
equivalent of what he or she consumes, inflicts on the community
precisely the same injury that a thief produces, and would, in any
honest State, be treated as a thief, however full his or her pockets
might be of money made by other people. The nation that first teaches
its children that truth, instead of flogging them if they discover
it for themselves, may have to fight all the slaves of all the other
nations to begin with; but it will beat them as easily as an unburdened
man with his hands free and with all his energies in full play can beat
an invalid who has to carry another invalid on his back.

This, however, is not an evil produced by the denial of children's
rights, nor is it inherent in the nature of schools. I mention it only
because it would be folly to call for a reform of our schools without
taking account of the corrupt resistance which awaits the reformer.

A word must also be said about the opposition to reform of the vested
interest of the classical and coercive schoolmaster. He, poor wretch,
has no other means of livelihood; and reform would leave him as a
workman is now left when he is superseded by a machine. He had therefore
better do what he can to get the workman compensated, so as to make the
public familiar with the idea of compensation before his own turn comes.




Taboo in Schools

The suppression of economic knowledge, disastrous as it is, is quite
intelligible, its corrupt motive being as clear as the motive of a
burglar for concealing his jemmy from a policeman. But the other great
suppression in our schools, the suppression of the subject of sex, is a
case of taboo. In mankind, the lower the type, and the less cultivated
the mind, the less courage there is to face important subjects
objectively. The ablest and most highly cultivated people continually
discuss religion, politics, and sex: it is hardly an exaggeration to say
that they discuss nothing else with fully-awakened interest. Commoner
and less cultivated people, even when they form societies for
discussion, make a rule that politics and religion are not to be
mentioned, and take it for granted that no decent person would attempt
to discuss sex. The three subjects are feared because they rouse the
crude passions which call for furious gratification in murder and rapine
at worst, and, at best, lead to quarrels and undesirable states of
consciousness.

Even when this excuse of bad manners, ill temper, and brutishness (for
that is what it comes to) compels us to accept it from those adults
among whom political and theological discussion does as a matter of fact
lead to the drawing of knives and pistols, and sex discussion leads to
obscenity, it has no application to children except as an imperative
reason for training them to respect other people's opinions, and to
insist on respect for their own in these as in other important matters
which are equally dangerous: for example, money. And in any case
there are decisive reasons; superior, like the reasons for
suspending conventional reticences between doctor and patient, to all
considerations of mere decorum, for giving proper instruction in the
facts of sex. Those who object to it (not counting coarse people who
thoughtlessly seize every opportunity of affecting and parading a
fictitious delicacy) are, in effect, advocating ignorance as a safeguard
against precocity. If ignorance were practicable there would be
something to be said for it up to the age at which ignorance is a danger
instead of a safeguard. Even as it is, it seems undesirable that any
special emphasis should be given to the subject, whether by way of
delicacy and poetry or too impressive warning. But the plain fact is
that in refusing to allow the child to be taught by qualified unrelated
elders (the parents shrink from the lesson, even when they are otherwise
qualified, because their own relation to the child makes the subject
impossible between them) we are virtually arranging to have our children
taught by other children in guilty secrets and unclean jests. And that
settles the question for all sensible people.

The dogmatic objection, the sheer instinctive taboo which rules the
subject out altogether as indecent, has no age limit. It means that
at no matter what age a woman consents to a proposal of marriage, she
should do so in ignorance of the relation she is undertaking. When this
actually happens (and apparently it does happen oftener than would seem
possible) a horrible fraud is being practiced on both the man and the
woman. He is led to believe that she knows what she is promising, and
that he is in no danger of finding himself bound to a woman to whom
he is eugenically antipathetic. She contemplates nothing but such
affectionate relations as may exist between her and her nearest kinsmen,
and has no knowledge of the condition which, if not foreseen, must come
as an amazing revelation and a dangerous shock, ending possibly in the
discovery that the marriage has been an irreparable mistake. Nothing can
justify such a risk. There may be people incapable of understanding that
the right to know all there is to know about oneself is a natural human
right that sweeps away all the pretences of others to tamper with one's
consciousness in order to produce what they choose to consider a good
character. But they must here bow to the plain mischievousness of
entrapping people into contracts on which the happiness of their whole
lives depends without letting them know what they are undertaking.




Alleged Novelties in Modern Schools

There is just one more nuisance to be disposed of before I come to
the positive side of my case. I mean the person who tells me that
my schooldays belong to a bygone order of educational ideas and
institutions, and that schools are not now a bit like my old school.
I reply, with Sir Walter Raleigh, by calling on my soul to give this
statement the lie. Some years ago I lectured in Oxford on the subject
of Education. A friend to whom I mentioned my intention said, "You know
nothing of modern education: schools are not now what they were when
you were a boy." I immediately procured the time sheets of half a dozen
modern schools, and found, as I expected, that they might all have been
my old school: there was no real difference. I may mention, too, that
I have visited modern schools, and observed that there is a tendency to
hang printed pictures in an untidy and soulless manner on the walls,
and occasionally to display on the mantel-shelf a deplorable glass case
containing certain objects which might possibly, if placed in the hands
of the pupils, give them some practical experience of the weight of
a pound and the length of an inch. And sometimes a scoundrel who has
rifled a bird's nest or killed a harmless snake encourages the children
to go and do likewise by putting his victims into an imitation nest and
bottle and exhibiting them as aids to "Nature study." A suggestion that
Nature is worth study would certainly have staggered my schoolmasters;
so perhaps I may admit a gleam of progress here. But as any child who
attempted to handle these dusty objects would probably be caned, I do
not attach any importance to such modernities in school furniture.
The school remains what it was in my boyhood, because its real object
remains what it was. And that object, I repeat, is to keep the children
out of mischief: mischief meaning for the most part worrying the
grown-ups.




What is to be Done?

The practical question, then, is what to do with the children. Tolerate
them at home we will not. Let them run loose in the streets we dare not
until our streets become safe places for children, which, to our utter
shame, they are not at present, though they can hardly be worse than
some homes and some schools.

The grotesque difficulty of making even a beginning was brought home to
me in the little village in Hertfordshire where I write these lines by
the lady of the manor, who asked me very properly what I was going to do
for the village school. I did not know what to reply. As the school kept
the children quiet during my working hours, I did not for the sake of
my own personal convenience want to blow it up with dynamite as I should
like to blow up most schools. So I asked for guidance. "You ought to
give a prize," said the lady. I asked if there was a prize for good
conduct. As I expected, there was: one for the best-behaved boy and
another for the best-behaved girl. On reflection I offered a handsome
prize for the worst-behaved boy and girl on condition that a record
should be kept of their subsequent careers and compared with the records
of the best-behaved, in order to ascertain whether the school criterion
of good conduct was valid out of school. My offer was refused because
it would not have had the effect of encouraging the children to give as
little trouble as possible, which is of course the real object of all
conduct prizes in schools.

I must not pretend, then, that I have a system ready to replace all
the other systems. Obstructing the way of the proper organization of
childhood, as of everything else, lies our ridiculous misdistribution
of the national income, with its accompanying class distinctions and
imposition of snobbery on children as a necessary part of their social
training. The result of our economic folly is that we are a nation of
undesirable acquaintances; and the first object of all our institutions
for children is segregation. If, for example, our children were set free
to roam and play about as they pleased, they would have to be policed;
and the first duty of the police in a State like ours would be to see
that every child wore a badge indicating its class in society, and that
every child seen speaking to another child with a lower-class badge, or
any child wearing a higher badge than that allotted to it by, say, the
College of Heralds, should immediately be skinned alive with a birch
rod. It might even be insisted that girls with high-class badges should
be attended by footmen, grooms, or even military escorts. In short,
there is hardly any limit to the follies with which our Commercialism
would infect any system that it would tolerate at all. But something
like a change of heart is still possible; and since all the evils of
snobbery and segregation are rampant in our schools at present we may as
well make the best as the worst of them.




Children's Rights and Duties

Now let us ask what are a child's rights, and what are the rights of
society over the child. Its rights, being clearly those of any other
human being, are summed up in the right to live: that is, to have all
the conclusive arguments that prove that it would be better dead, that
it is a child of wrath, that the population is already excessive, that
the pains of life are greater than its pleasures, that its sacrifice in
a hospital or laboratory experiment might save millions of lives,
etc. etc. etc., put out of the question, and its existence accepted
as necessary and sacred, all theories to the contrary notwithstanding,
whether by Calvin or Schopenhauer or Pasteur or the nearest person with
a taste for infanticide. And this right to live includes, and in fact
is, the right to be what the child likes and can, to do what it likes
and can, to make what it likes and can, to think what it likes and
can, to smash what it dislikes and can, and generally to behave in an
altogether unaccountable manner within the limits imposed by the similar
rights of its neighbors. And the rights of society over it clearly
extend to requiring it to qualify itself to live in society without
wasting other peoples time: that is, it must know the rules of the road,
be able to read placards and proclamations, fill voting papers, compose
and send letters and telegrams, purchase food and clothing and
railway tickets for itself, count money and give and take change, and,
generally, know how many beans made five. It must know some law, were it
only a simple set of commandments, some political economy, agriculture
enough to shut the gates of fields with cattle in them and not to
trample on growing crops, sanitation enough not to defile its haunts,
and religion enough to have some idea of why it is allowed its rights
and why it must respect the rights of others. And the rest of its
education must consist of anything else it can pick up; for beyond this
society cannot go with any certainty, and indeed can only go this far
rather apologetically and provisionally, as doing the best it can on
very uncertain ground.




Should Children Earn their Living?

Now comes the question how far children should be asked to contribute
to the support of the community. In approaching it we must put aside
the considerations that now induce all humane and thoughtful political
students to agitate for the uncompromising abolition of child labor
under our capitalist system. It is not the least of the curses of that
system that it will bequeath to future generations a mass of legislation
to prevent capitalists from "using up nine generations of men in one
generation," as they began by doing until they were restrained by law at
the suggestion of Robert Owen, the founder of English Socialism. Most of
this legislation will become an insufferable restraint upon freedom
and variety of action when Capitalism goes the way of Druidic human
sacrifice (a much less slaughterous institution). There is every reason
why a child should not be allowed to work for commercial profit or for
the support of its parents at the expense of its own future; but there
is no reason whatever why a child should not do some work for its own
sake and that of the community if it can be shewn that both it and the
community will be the better for it.




Children's Happiness

Also it is important to put the happiness of the children rather
carefully in its place, which is really not a front place. The
unsympathetic, selfish, hard people who regard happiness as a very
exceptional indulgence to which children are by no means entitled,
though they may be allowed a very little of it on their birthdays or at
Christmas, are sometimes better parents in effect than those who imagine
that children are as capable of happiness as adults. Adults habitually
exaggerate their own capacity in that direction grossly; yet most adults
can stand an allowance of happiness that would be quite thrown away on
children. The secret of being miserable is to have leisure to bother
about whether you are happy or not. The cure for it is occupation,
because occupation means pre-occupation; and the pre-occupied person
is neither happy nor unhappy, but simply alive and active, which is
pleasanter than any happiness until you are tired of it. That is why it
is necessary to happiness that one should be tired. Music after dinner
is pleasant: music before breakfast is so unpleasant as to be clearly
unnatural. To people who are not overworked holidays are a nuisance.
To people who are, and who can afford them, they are a troublesome
necessity. A perpetual holiday is a good working definition of hell.




The Horror of the Perpetual Holiday

It will be said here that, on the contrary, heaven is always conceived
as a perpetual holiday, and that whoever is not born to an independent
income is striving for one or longing for one because it gives holidays
for life. To which I reply, first, that heaven, as conventionally
conceived, is a place so inane, so dull, so useless, so miserable,
that nobody has ever ventured to describe a whole day in heaven, though
plenty of people have described a day at the seaside; and that the
genuine popular verdict on it is expressed in the proverb "Heaven for
holiness and Hell for company." Second, I point out that the wretched
people who have independent incomes and no useful occupation, do the
most amazingly disagreeable and dangerous things to make themselves
tired and hungry in the evening. When they are not involved in what they
call sport, they are doing aimlessly what other people have to be paid
to do: driving horses and motor cars; trying on dresses and walking up
and down to shew them off; and acting as footmen and housemaids to royal
personages. The sole and obvious cause of the notion that idleness is
delightful and that heaven is a place where there is nothing to be done,
is our school system and our industrial system. The school is a prison
in which work is a punishment and a curse. In avowed prisons, hard
labor, the only alleviation of a prisoner's lot, is treated as an
aggravation of his punishment; and everything possible is done to
intensify the prisoner's inculcated and unnatural notion that work is an
evil. In industry we are overworked and underfed prisoners. Under such
absurd circumstances our judgment of things becomes as perverted as our
habits. If we were habitually underworked and overfed, our notion
of heaven would be a place where everybody worked strenuously for
twenty-four hours a day and never got anything to eat.

Once realize that a perpetual holiday is beyond human endurance, and
that "Satan finds some mischief still for idle hands to do" and it will
be seen that we have no right to impose a perpetual holiday on children.
If we did, they would soon outdo the Labor Party in their claim for a
Right to Work Bill.

In any case no child should be brought up to suppose that its food and
clothes come down from heaven or are miraculously conjured from empty
space by papa. Loathsome as we have made the idea of duty (like the idea
of work) we must habituate children to a sense of repayable obligation
to the community for what they consume and enjoy, and inculcate the
repayment as a point of honor. If we did that today--and nothing but
flat dishonesty prevents us from doing it--we should have no idle rich
and indeed probably no rich, since there is no distinction in being
rich if you have to pay scot and lot in personal effort like the working
folk. Therefore, if for only half an hour a day, a child should do
something serviceable to the community.

Productive work for children has the advantage that its discipline is
the discipline of impersonal necessity, not that of wanton personal
coercion. The eagerness of children in our industrial districts to
escape from school to the factory is not caused by lighter tasks or
shorter hours in the factory, nor altogether by the temptation of wages,
nor even by the desire for novelty, but by the dignity of adult work,
the exchange of the factitious personal tyranny of the schoolmaster,
from which the grown-ups are free, for the stern but entirely dignified
Laws of Life to which all flesh is subject.




University Schoolboyishness

Older children might do a good deal before beginning their collegiate
education. What is the matter with our universities is that all the
students are schoolboys, whereas it is of the very essence of university
education that they should be men. The function of a university is not
to teach things that can now be taught as well or better by University
Extension lectures or by private tutors or modern correspondence classes
with gramophones. We go to them to be socialized; to acquire the hall
mark of communal training; to become citizens of the world instead of
inmates of the enlarged rabbit hutches we call homes; to learn manners
and become unchallengeable ladies and gentlemen. The social pressure
which effects these changes should be that of persons who have faced
the full responsibilities of adults as working members of the general
community, not that of a barbarous rabble of half emancipated schoolboys
and unemancipable pedants. It is true that in a reasonable state of
society this outside experience would do for us very completely what the
university does now so corruptly that we tolerate its bad manners only
because they are better than no manners at all. But the university will
always exist in some form as a community of persons desirous of pushing
their culture to the highest pitch they are capable of, not as solitary
students reading in seclusion, but as members of a body of individuals
all pursuing culture, talking culture, thinking culture, above all,
criticizing culture. If such persons are to read and talk and criticize
to any purpose, they must know the world outside the university at least
as well as the shopkeeper in the High Street does. And this is just
what they do not know at present. You may say of them, paraphrasing
Mr. Kipling, "What do they know of Plato that only Plato know?" If our
universities would exclude everybody who had not earned a living by his
or her own exertions for at least a couple of years, their effect would
be vastly improved.




The New Laziness

The child of the future, then, if there is to be any future but one of
decay, will work more or less for its living from an early age; and
in doing so it will not shock anyone, provided there be no longer any
reason to associate the conception of children working for their living
with infants toiling in a factory for ten hours a day or boys drudging
from nine to six under gas lamps in underground city offices. Lads and
lasses in their teens will probably be able to produce as much as the
most expensive person now costs in his own person (it is retinue that
eats up the big income) without working too hard or too long for quite
as much happiness as they can enjoy. The question to be balanced then
will be, not how soon people should be put to work, but how soon they
should be released from any obligation of the kind. A life's work is
like a day's work: it can begin early and leave off early or begin late
and leave off late, or, as with us, begin too early and never leave off
at all, obviously the worst of all possible plans. In any event we
must finally reckon work, not as the curse our schools and prisons and
capitalist profit factories make it seem today, but as a prime necessity
of a tolerable existence. And if we cannot devise fresh wants as fast
as we develop the means of supplying them, there will come a scarcity
of the needed, cut-and-dried, appointed work that is always ready to
everybody's hand. It may have to be shared out among people all of whom
want more of it. And then a new sort of laziness will become the bugbear
of society: the laziness that refuses to face the mental toil and
adventure of making work by inventing new ideas or extending the domain
of knowledge, and insists on a ready-made routine. It may come to
forcing people to retire before they are willing to make way for younger
ones: that is, to driving all persons of a certain age out of industry,
leaving them to find something experimental to occupy them on pain of
perpetual holiday. Men will then try to spend twenty thousand a year
for the sake of having to earn it. Instead of being what we are now, the
cheapest and nastiest of the animals, we shall be the costliest, most
fastidious, and best bred. In short, there is no end to the astonishing
things that may happen when the curse of Adam becomes first a blessing
and then an incurable habit. And in that day we must not grudge children
their share of it.




The Infinite School Task

The question of children's work, however, is only a question of what the
child ought to do for the community. How highly it should qualify itself
is another matter. But most of the difficulty of inducing children
to learn would disappear if our demands became not only definite but
finite. When learning is only an excuse for imprisonment, it is an
instrument of torture which becomes more painful the more progress is
made. Thus when you have forced a child to learn the Church Catechism,
a document profound beyond the comprehension of most adults, you are
sometimes at a standstill for something else to teach; and you therefore
keep the wretched child repeating its catechism again and again until
you hit on the plan of making it learn instalments of Bible verses,
preferably from the book of Numbers. But as it is less trouble to set a
lesson that you know yourself, there is a tendency to keep repeating the
already learnt lesson rather than break new ground. At school I began
with a fairly complete knowledge of Latin grammar in the childish sense
of being able to repeat all the paradigms; and I was kept at this, or
rather kept in a class where the master never asked me to do it because
he knew I could, and therefore devoted himself to trapping the boys who
could not, until I finally forgot most of it. But when progress took
place, what did it mean? First it meant Caesar, with the foreknowledge
that to master Caesar meant only being set at Virgil, with the
culminating horror of Greek and Homer in reserve at the end of that. I
preferred Caesar, because his statement that Gaul is divided into three
parts, though neither interesting nor true, was the only Latin sentence
I could translate at sight: therefore the longer we stuck at Caesar the
better I was pleased. Just so do less classically educated children see
nothing in the mastery of addition but the beginning of subtraction, and
so on through multiplication and division and fractions, with the black
cloud of algebra on the horizon. And if a boy rushes through all that,
there is always the calculus to fall back on, unless indeed you insist
on his learning music, and proceed to hit him if he cannot tell you the
year Beethoven was born.

A child has a right to finality as regards its compulsory lessons.
Also as regards physical training. At present it is assumed that the
schoolmaster has a right to force every child into an attempt to become
Porson and Bentley, Leibnitz and Newton, all rolled into one. This is
the tradition of the oldest grammar schools. In our times an even more
horrible and cynical claim has been made for the right to drive boys
through compulsory games in the playing fields until they are too much
exhausted physically to do anything but drop off to sleep. This is
supposed to protect them from vice; but as it also protects them from
poetry, literature, music, meditation and prayer, it may be dismissed
with the obvious remark that if boarding schools are places whose
keepers are driven to such monstrous measures lest more abominable
things should happen, then the sooner boarding schools are violently
abolished the better. It is true that society may make physical claims
on the child as well as mental ones: the child must learn to walk, to
use a knife and fork, to swim, to ride a bicycle, to acquire sufficient
power of self-defence to make an attack on it an arduous and uncertain
enterprise, perhaps to fly. What as a matter of common-sense it clearly
has not a right to do is to make this an excuse for keeping the child
slaving for ten hours at physical exercises on the ground that it is not
yet as dexterous as Cinquevalli and as strong as Sandow.




The Rewards and Risks of Knowledge

In a word, we have no right to insist on educating a child; for its
education can end only with its life and will not even then be complete.
Compulsory completion of education is the last folly of a rotten
and desperate civilization. It is the rattle in its throat before
dissolution. All we can fairly do is to prescribe certain definite
acquirements and accomplishments as qualifications for certain
employments; and to secure them, not by the ridiculous method of
inflicting injuries on the persons who have not yet mastered them, but
by attaching certain privileges (not pecuniary) to the employments.

Most acquirements carry their own privileges with them. Thus a baby has
to be pretty closely guarded and imprisoned because it cannot take
care of itself. It has even to be carried about (the most complete
conceivable infringement of its liberty) until it can walk. But nobody
goes on carrying children after they can walk lest they should walk into
mischief, though Arab boys make their sisters carry them, as our own
spoiled children sometimes make their nurses, out of mere laziness,
because sisters in the East and nurses in the West are kept in
servitude. But in a society of equals (the only reasonable and
permanently possible sort of society) children are in much greater
danger of acquiring bandy legs through being left to walk before they
are strong enough than of being carried when they are well able to walk.
Anyhow, freedom of movement in a nursery is the reward of learning to
walk; and in precisely the same way freedom of movement in a city is
the reward of learning how to read public notices, and to count and use
money. The consequences are of course much larger than the mere ability
to read the name of a street or the number of a railway platform and the
destination of a train. When you enable a child to read these, you also
enable it to read this preface, to the utter destruction, you may quite
possibly think, of its morals and docility. You also expose it to the
danger of being run over by taxicabs and trains. The moral and physical
risks of education are enormous: every new power a child acquires,
from speaking, walking, and co-ordinating its vision, to conquering
continents and founding religions, opens up immense new possibilities of
mischief. Teach a child to write and you teach it how to forge: teach it
to speak and you teach it how to lie: teach it to walk and you teach it
how to kick its mother to death.

The great problem of slavery for those whose aim is to maintain it
is the problem of reconciling the efficiency of the slave with
the helplessness that keeps him in servitude; and this problem is
fortunately not completely soluble; for it is not in fact found possible
for a duke to treat his solicitor or his doctor as he treats his
laborers, though they are all equally his slaves: the laborer being in
fact less dependent on his favor than the professional man. Hence it is
that men come to resent, of all things, protection, because it so often
means restriction of their liberty lest they should make a bad use
of it. If there are dangerous precipices about, it is much easier
and cheaper to forbid people to walk near the edge than to put up an
effective fence: that is why both legislators and parents and the paid
deputies of parents are always inhibiting and prohibiting and punishing
and scolding and laming and cramping and delaying progress and growth
instead of making the dangerous places as safe as possible and then
boldly taking and allowing others to take the irreducible minimum of
risk.




English Physical Hardihood and Spiritual Cowardice

It is easier to convert most people to the need for allowing their
children to run physical risks than moral ones. I can remember a
relative of mine who, when I was a small child, unused to horses and
very much afraid of them, insisted on putting me on a rather rumbustious
pony with little spurs on my heels (knowing that in my agitation I would
use them unconsciously), and being enormously amused at my terrors. Yet
when that same lady discovered that I had found a copy of The Arabian
Nights and was devouring it with avidity, she was horrified, and hid it
away from me lest it should break my soul as the pony might have broken
my neck. This way of producing hardy bodies and timid souls is so common
in country houses that you may spend hours in them listening to stories
of broken collar bones, broken backs, and broken necks without coming
upon a single spiritual adventure or daring thought.

But whether the risks to which liberty exposes us are moral or physical
our right to liberty involves the right to run them. A man who is not
free to risk his neck as an aviator or his soul as a heretic is not free
at all; and the right to liberty begins, not at the age of 21 years but
of 21 seconds.




The Risks of Ignorance and Weakness

The difficulty with children is that they need protection from risks
they are too young to understand, and attacks they can neither avoid
nor resist. You may on academic grounds allow a child to snatch glowing
coals from the fire once. You will not do it twice. The risks of
liberty we must let everyone take; but the risks of ignorance and
self-helplessness are another matter. Not only children but adults
need protection from them. At present adults are often exposed to risks
outside their knowledge or beyond their comprehension or powers of
resistance or foresight: for example, we have to look on every day
at marriages or financial speculations that may involve far worse
consequences than burnt fingers. And just as it is part of the business
of adults to protect children, to feed them, clothe them, shelter them,
and shift for them in all sorts of ways until they are able to shift for
themselves, it is coming more and more to be seen that this is true not
only of the relation between adults and children, but between adults and
adults. We shall not always look on indifferently at foolish marriages
and financial speculations, nor allow dead men to control live
communities by ridiculous wills and living heirs to squander and ruin
great estates, nor tolerate a hundred other absurd liberties that
we allow today because we are too lazy to find out the proper way to
interfere. But the interference must be regulated by some theory of the
individual's rights. Though the right to live is absolute, it is not
unconditional. If a man is unbearably mischievous, he must be killed.
This is a mere matter of necessity, like the killing of a man-eating
tiger in a nursery, a venomous snake in the garden, or a fox in the
poultry yard. No society could be constructed on the assumption that
such extermination is a violation of the creature's right to live, and
therefore must not be allowed. And then at once arises the danger into
which morality has led us: the danger of persecution. One Christian
spreading his doctrines may seem more mischievous than a dozen thieves:
throw him therefore to the lions. A lying or disobedient child may
corrupt a whole generation and make human Society impossible: therefore
thrash the vice out of him. And so on until our whole system of
abortion, intimidation, tyranny, cruelty and the rest is in full swing
again.




The Common Sense of Toleration

The real safeguard against this is the dogma of Toleration. I need not
here repeat the compact treatise on it which I prepared for the Joint
Committee on the Censorship of Stage Plays, and prefixed to The Shewing
Up of Blanco Posnet. It must suffice now to say that the present must
not attempt to schoolmaster the future by pretending to know good from
evil in tendency, or protect citizens against shocks to their opinions
and convictions, moral, political or religious: in other words it must
not persecute doctrines of any kind, or what is called bad taste,
and must insist on all persons facing such shocks as they face frosty
weather or any of the other disagreeable, dangerous, or bracing
incidents of freedom. The expediency of Toleration has been forced on us
by the fact that progressive enlightenment depends on a fair hearing for
doctrines which at first appear seditious, blasphemous, and immoral, and
which deeply shock people who never think originally, thought being with
them merely a habit and an echo. The deeper ground for Toleration is
the nature of creation, which, as we now know, proceeds by evolution.
Evolution finds its way by experiment; and this finding of the way
varies according to the stage of development reached, from the blindest
groping along the line of least resistance to intellectual speculation,
with its practical sequel of hypothesis and experimental verification;
or to observation, induction, and deduction; or even into so rapid and
intuitive an integration of all these processes in a single brain
that we get the inspired guess of the man of genius and the desperate
resolution of the teacher of new truths who is first slain as a
blasphemous apostate and then worshipped as a prophet.

Here the law for the child is the same as for the adult. The high priest
must not rend his garments and cry "Crucify him" when he is shocked:
the atheist must not clamor for the suppression of Law's Serious Call
because it has for two centuries destroyed the natural happiness of
innumerable unfortunate children by persuading their parents that it is
their religious duty to be miserable. It, and the Sermon on the Mount,
and Machiavelli's Prince, and La Rochefoucauld's maxims, and Hymns
Ancient and Modern, and De Glanville's apologue, and Dr. Watts's rhymes,
and Nietzsche's Gay Science, and Ingersoll's Mistakes of Moses, and the
speeches and pamphlets of the people who want us to make war on
Germany, and the Noodle's Orations and articles of our politicians and
journalists, must all be tolerated not only because any of them may for
all we know be on the right track but because it is in the conflict of
opinion that we win knowledge and wisdom. However terrible the wounds
suffered in that conflict, they are better than the barren peace of
death that follows when all the combatants are slaughtered or bound hand
and foot.

The difficulty at present is that though this necessity for Toleration
is a law of political science as well established as the law of
gravitation, our rulers are never taught political science: on the
contrary, they are taught in school that the master tolerates nothing
that is disagreeable to him; that ruling is simply being master; and
that the master's method is the method of violent punishment. And our
citizens, all school taught, are walking in the same darkness. As I
write these lines the Home Secretary is explaining that a man who has
been imprisoned for blasphemy must not be released because his remarks
were painful to the feelings of his pious fellow townsmen. Now it
happens that this very Home Secretary has driven many thousands of his
fellow citizens almost beside themselves by the crudity of his notions
of government, and his simple inability to understand why he should
not use and make laws to torment and subdue people who do not happen
to agree with him. In a word, he is not a politician, but a grown-up
schoolboy who has at last got a cane in his hand. And as all the rest of
us are in the same condition (except as to command of the cane) the only
objection made to his proceedings takes the shape of clamorous demands
that _he_ should be caned instead of being allowed to cane other people.




The Sin of Athanasius

It seems hopeless. Anarchists are tempted to preach a violent and
implacable resistance to all law as the only remedy; and the result of
that speedily is that people welcome any tyranny that will rescue them
from chaos. But there is really no need to choose between anarchy and
tyranny. A quite reasonable state of things is practicable if we proceed
on human assumptions and not on academic ones. If adults will frankly
give up their claim to know better than children what the purposes
of the Life Force are, and treat the child as an experiment like
themselves, and possibly a more successful one, and at the same time
relinquish their monstrous parental claims to personal private property
in children, the rest must be left to common sense. It is our attitude,
our religion, that is wrong. A good beginning might be made by enacting
that any person dictating a piece of conduct to a child or to anyone
else as the will of God, or as absolutely right, should be dealt with
as a blasphemer: as, indeed, guilty of the unpardonable sin against the
Holy Ghost. If the penalty were death, it would rid us at once of that
scourge of humanity, the amateur Pope. As an Irish Protestant, I raise
the cry of No Popery with hereditary zest. We are overrun with Popes.
From curates and governesses, who may claim a sort of professional
standing, to parents and uncles and nurserymaids and school teachers
and wiseacres generally, there are scores of thousands of human insects
groping through our darkness by the feeble phosphorescence of their own
tails, yet ready at a moment's notice to reveal the will of God on every
possible subject; to explain how and why the universe was made (in my
youth they added the exact date) and the circumstances under which
it will cease to exist; to lay down precise rules of right and wrong
conduct; to discriminate infallibly between virtuous and vicious
character; and all this with such certainty that they are prepared to
visit all the rigors of the law, and all the ruinous penalties of social
ostracism on people, however harmless their actions maybe who venture
to laugh at their monstrous conceit or to pay their assumptions the
extravagant compliment of criticizing them. As to children, who shall
say what canings and birchings and terrifyings and threats of hell fire
and impositions and humiliations and petty imprisonings and sendings
to bed and standing in corners and the like they have suffered because
their parents and guardians and teachers knew everything so much better
than Socrates or Solon?

It is this ignorant uppishness that does the mischief. A stranger on the
planet might expect that its grotesque absurdity would provoke enough
ridicule to cure it; but unfortunately quite the contrary happens.
Just as our ill health delivers us into the hands of medical quacks and
creates a passionate demand for impudent pretences that doctors can
cure the diseases they themselves die of daily, so our ignorance and
helplessness set us clamoring for spiritual and moral quacks who pretend
that they can save our souls from their own damnation. If a doctor were
to say to his patients, "I am familiar with your symptoms, because I
have seen other people in your condition; and I will bring the very
little knowledge we have to your treatment; but except in that very
shallow sense I dont know what is the matter with you; and I cant
undertake to cure you," he would be a lost man professionally; and if a
clergyman, on being called on to award a prize for good conduct in
the village school, were to say, "I am afraid I cannot say who is the
best-behaved child, because I really do not know what good conduct is;
but I will gladly take the teacher's word as to which child has
caused least inconvenience," he would probably be unfrocked, if not
excommunicated. And yet no honest and intellectually capable doctor or
parson can say more. Clearly it would not be wise of the doctor to say
it, because optimistic lies have such immense therapeutic value that a
doctor who cannot tell them convincingly has mistaken his profession.
And a clergyman who is not prepared to lay down the law dogmatically
will not be of much use in a village school, though it behoves him all
the more to be very careful what law he lays down. But unless both the
clergyman and the doctor are in the attitude expressed by these speeches
they are not fit for their work. The man who believes that he has more
than a provisional hypothesis to go upon is a born fool. He may have
to act vigorously on it. The world has no use for the Agnostic who wont
believe anything because anything might be false, and wont deny anything
because anything might be true. But there is a wide difference between
saying, "I believe this; and I am going to act on it," or, "I dont
believe it; and I wont act on it," and saying, "It is true; and it is
my duty and yours to act on it," or, "It is false; and it is my duty
and yours to refuse to act on it." The difference is as great as that
between the Apostles' Creed and the Athanasian Creed. When you repeat
the Apostles' Creed you affirm that you believe certain things. There
you are clearly within your rights. When you repeat the Athanasian
Creed, you affirm that certain things are so, and that anybody who
doubts that they are so cannot be saved. And this is simply a piece of
impudence on your part, as you know nothing about it except that as good
men as you have never heard of your creed. The apostolic attitude is
a desire to convert others to our beliefs for the sake of sympathy and
light: the Athanasian attitude is a desire to murder people who dont
agree with us. I am sufficient of an Athanasian to advocate a law
for the speedy execution of all Athanasians, because they violate the
fundamental proposition of my creed, which is, I repeat, that all
living creatures are experiments. The precise formula for the Superman,
_ci-devant_ The Just Man Made Perfect, has not yet been discovered.
Until it is, every birth is an experiment in the Great Research which is
being conducted by the Life Force to discover that formula.




The Experiment Experimenting

And now all the modern schoolmaster abortionists will rise up beaming,
and say, "We quite agree. We regard every child in our school as a
subject for experiment. We are always experimenting with them. We
challenge the experimental test for our system. We are continually
guided by our experience in our great work of moulding the character of
our future citizens, etc. etc. etc." I am sorry to seem irreconcilable;
but it is the Life Force that has to make the experiment and not the
schoolmaster; and the Life Force for the child's purpose is in the child
and not in the schoolmaster. The schoolmaster is another experiment;
and a laboratory in which all the experiments began experimenting on one
another would not produce intelligible results. I admit, however, that
if my schoolmasters had treated me as an experiment of the Life Force:
that is, if they had set me free to do as I liked subject only to my
political rights and theirs, they could not have watched the experiment
very long, because the first result would have been a rapid movement
on my part in the direction of the door, and my disappearance
there-through.

It may be worth inquiring where I should have gone to. I should say that
practically every time I should have gone to a much more educational
place. I should have gone into the country, or into the sea, or into the
National Gallery, or to hear a band if there was one, or to any library
where there were no schoolbooks. I should have read very dry and
difficult books: for example, though nothing would have induced me
to read the budget of stupid party lies that served as a text-book of
history in school, I remember reading Robertson's Charles V. and his
history of Scotland from end to end most laboriously. Once, stung by the
airs of a schoolfellow who alleged that he had read Locke On The Human
Understanding, I attempted to read the Bible straight through, and
actually got to the Pauline Epistles before I broke down in disgust at
what seemed to me their inveterate crookedness of mind. If there had
been a school where children were really free, I should have had to
be driven out of it for the sake of my health by the teachers; for the
children to whom a literary education can be of any use are insatiable:
they will read and study far more than is good for them. In fact the
real difficulty is to prevent them from wasting their time by reading
for the sake of reading and studying for the sake of studying, instead
of taking some trouble to find out what they really like and are capable
of doing some good at. Some silly person will probably interrupt me
here with the remark that many children have no appetite for a literary
education at all, and would never open a book if they were not forced
to. I have known many such persons who have been forced to the point
of obtaining University degrees. And for all the effect their literary
exercises has left on them they might just as well have been put on the
treadmill. In fact they are actually less literate than the treadmill
would have left them; for they might by chance have picked up and dipped
into a volume of Shakespear or a translation of Homer if they had not
been driven to loathe every famous name in literature. I should probably
know as much Latin as French, if Latin had not been made the excuse for
my school imprisonment and degradation.




Why We Loathe Learning and Love Sport

If we are to discuss the importance of art, learning, and intellectual
culture, the first thing we have to recognize is that we have very
little of them at present; and that this little has not been produced by
compulsory education: nay, that the scarcity is unnatural and has been
produced by the violent exclusion of art and artists from schools. On
the other hand we have quite a considerable degree of bodily culture:
indeed there is a continual outcry against the sacrifice of mental
accomplishments to athletics. In other words a sacrifice of the
professed object of compulsory education to the real object of voluntary
education. It is assumed that this means that people prefer bodily
to mental culture; but may it not mean that they prefer liberty and
satisfaction to coercion and privation. Why is it that people who have
been taught Shakespear as a school subject loathe his plays and cannot
by any means be persuaded ever to open his works after they escape from
school, whereas there is still, 300 years after his death, a wide and
steady sale for his works to people who read his plays as plays, and not
as task work? If Shakespear, or for that matter, Newton and Leibnitz,
are allowed to find their readers and students they will find them.
If their works are annotated and paraphrased by dullards, and the
annotations and paraphrases forced on all young people by imprisonment
and flogging and scolding, there will not be a single man of letters or
higher mathematician the more in the country: on the contrary there will
be less, as so many potential lovers of literature and mathematics will
have been incurably prejudiced against them. Everyone who is conversant
with the class in which child imprisonment and compulsory schooling is
carried out to the final extremity of the university degree knows that
its scholastic culture is a sham; that it knows little about literature
or art and a great deal about point-to-point races; and that the
village cobbler, who has never read a page of Plato, and is admittedly
a dangerously ignorant man politically, is nevertheless a Socrates
compared to the classically educated gentlemen who discuss politics in
country houses at election time (and at no other time) after their day's
earnest and skilful shooting. Think of the years and years of weary
torment the women of the piano-possessing class have been forced to
spend over the keyboard, fingering scales. How many of them could be
bribed to attend a pianoforte recital by a great player, though they
will rise from sick beds rather than miss Ascot or Goodwood?

Another familiar fact that teaches the same lesson is that many women
who have voluntarily attained a high degree of culture cannot add
up their own housekeeping books, though their education in simple
arithmetic was compulsory, whereas their higher education has been
wholly voluntary. Everywhere we find the same result. The imprisonment,
the beating, the taming and laming, the breaking of young spirits, the
arrest of development, the atrophy of all inhibitive power except the
power of fear, are real: the education is sham. Those who have been
taught most know least.




Antichrist

Among the worst effects of the unnatural segregation of children in
schools and the equally unnatural constant association of them with
adults in the family is the utter defeat of the vital element in
Christianity. Christ stands in the world for that intuition of the
highest humanity that we, being members one of another, must not
complain, must not scold, must not strike, nor revile nor persecute nor
revenge nor punish. Now family life and school life are, as far as the
moral training of children is concerned, nothing but the deliberate
inculcation of a routine of complaint, scolding, punishment,
persecution, and revenge as the natural and only possible way of dealing
with evil or inconvenience. "Aint nobody to be whopped for this here?"
exclaimed Sam Weller when he saw his employer's name written up on a
stage coach, and conceived the phenomenon as an insult which reflected
on himself. This exclamation of Sam Weller is at once the negation of
Christianity and the beginning and the end of current morality; and so
it will remain as long as the family and the school persist as we know
them: that is, as long as the rights of children are so utterly denied
that nobody will even take the trouble to ascertain what they are, and
coming of age is like the turning of a convict into the street after
twenty-one years penal servitude. Indeed it is worse; for the convict
may have learnt before his conviction how to live in freedom and may
remember how to set about it, however lamed his powers of freedom may
have become through disuse; but the child knows no other way of life but
the slave's way. Born free, as Rousseau says, he has been laid hands on
by slaves from the moment of his birth and brought up as a slave. How is
he, when he is at last set free, to be anything else than the slave he
actually is, clamoring for war, for the lash, for police, prisons, and
scaffolds in a wild panic of delusion that without these things he
is lost. The grown-up Englishman is to the end of his days a badly
brought-up child, beyond belief quarrelsome, petulant, selfish,
destructive, and cowardly: afraid that the Germans will come and enslave
him; that the burglar will come and rob him; that the bicycle or motor
car will run over him; that the smallpox will attack him; and that the
devil will run away with him and empty him out like a sack of coals on a
blazing fire unless his nurse or his parents or his schoolmaster or
his bishop or his judge or his army or his navy will do something to
frighten these bad things away. And this Englishman, without the moral
courage of a louse, will risk his neck for fun fifty times every winter
in the hunting field, and at Badajos sieges and the like will ram his
head into a hole bristling with sword blades rather than be beaten in
the one department in which he has been brought up to consult his own
honor. As a Sportsman (and war is fundamentally the sport of hunting
and fighting the most dangerous of the beasts of prey) he feels free. He
will tell you himself that the true sportsman is never a snob, a coward,
a duffer, a cheat, a thief, or a liar. Curious, is it not, that he has
not the same confidence in other sorts of man?

And even sport is losing its freedom. Soon everybody will be schooled,
mentally and physically, from the cradle to the end of the term of adult
compulsory military service, and finally of compulsory civil service
lasting until the age of superannuation. Always more schooling, more
compulsion. We are to be cured by an excess of the dose that has
poisoned us. Satan is to cast out Satan.




Under the Whip

Clearly this will not do. We must reconcile education with liberty.
We must find out some means of making men workers and, if need be,
warriors, without making them slaves. We must cultivate the noble
virtues that have their root in pride. Now no schoolmaster will teach
these any more than a prison governor will teach his prisoners how to
mutiny and escape. Self-preservation forces him to break the spirit
that revolts against him, and to inculcate submission, even to obscene
assault, as a duty. A bishop once had the hardihood to say that he would
rather see England free than England sober. Nobody has yet dared to say
that he would rather see an England of ignoramuses than an England of
cowards and slaves. And if anyone did, it would be necessary to point
out that the antithesis is not a practical one, as we have got at
present an England of ignoramuses who are also cowards and slaves, and
extremely proud of it at that, because in school they are taught to
submit, with what they ridiculously call Oriental fatalism (as if any
Oriental has ever submitted more helplessly and sheepishly to robbery
and oppression than we Occidentals do), to be driven day after day into
compounds and set to the tasks they loathe by the men they hate and
fear, as if this were the inevitable destiny of mankind. And naturally,
when they grow up, they helplessly exchange the prison of the school for
the prison of the mine or the workshop or the office, and drudge along
stupidly and miserably, with just enough gregarious instinct to turn
furiously on any intelligent person who proposes a change. It would be
quite easy to make England a paradise, according to our present ideas,
in a few years. There is no mystery about it: the way has been pointed
out over and over again. The difficulty is not the way but the will. And
we have no will because the first thing done with us in childhood was to
break our will. Can anything be more disgusting than the spectacle of a
nation reading the biography of Gladstone and gloating over the account
of how he was flogged at Eton, two of his schoolfellows being compelled
to hold him down whilst he was flogged. Not long ago a public body in
England had to deal with the case of a schoolmaster who, conceiving
himself insulted by the smoking of a cigaret against his orders by
a pupil eighteen years old, proposed to flog him publicly as a
satisfaction to what he called his honor and authority. I had intended
to give the particulars of this ease, but find the drudgery of repeating
such stuff too sickening, and the effect unjust to a man who was
doing only what others all over the country were doing as part of the
established routine of what is called education. The astounding part of
it was the manner in which the person to whom this outrage on decency
seemed quite proper and natural claimed to be a functionary of high
character, and had his claim allowed. In Japan he would hardly have been
allowed the privilege of committing suicide. What is to be said of a
profession in which such obscenities are made points of honor, or of
institutions in which they are an accepted part of the daily routine?
Wholesome people would not argue about the taste of such nastinesses:
they would spit them out; but we are tainted with flagellomania from
our childhood. When will we realize that the fact that we can become
accustomed to anything, however disgusting at first, makes it necessary
for us to examine carefully everything we have become accustomed to?
Before motor cars became common, necessity had accustomed us to a
foulness in our streets which would have horrified us had the street
been our drawing-room carpet. Before long we shall be as particular
about our streets as we now are about our carpets; and their condition
in the nineteenth century will become as forgotten and incredible as the
condition of the corridors of palaces and the courts of castles was as
late as the eighteenth century. This foulness, we can plead, was imposed
on us as a necessity by the use of horses and of huge retinues; but
flogging has never been so imposed: it has always been a vice, craved
for on any pretext by those depraved by it. Boys were flogged when
criminals were hanged, to impress the awful warning on them. Boys were
flogged at boundaries, to impress the boundaries on their memory. Other
methods and other punishments were always available: the choice of
this one betrayed the sensual impulse which makes the practice an
abomination. But when its viciousness made it customary, it was
practised and tolerated on all hands by people who were innocent of
anything worse than stupidity, ill temper, and inability to discover
other methods of maintaining order than those they had always seen
practised and approved of. From children and animals it extended to
slaves and criminals. In the days of Moses it was limited to 39 lashes.
In the early nineteenth century it had become an open madness: soldiers
were sentenced to a thousand lashes for trifling offences, with the
result (among others less mentionable) that the Iron Duke of Wellington
complained that it was impossible to get an order obeyed in the British
army except in two or three crack regiments. Such frantic excesses of
this disgusting neurosis provoked a reaction against it; but the clamor
for it by depraved persons never ceased, and was tolerated by a nation
trained to it from childhood in the schools until last year (1913), when
in what must be described as a paroxysm of sexual excitement provoked by
the agitation concerning the White Slave Traffic (the purely commercial
nature of which I was prevented from exposing on the stage by the
Censorship twenty years ago) the Government yielded to an outcry for
flagellation led by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and passed an Act
under which a judge can sentence a man to be flogged to the utmost
extremity with any instrument usable for such a purpose that he cares
to prescribe. Such an Act is not a legislative phenomenon but a
psychopathic one. Its effect on the White Slave Traffic was, of course,
to distract public attention from its real cause and from the people who
really profit by it to imaginary "foreign scoundrels," and to secure a
monopoly of its organization for women.

And all this evil is made possible by the schoolmaster with his cane and
birch, by the parents getting rid as best they can of the nuisance of
children making noise and mischief in the house, and by the denial to
children of the elementary rights of human beings.

The first man who enslaved and "broke in" an animal with a whip would
have invented the explosion engine instead could he have foreseen the
curse he was laying on his race. For men and women learnt thereby to
enslave and break in their children by the same means. These children,
grown up, knew no other methods of training. Finally the evil that was
done for gain by the greedy was refined on and done for pleasure by the
lustful. Flogging has become a pleasure purchasable in our streets, and
inhibition a grown-up habit that children play at. "Go and see what baby
is doing; and tell him he mustnt" is the last word of the nursery; and
the grimmest aspect of it is that it was first formulated by a comic
paper as a capital joke.




Technical Instruction

Technical instruction tempts to violence (as a short cut) more
than liberal education. The sailor in Mr Rudyard Kipling's Captains
Courageous, teaching the boy the names of the ship's tackle with a
rope's end, does not disgust us as our schoolmasters do, especially as
the boy was a spoiled boy. But an unspoiled boy would not have needed
that drastic medicine. Technical training may be as tedious as learning
to skate or to play the piano or violin; but it is the price one must
pay to achieve certain desirable results or necessary ends. It is a
monstrous thing to force a child to learn Latin or Greek or mathematics
on the ground that they are an indispensable gymnastic for the mental
powers. It would be monstrous even if it were true; for there is no
labor that might not be imposed on a child or an adult on the same
pretext; but as a glance at the average products of our public school
and university education shews that it is not true, it need not trouble
us. But it is a fact that ignorance of Latin and Greek and mathematics
closes certain careers to men (I do not mean artificial, unnecessary,
noxious careers like those of the commercial schoolmaster). Languages,
even dead ones, have their uses; and, as it seems to many of us,
mathematics have their uses. They will always be learned by people who
want to learn them; and people will always want to learn them as long as
they are of any importance in life: indeed the want will survive their
importance: superstition is nowhere stronger than in the field of
obsolete acquirements. And they will never be learnt fruitfully by
people who do not want to learn them either for their own sake or for
use in necessary work. There is no harder schoolmaster than experience;
and yet experience fails to teach where there is no desire to learn.

Still, one must not begin to apply this generalization too early.
And this brings me to an important factor in the case: the factor of
evolution.




Docility and Dependence

If anyone, impressed by my view that the rights of a child are precisely
those of an adult, proceeds to treat a child as if it were an adult, he
(or she) will find that though the plan will work much better at some
points than the usual plan, at others it will not work at all; and this
discovery may provoke him to turn back from the whole conception of
children's rights with a jest at the expense of bachelors' and old
maids' children. In dealing with children what is needed is not logic
but sense. There is no logical reason why young persons should be
allowed greater control of their property the day after they are
twenty-one than the day before it. There is no logical reason why I,
who strongly object to an adult standing over a boy of ten with a Latin
grammar, and saying, "you must learn this, whether you want to or not,"
should nevertheless be quite prepared to stand over a boy of five with
the multiplication table or a copy book or a code of elementary good
manners, and practice on his docility to make him learn them. And there
is no logical reason why I should do for a child a great many little
offices, some of them troublesome and disagreeable, which I should
not do for a boy twice its age, or support a boy or girl when I would
unhesitatingly throw an adult on his own resources. But there are
practical reasons, and sensible reasons, and affectionate reasons for
all these illogicalities. Children do not want to be treated altogether
as adults: such treatment terrifies them and over-burdens them with
responsibility. In truth, very few adults care to be called on for
independence and originality: they also are bewildered and terrified
in the absence of precedents and precepts and commandments; but modern
Democracy allows them a sanctioning and cancelling power if they are
capable of using it, which children are not. To treat a child wholly
as an adult would be to mock and destroy it. Infantile docility and
juvenile dependence are, like death, a product of Natural Selection;
and though there is no viler crime than to abuse them, yet there is no
greater cruelty than to ignore them. I have complained sufficiently
of what I suffered through the process of assault, imprisonment,
and compulsory lessons that taught me nothing, which are called my
schooling. But I could say a good deal also about the things I was not
taught and should have been taught, not to mention the things I was
allowed to do which I should not have been allowed to do. I have no
recollection of being taught to read or write; so I presume I was born
with both faculties; but many people seem to have bitter recollections
of being forced reluctantly to acquire them. And though I have the
uttermost contempt for a teacher so ill mannered and incompetent as to
be unable to make a child learn to read and write without also making it
cry, still I am prepared to admit that I had rather have been compelled
to learn to read and write with tears by an incompetent and ill mannered
person than left in ignorance. Reading, writing, and enough arithmetic
to use money honestly and accurately, together with the rudiments of law
and order, become necessary conditions of a child's liberty before it
can appreciate the importance of its liberty, or foresee that these
accomplishments are worth acquiring. Nature has provided for this by
evolving the instinct of docility. Children are very docile: they have
a sound intuition that they must do what they are told or perish. And
adults have an intuition, equally sound, that they must take advantage
of this docility to teach children how to live properly or the children
will not survive. The difficulty is to know where to stop. To illustrate
this, let us consider the main danger of childish docility and parental
officiousness.




The Abuse of Docility

Docility may survive as a lazy habit long after it has ceased to be a
beneficial instinct. If you catch a child when it is young enough to be
instinctively docile, and keep it in a condition of unremitted tutelage
under the nurserymaid, the governess, the preparatory school, the
secondary school, and the university, until it is an adult, you will
produce, not a self-reliant, free, fully matured human being, but a
grown-up schoolboy or schoolgirl, capable of nothing in the way of
original or independent action except outbursts of naughtiness in the
women and blackguardism in the men. That is exactly what we get at
present in our rich and consequently governing classes: they pass from
juvenility to senility without ever touching maturity except in body.
The classes which cannot afford this sustained tutelage are notably more
self-reliant and grown-up: an office boy of fifteen is often more of a
man than a university student of twenty. Unfortunately this precocity
is disabled by poverty, ignorance, narrowness, and a hideous power of
living without art or love or beauty and being rather proud of it. The
poor never escape from servitude: their docility is preserved by their
slavery. And so all become the prey of the greedy, the selfish, the
domineering, the unscrupulous, the predatory. If here and there an
individual refuses to be docile, ten docile persons will beat him or
lock him up or shoot him or hang him at the bidding of his oppressors
and their own. The crux of the whole difficulty about parents,
schoolmasters, priests, absolute monarchs, and despots of every sort,
is the tendency to abuse natural docility. A nation should always be
healthily rebellious; but the king or prime minister has yet to be found
who will make trouble by cultivating that side of the national spirit. A
child should begin to assert itself early, and shift for itself more
and more not only in washing and dressing itself, but in opinions and
conduct; yet as nothing is so exasperating and so unlovable as an uppish
child, it is useless to expect parents and schoolmasters to inculcate
this uppishness. Such unamiable precepts as Always contradict an
authoritative statement, Always return a blow, Never lose a chance of a
good fight, When you are scolded for a mistake ask the person who scolds
you whether he or she supposes you did it on purpose, and follow the
question with a blow or an insult or some other unmistakable expression
of resentment, Remember that the progress of the world depends on your
knowing better than your elders, are just as important as those of The
Sermon on the Mount; but no one has yet seen them written up in letters
of gold in a schoolroom or nursery. The child is taught to be kind, to
be respectful, to be quiet, not to answer back, to be truthful when its
elders want to find out anything from it, to lie when the truth would
shock or hurt its elders, to be above all things obedient, and to be
seen and not heard. Here we have two sets of precepts, each warranted
to spoil a child hopelessly if the other be omitted. Unfortunately we
do not allow fair play between them. The rebellious, intractable,
aggressive, selfish set provoke a corrective resistance, and do not
pretend to high moral or religious sanctions; and they are never urged
by grown-up people on young people. They are therefore more in danger
of neglect or suppression than the other set, which have all the adults,
all the laws, all the religions on their side. How is the child to be
secured its due share of both bodies of doctrine?




The Schoolboy and the Homeboy

In practice what happens is that parents notice that boys brought up at
home become mollycoddles, or prigs, or duffers, unable to take care of
themselves. They see that boys should learn to rough it a little and
to mix with children of their own age. This is natural enough. When you
have preached at and punished a boy until he is a moral cripple, you
are as much hampered by him as by a physical cripple; and as you do not
intend to have him on your hands all your life, and are generally rather
impatient for the day when he will earn his own living and leave you to
attend to yourself, you sooner or later begin to talk to him about the
need for self-reliance, learning to think, and so forth, with the result
that your victim, bewildered by your inconsistency, concludes that there
is no use trying to please you, and falls into an attitude of sulky
resentment. Which is an additional inducement to pack him off to school.

In school, he finds himself in a dual world, under two dispensations.
There is the world of the boys, where the point of honor is to be
untameable, always ready to fight, ruthless in taking the conceit out of
anyone who ventures to give himself airs of superior knowledge or taste,
and generally to take Lucifer for one's model. And there is the world of
the masters, the world of discipline, submission, diligence, obedience,
and continual and shameless assumption of moral and intellectual
authority. Thus the schoolboy hears both sides, and is so far better
off than the homebred boy who hears only one. But the two sides are
not fairly presented. They are presented as good and evil, as vice and
virtue, as villainy and heroism. The boy feels mean and cowardly when
he obeys, and selfish and rascally when he disobeys. He looses his moral
courage just as he comes to hate books and languages. In the end, John
Ruskin, tied so close to his mother's apron-string that he did not
escape even when he went to Oxford, and John Stuart Mill, whose father
ought to have been prosecuted for laying his son's childhood waste with
lessons, were superior, as products of training, to our schoolboys. They
were very conspicuously superior in moral courage; and though they did
not distinguish themselves at cricket and football, they had quite as
much physical hardihood as any civilized man needs. But it is to be
observed that Ruskin's parents were wise people who gave John a full
share in their own life, and put up with his presence both at home and
abroad when they must sometimes have been very weary of him; and Mill,
as it happens, was deliberately educated to challenge all the most
sacred institutions of his country. The households they were brought
up in were no more average households than a Montessori school is an
average school.




The Comings of Age of Children

All this inculcated adult docility, which wrecks every civilization as
it is wrecking ours, is inhuman and unnatural. We must reconsider our
institution of the Coming of Age, which is too late for some purposes,
and too early for others. There should be a series of Coming of Ages for
every individual. The mammals have their first coming of age when they
are weaned; and it is noteworthy that this rather cruel and selfish
operation on the part of the parent has to be performed resolutely, with
claws and teeth; for your little mammal does not want to be weaned, and
yields only to a pretty rough assertion of the right of the parent to
be relieved of the child as soon as the child is old enough to bear the
separation. The same thing occurs with children: they hang on to the
mother's apron-string and the father's coat tails as long as they can,
often baffling those sensitive parents who know that children should
think for themselves and fend for themselves, but are too kind to throw
them on their own resources with the ferocity of the domestic cat. The
child should have its first coming of age when it is weaned, another
when it can talk, another when it can walk, another when it can dress
itself without assistance; and when it can read, write, count money, and
pass an examination in going a simple errand involving a purchase and
a journey by rail or other public method of locomotion, it should have
quite a majority. At present the children of laborers are soon mobile
and able to shift for themselves, whereas it is possible to find
grown-up women in the rich classes who are actually afraid to take a
walk in the streets unattended and unprotected. It is true that this
is a superstition from the time when a retinue was part of the state
of persons of quality, and the unattended person was supposed to be a
common person of no quality, earning a living; but this has now become
so absurd that children and young women are no longer told why they are
forbidden to go about alone, and have to be persuaded that the streets
are dangerous places, which of course they are; but people who are not
educated to live dangerously have only half a life, and are more likely
to die miserably after all than those who have taken all the common
risks of freedom from their childhood onward as matters of course.




The Conflict of Wills

The world wags in spite of its schools and its families because both
schools and families are mostly very largely anarchic: parents and
schoolmasters are good-natured or weak or lazy; and children are docile
and affectionate and very shortwinded in their fits of naughtiness; and
so most families slummock along and muddle through until the children
cease to be children. In the few cases when the parties are energetic
and determined, the child is crushed or the parent is reduced to a
cipher, as the case may be. When the opposed forces are neither of them
strong enough to annihilate the other, there is serious trouble: that
is how we get those feuds between parent and child which recur to our
memory so ironically when we hear people sentimentalizing about natural
affection. We even get tragedies; for there is nothing so tragic to
contemplate or so devastating to suffer as the oppression of will
without conscience; and the whole tendency of our family and school
system is to set the will of the parent and the school despot above
conscience as something that must be deferred to abjectly and absolutely
for its own sake.

The strongest, fiercest force in nature is human will. It is the highest
organization we know of the will that has created the whole universe.
Now all honest civilization, religion, law, and convention is an attempt
to keep this force within beneficent bounds. What corrupts civilization,
religion, law, and convention (and they are at present pretty nearly
as corrupt as they dare) is the constant attempts made by the wills of
individuals and classes to thwart the wills and enslave the powers
of other individuals and classes. The powers of the parent and the
schoolmaster, and of their public analogues the lawgiver and the
judge, become instruments of tyranny in the hands of those who are too
narrow-minded to understand law and exercise judgment; and in their
hands (with us they mostly fall into such hands) law becomes tyranny.
And what is a tyrant? Quite simply a person who says to another person,
young or old, "You shall do as I tell you; you shall make what I want;
you shall profess my creed; you shall have no will of your own; and
your powers shall be at the disposal of my will." It has come to this at
last: that the phrase "she has a will of her own," or "he has a will
of his own" has come to denote a person of exceptional obstinacy and
self-assertion. And even persons of good natural disposition, if
brought up to expect such deference, are roused to unreasoning fury,
and sometimes to the commission of atrocious crimes, by the slightest
challenge to their authority. Thus a laborer may be dirty, drunken,
untruthful, slothful, untrustworthy in every way without exhausting the
indulgence of the country house. But let him dare to be "disrespectful"
and he is a lost man, though he be the cleanest, soberest, most
diligent, most veracious, most trustworthy man in the county. Dickens's
instinct for detecting social cankers never served him better than when
he shewed us Mrs Heep teaching her son to "be umble," knowing that if he
carried out that precept he might be pretty well anything else he liked.
The maintenance of deference to our wills becomes a mania which will
carry the best of us to any extremity. We will allow a village of
Egyptian fellaheen or Indian tribesmen to live the lowest life they
please among themselves without molestation; but let one of them slay
an Englishman or even strike him on the strongest provocation, and
straightway we go stark mad, burning and destroying, shooting and
shelling, flogging and hanging, if only such survivors as we may leave
are thoroughly cowed in the presence of a man with a white face. In
the committee room of a local council or city corporation, the humblest
employees of the committee find defenders if they complain of harsh
treatment. Gratuities are voted, indulgences and holidays are pleaded
for, delinquencies are excused in the most sentimental manner provided
only the employee, however patent a hypocrite or incorrigible a slacker,
is hat in hand. But let the most obvious measure of justice be demanded
by the secretary of a Trade Union in terms which omit all expressions
of subservience, and it is with the greatest difficulty that the
cooler-headed can defeat angry motions that the letter be thrown into
the waste paper basket and the committee proceed to the next business.




The Demagogue's Opportunity

And the employee has in him the same fierce impulse to impose his will
without respect for the will of others. Democracy is in practice nothing
but a device for cajoling from him the vote he refuses to arbitrary
authority. He will not vote for Coriolanus; but when an experienced
demagogue comes along and says, "Sir: _you_ are the dictator: the
voice of the people is the voice of God; and I am only your very humble
servant," he says at once, "All right: tell me what to dictate," and
is presently enslaved more effectually with his own silly consent than
Coriolanus would ever have enslaved him without asking his leave. And
the trick by which the demagogue defeats Coriolanus is played on him in
his turn by _his_ inferiors. Everywhere we see the cunning succeeding
in the world by seeking a rich or powerful master and practising on his
lust for subservience. The political adventurer who gets into parliament
by offering himself to the poor voter, not as his representative but as
his will-less soulless "delegate," is himself the dupe of a clever wife
who repudiates Votes for Women, knowing well that whilst the man is
master, the man's mistress will rule. Uriah Heep may be a crawling
creature; but his crawling takes him upstairs.

Thus does the selfishness of the will turn on itself, and obtain by
flattery what it cannot seize by open force. Democracy becomes the
latest trick of tyranny: "womanliness" becomes the latest wile of
prostitution.

Between parent and child the same conflict wages and the same
destruction of character ensues. Parents set themselves to bend the will
of their children to their own--to break their stubborn spirit, as
they call it--with the ruthlessness of Grand Inquisitors. Cunning,
unscrupulous children learn all the arts of the sneak in circumventing
tyranny: children of better character are cruelly distressed and more or
less lamed for life by it.




Our Quarrelsomeness

As between adults, we find a general quarrelsomeness which makes
political reform as impossible to most Englishmen as to hogs. Certain
sections of the nation get cured of this disability. University men,
sailors, and politicians are comparatively free from it, because the
communal life of the University, the fact that in a ship a man must
either learn to consider others or else go overboard or into irons, and
the habit of working on committees and ceasing to expect more of
one's own way than is included in the greatest common measure of the
committee, educate the will socially. But no one who has ever had to
guide a committee of ordinary private Englishmen through their first
attempts at collective action, in committee or otherwise, can retain
any illusions as to the appalling effects on our national manners
and character of the organization of the home and the school as petty
tyrannies, and the absence of all teaching of self-respect and training
in self-assertion. Bullied and ordered about, the Englishman obeys like
a sheep, evades like a knave, or tries to murder his oppressor. Merely
criticized or opposed in committee, or invited to consider anybody's
views but his own, he feels personally insulted and wants to resign
or leave the room unless he is apologized to. And his panic and
bewilderment when he sees that the older hands at the work have no
patience with him and do not intend to treat him as infallible, are
pitiable as far as they are anything but ludicrous. That is what comes
of not being taught to consider other people's wills, and left to submit
to them or to over-ride them as if they were the winds and the weather.
Such a state of mind is incompatible not only with the democratic
introduction of high civilization, but with the comprehension and
maintenance of such civilized institutions as have been introduced by
benevolent and intelligent despots and aristocrats.




We Must Reform Society before we can Reform Ourselves

When we come to the positive problem of what to do with children if we
are to give up the established plan, we find the difficulties so great
that we begin to understand why so many people who detest the system and
look back with loathing on their own schooldays, must helplessly send
their children to the very schools they themselves were sent to, because
there is no alternative except abandoning the children to undisciplined
vagabondism. Man in society must do as everybody else does in his class:
only fools and romantic novices imagine that freedom is a mere matter of
the readiness of the individual to snap his fingers at convention. It
is true that most of us live in a condition of quite unnecessary
inhibition, wearing ugly and uncomfortable clothes, making ourselves and
other people miserable by the heathen horrors of mourning, staying away
from the theatre because we cannot afford the stalls and are ashamed
to go to the pit, and in dozens of other ways enslaving ourselves
when there are comfortable alternatives open to us without any real
drawbacks. The contemplation of these petty slaveries, and of the
triumphant ease with which sensible people throw them off, creates an
impression that if we only take Johnson's advice to free our minds from
cant, we can achieve freedom. But if we all freed our minds from cant
we should find that for the most part we should have to go on doing
the necessary work of the world exactly as we did it before until we
organized new and free methods of doing it. Many people believed in
secondary co-education (boys and girls taught together) before schools
like Bedales were founded: indeed the practice was common enough in
elementary schools and in Scotland; but their belief did not help them
until Bedales and St George's were organized; and there are still not
nearly enough co-educational schools in existence to accommodate all
the children of the parents who believe in co-education up to university
age, even if they could always afford the fees of these exceptional
schools. It may be edifying to tell a duke that our public schools are
all wrong in their constitution and methods, or a costermonger that
children should be treated as in Goethe's Wilhelm Meister instead of as
they are treated at the elementary school at the corner of his street;
but what are the duke and the coster to do? Neither of them has any
effective choice in the matter: their children must either go to the
schools that are, or to no school at all. And as the duke thinks with
reason that his son will be a lout or a milksop or a prig if he does
not go to school, and the coster knows that his son will become an
illiterate hooligan if he is left to the streets, there is no real
alternative for either of them. Child life must be socially organized:
no parent, rich or poor, can choose institutions that do not exist; and
the private enterprise of individual school masters appealing to a
group of well-to-do parents, though it may shew what can be done by
enthusiasts with new methods, cannot touch the mass of our children.
For the average parent or child nothing is really available except the
established practice; and this is what makes it so important that the
established practice should be a sound one, and so useless for clever
individuals to disparage it unless they can organize an alternative
practice and make it, too, general.




The Pursuit of Manners

If you cross-examine the duke and the coster, you will find that they
are not concerned for the scholastic attainments of their children.
Ask the duke whether he could pass the standard examination of
twelve-year-old children in elementary schools, and he will admit,
with an entirely placid smile, that he would almost certainly be
ignominiously plucked. And he is so little ashamed of or disadvantaged
by his condition that he is not prepared to spend an hour in remedying
it. The coster may resent the inquiry instead of being amused by it;
but his answer, if true, will be the same. What they both want for their
children is the communal training, the apprenticeship to society, the
lessons in holding one's own among people of all sorts with whom one is
not, as in the home, on privileged terms. These can be acquired only by
"mixing with the world," no matter how wicked the world is. No parent
cares twopence whether his children can write Latin hexameters or
repeat the dates of the accession of all the English monarchs since the
Conqueror; but all parents are earnestly anxious about the manners of
their children. Better Claude Duval than Kaspar Hauser. Laborers who are
contemptuously anti-clerical in their opinions will send their
daughters to the convent school because the nuns teach them some sort
of gentleness of speech and behavior. And peers who tell you that our
public schools are rotten through and through, and that our Universities
ought to be razed to the foundations, send their sons to Eton and
Oxford, Harrow and Cambridge, not only because there is nothing else to
be done, but because these places, though they turn out blackguards
and ignoramuses and boobies galore, turn them out with the habits and
manners of the society they belong to. Bad as those manners are in many
respects, they are better than no manners at all. And no individual or
family can possibly teach them. They can be acquired only by living in
an organized community in which they are traditional.

Thus we see that there are reasons for the segregation of children even
in families where the great reason: namely, that children are nuisances
to adults, does not press very hardly, as, for instance, in the houses
of the very poor, who can send their children to play in the streets,
or the houses of the very rich, which are so large that the children's
quarters can be kept out of the parents' way like the servants'
quarters.




Not too much Wind on the Heath, Brother

What, then, is to be done? For the present, unfortunately, little except
propagating the conception of Children's Rights. Only the achievement
of economic equality through Socialism can make it possible to deal
thoroughly with the question from the point of view of the total
interest of the community, which must always consist of grown-up
children. Yet economic equality, like all simple and obvious
arrangements, seems impossible to people brought up as children are now.
Still, something can be done even within class limits. Large communities
of children of the same class are possible today; and voluntary
organization of outdoor life for children has already begun in Boy
Scouting and excursions of one kind or another. The discovery that
anything, even school life, is better for the child than home life,
will become an over-ridden hobby; and we shall presently be told by our
faddists that anything, even camp life, is better than school life.
Some blundering beginnings of this are already perceptible. There is a
movement for making our British children into priggish little barefooted
vagabonds, all talking like that born fool George Borrow, and supposed
to be splendidly healthy because they would die if they slept in rooms
with the windows shut, or perhaps even with a roof over their heads.
Still, this is a fairly healthy folly; and it may do something to
establish Mr Harold Cox's claim of a Right to Roam as the basis of a
much needed law compelling proprietors of land to provide plenty of
gates in their fences, and to leave them unlocked when there are no
growing crops to be damaged nor bulls to be encountered, instead of, as
at present, imprisoning the human race in dusty or muddy thoroughfares
between walls of barbed wire.

The reaction against vagabondage will come from the children themselves.
For them freedom will not mean the expensive kind of savagery now called
"the simple life." Their natural disgust with the visions of cockney
book fanciers blowing themselves out with "the wind on the heath,
brother," and of anarchists who are either too weak to understand that
men are strong and free in proportion to the social pressure they
can stand and the complexity of the obligations they are prepared to
undertake, or too strong to realize that what is freedom to them may be
terror and bewilderment to others, will drive them back to the home and
the school if these have meanwhile learned the lesson that children are
independent human beings and have rights.




Wanted: a Child's Magna Charta

Whether we shall presently be discussing a Juvenile Magna Charta or
Declaration of Rights by way of including children in the Constitution
is a question on which I leave others to speculate. But if it could
once be established that a child has an adult's Right of Egress from
uncomfortable places and unpleasant company, and there were children's
lawyers to sue pedagogues and others for assault and imprisonment, there
would be an amazing change in the behavior of schoolmasters, the quality
of school books, and the amenities of school life. That Consciousness of
Consent which, even in its present delusive form, has enabled Democracy
to oust tyrannical systems in spite of all its vulgarities and
stupidities and rancors and ineptitudes and ignorances, would operate as
powerfully among children as it does now among grown-ups. No doubt the
pedagogue would promptly turn demagogue, and woo his scholars by all the
arts of demagogy; but none of these arts can easily be so dishonorable
or mischievous as the art of caning. And, after all, if larger liberties
are attached to the acquisition of knowledge, and the child finds
that it can no more go to the seaside without a knowledge of the
multiplication and pence tables than it can be an astronomer without
mathematics, it will learn the multiplication table, which is more than
it always does at present, in spite of all the canings and keepings in.




The Pursuit of Learning

When the Pursuit of Learning comes to mean the pursuit of learning by
the child instead of the pursuit of the child by Learning, cane in
hand, the danger will be precocity of the intellect, which is just as
undesirable as precocity of the emotions. We still have a silly habit of
talking and thinking as if intellect were a mechanical process and not a
passion; and in spite of the German tutors who confess openly that three
out of every five of the young men they coach for examinations are lamed
for life thereby; in spite of Dickens and his picture of little Paul
Dombey dying of lessons, we persist in heaping on growing children and
adolescent youths and maidens tasks Pythagoras would have declined out
of common regard for his own health and common modesty as to his own
capacity. And this overwork is not all the effect of compulsion; for
the average schoolmaster does not compel his scholars to learn: he only
scolds and punishes them if they do not, which is quite a different
thing, the net effect being that the school prisoners need not learn
unless they like. Nay, it is sometimes remarked that the school
dunce--meaning the one who does not like--often turns out well
afterwards, as if idleness were a sign of ability and character. A much
more sensible explanation is that the so-called dunces are not exhausted
before they begin the serious business of life. It is said that boys
will be boys; and one can only add one wishes they would. Boys really
want to be manly, and are unfortunately encouraged thoughtlessly in this
very dangerous and overstraining aspiration. All the people who have
really worked (Herbert Spencer for instance) warn us against work as
earnestly as some people warn us against drink. When learning is placed
on the voluntary footing of sport, the teacher will find himself saying
every day "Run away and play: you have worked as much as is good for
you." Trying to make children leave school will be like trying to make
them go to bed; and it will be necessary to surprise them with the idea
that teaching is work, and that the teacher is tired and must go play or
rest or eat: possibilities always concealed by that infamous humbug
the current schoolmaster, who achieves a spurious divinity and a witch
doctor's authority by persuading children that he is not human, just as
ladies persuade them that they have no legs.




Children and Game: a Proposal

Of the many wild absurdities of our existing social order perhaps the
most grotesque is the costly and strictly enforced reservation of large
tracts of country as deer forests and breeding grounds for pheasants
whilst there is so little provision of the kind made for children.
I have more than once thought of trying to introduce the shooting
of children as a sport, as the children would then be preserved very
carefully for ten months in the year, thereby reducing their death rate
far more than the fusillades of the sportsmen during the other two would
raise it. At present the killing of a fox except by a pack of foxhounds
is regarded with horror; but you may and do kill children in a hundred
and fifty ways provided you do not shoot them or set a pack of dogs on
them. It must be admitted that the foxes have the best of it; and indeed
a glance at our pheasants, our deer, and our children will convince the
most sceptical that the children have decidedly the worst of it.

This much hope, however, can be extracted from the present state of
things. It is so fantastic, so mad, so apparently impossible, that no
scheme of reform need ever henceforth be discredited on the ground that
it is fantastic or mad or apparently impossible. It is the sensible
schemes, unfortunately, that are hopeless in England. Therefore I have
great hopes that my own views, though fundamentally sensible, can be
made to appear fantastic enough to have a chance.

First, then, I lay it down as a prime condition of sane society, obvious
as such to anyone but an idiot, that in any decent community, children
should find in every part of their native country, food, clothing,
lodging, instruction, and parental kindness for the asking. For the
matter of that, so should adults; but the two cases differ in that as
these commodities do not grow on the bushes, the adults cannot have
them unless they themselves organize and provide the supply, whereas the
children must have them as if by magic, with nothing to do but rub the
lamp, like Aladdin, and have their needs satisfied.




The Parents' Intolerable Burden

There is nothing new in this: it is how children have always had and
must always have their needs satisfied. The parent has to play the part
of Aladdin's djinn; and many a parent has sunk beneath the burden of
this service. All the novelty we need is to organize it so that instead
of the individual child fastening like a parasite on its own particular
parents, the whole body of children should be thrown not only upon the
whole body of parents, but upon the celibates and childless as well,
whose present exemption from a full share in the social burden of
children is obviously unjust and unwholesome. Today it is easy to find a
widow who has at great cost to herself in pain, danger, and disablement,
borne six or eight children. In the same town you will find rich
bachelors and old maids, and married couples with no children or with
families voluntarily limited to two or three. The eight children do not
belong to the woman in any real or legal sense. When she has reared
them they pass away from her into the community as independent persons,
marrying strangers, working for strangers, spending on the community the
life that has been built up at her expense. No more monstrous injustice
could be imagined than that the burden of rearing the children should
fall on her alone and not on the celibates and the selfish as well.

This is so far recognized that already the child finds, wherever it
goes, a school for it, and somebody to force it into the school; and
more and more these schools are being driven by the mere logic of facts
to provide the children with meals, with boots, with spectacles, with
dentists and doctors. In fact, when the child's parents are destitute or
not to be found, bread, lodging, and clothing are provided. It is true
that they are provided grudgingly and on conditions infamous enough to
draw down abundant fire from Heaven upon us every day in the shape of
crime and disease and vice; but still the practice of keeping children
barely alive at the charge of the community is established; and there is
no need for me to argue about it. I propose only two extensions of the
practice. One is to provide for all the child's reasonable human wants,
on which point, if you differ from me, I shall take leave to say that
you are socially a fool and personally an inhuman wretch. The other is
that these wants should be supplied in complete freedom from compulsory
schooling or compulsory anything except restraint from crime, though,
as they can be supplied only by social organization, the child must be
conscious of and subject to the conditions of that organization, which
may involve such portions of adult responsibility and duty as a child
may be able to bear according to its age, and which will in any case
prevent it from forming the vagabond and anarchist habit of mind.

One more exception might be necessary: compulsory freedom. I am sure
that a child should not be imprisoned in a school. I am not so sure that
it should not sometimes be driven out into the open--imprisoned in the
woods and on the mountains, as it were. For there are frowsty children,
just as there are frowsty adults, who dont want freedom. This morbid
result of over-domestication would, let us hope, soon disappear with its
cause.




Mobilization

Those who see no prospect held out to them by this except a country in
which all the children shall be roaming savages, should consider, first,
whether their condition would be any worse than that of the little caged
savages of today, and second, whether either children or adults are
so apt to run wild that it is necessary to tether them fast to one
neighborhood to prevent a general dissolution of society. My own
observation leads me to believe that we are not half mobilized enough.
True, I cannot deny that we are more mobile than we were. You will still
find in the home counties old men who have never been to London, and who
tell you that they once went to Winchester or St Albans much as if they
had been to the South Pole; but they are not so common as the clerk who
has been to Paris or to Lovely Lucerne, and who "goes away somewhere"
when he has a holiday. His grandfather never had a holiday, and, if he
had, would no more have dreamed of crossing the Channel than of taking
a box at the Opera. But with all allowance for the Polytechnic excursion
and the tourist agency, our inertia is still appalling. I confess to
having once spent nine years in London without putting my nose
outside it; and though this was better, perhaps, than the restless
globe-trotting vagabondage of the idle rich, wandering from hotel to
hotel and never really living anywhere, yet I should no more have done
it if I had been properly mobilized in my childhood than I should have
worn the same suit of clothes all that time (which, by the way, I very
nearly did, my professional income not having as yet begun to sprout).
There are masses of people who could afford at least a trip to Margate,
and a good many who could afford a trip round the world, who are more
immovable than Aldgate pump. To others, who would move if they knew how,
travelling is surrounded with imaginary difficulties and terrors. In
short, the difficulty is not to fix people, but to root them up. We keep
repeating the silly proverb that a rolling stone gathers no moss, as if
moss were a desirable parasite. What we mean is that a vagabond does not
prosper. Even this is not true, if prosperity means enjoyment as well as
responsibility and money. The real misery of vagabondage is the misery
of having nothing to do and nowhere to go, the misery of being derelict
of God and Man, the misery of the idle, poor or rich. And this is one
of the miseries of unoccupied childhood. The unoccupied adult, thus
afflicted, tries many distractions which are, to say the least, unsuited
to children. But one of them, the distraction of seeing the world, is
innocent and beneficial. Also it is childish, being a continuation of
what nurses call "taking notice," by which a child becomes experienced.
It is pitiable nowadays to see men and women doing after the age of 45
all the travelling and sightseeing they should have done before they
were 15. Mere wondering and staring at things is an important part of
a child's education: that is why children can be thoroughly mobilized
without making vagabonds of them. A vagabond is at home nowhere because
he wanders: a child should wander because it ought to be at home
everywhere. And if it has its papers and its passports, and gets what
it requires not by begging and pilfering, but from responsible agents
of the community as of right, and with some formal acknowledgment of
the obligations it is incurring and a knowledge of the fact that these
obligations are being recorded: if, further, certain qualifications are
exacted before it is promoted from permission to go as far as its
legs will carry it to using mechanical aids to locomotion, it can roam
without much danger of gypsification.

Under such circumstances the boy or girl could always run away, and
never be lost; and on no other conditions can a child be free without
being also a homeless outcast.

Parents could also run away from disagreeable children or drive them out
of doors or even drop their acquaintance, temporarily or permanently,
without inhumanity. Thus both parties would be on their good behavior,
and not, as at present, on their filial or parental behavior, which,
like all unfree behavior, is mostly bad behavior.

As to what other results might follow, we had better wait and see; for
nobody now alive can imagine what customs and institutions would grow
up in societies of free children. Child laws and child fashions, child
manners and child morals are now not tolerated; but among free children
there would certainly be surprising developments in this direction. I do
not think there would be any danger of free children behaving as badly
as grown-up people do now because they have never been free. They could
hardly behave worse, anyhow.




Children's Rights and Parents' Wrongs

A very distinguished man once assured a mother of my acquaintance that
she would never know what it meant to be hurt until she was hurt through
her children. Children are extremely cruel without intending it; and
in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred the reason is that they do not
conceive their elders as having any human feelings. Serve the elders
right, perhaps, for posing as superhuman! The penalty of the impostor
is not that he is found out (he very seldom is) but that he is taken
for what he pretends to be, and treated as such. And to be treated as
anything but what you really are may seem pleasant to the imagination
when the treatment is above your merits; but in actual experience it
is often quite the reverse. When I was a very small boy, my romantic
imagination, stimulated by early doses of fiction, led me to brag to a
still smaller boy so outrageously that he, being a simple soul, really
believed me to be an invincible hero. I cannot remember whether this
pleased me much; but I do remember very distinctly that one day this
admirer of mine, who had a pet goat, found the animal in the hands of a
larger boy than either of us, who mocked him and refused to restore the
animal to his rightful owner. Whereupon, naturally, he came weeping
to me, and demanded that I should rescue the goat and annihilate the
aggressor. My terror was beyond description: fortunately for me, it
imparted such a ghastliness to my voice and aspect as I under the eye of
my poor little dupe, advanced on the enemy with that hideous extremity
of cowardice which is called the courage of despair, and said "You let
go that goat," that he abandoned his prey and fled, to my unforgettable,
unspeakable relief. I have never since exaggerated my prowess in bodily
combat.

Now what happened to me in the adventure of the goat happens very often
to parents, and would happen to schoolmasters if the prison door of the
school did not shut out the trials of life. I remember once, at school,
the resident head master was brought down to earth by the sudden illness
of his wife. In the confusion that ensued it became necessary to
leave one of the schoolrooms without a master. I was in the class that
occupied that schoolroom. To have sent us home would have been to break
the fundamental bargain with our parents by which the school was bound
to keep us out of their way for half the day at all hazards. Therefore
an appeal had to be made to our better feelings: that is, to our common
humanity, not to make a noise. But the head master had never admitted
any common humanity with us. We had been carefully broken in to regard
him as a being quite aloof from and above us: one not subject to error
or suffering or death or illness or mortality. Consequently sympathy was
impossible; and if the unfortunate lady did not perish, it was because,
as I now comfort myself with guessing, she was too much pre-occupied
with her own pains, and possibly making too much noise herself, to be
conscious of the pandemonium downstairs.

A great deal of the fiendishness of schoolboys and the cruelty of
children to their elders is produced just in this way. Elders cannot be
superhuman beings and suffering fellow-creatures at the same time. If
you pose as a little god, you must pose for better for worse.




How Little We Know About Our Parents

The relation between parent and child has cruel moments for the parent
even when money is no object, and the material worries are delegated to
servants and school teachers. The child and the parent are strangers
to one another necessarily, because their ages must differ widely. Read
Goethe's autobiography; and note that though he was happy in his
parents and had exceptional powers of observation, divination, and
story-telling, he knew less about his father and mother than about most
of the other people he mentions. I myself was never on bad terms with
my mother: we lived together until I was forty-two years old, absolutely
without the smallest friction of any kind; yet when her death set me
thinking curiously about our relations, I realized that I knew very
little about her. Introduce me to a strange woman who was a child when
I was a child, a girl when I was a boy, an adolescent when I was an
adolescent; and if we take naturally to one another I will know more of
her and she of me at the end of forty days (I had almost said of
forty minutes) than I knew of my mother at the end of forty years. A
contemporary stranger is a novelty and an enigma, also a possibility;
but a mother is like a broomstick or like the sun in the heavens, it
does not matter which as far as one's knowledge of her is concerned:
the broomstick is there and the sun is there; and whether the child is
beaten by it or warmed and enlightened by it, it accepts it as a fact
in nature, and does not conceive it as having had youth, passions, and
weaknesses, or as still growing, yearning, suffering, and learning. If
I meet a widow I may ask her all about her marriage; but what son ever
dreams of asking his mother about her marriage, or could endure to hear
of it without violently breaking off the old sacred relationship between
them, and ceasing to be her child or anything more to her than the first
man in the street might be?

Yet though in this sense the child cannot realize its parent's
humanity, the parent can realize the child's; for the parents with their
experience of life have none of the illusions about the child that the
child has about the parents; and the consequence is that the child
can hurt its parents' feelings much more than its parents can hurt
the child's, because the child, even when there has been none of the
deliberate hypocrisy by which children are taken advantage of by their
elders, cannot conceive the parent as a fellow-creature, whilst the
parents know very well that the children are only themselves over again.
The child cannot conceive that its blame or contempt or want of interest
could possibly hurt its parent, and therefore expresses them all with
an indifference which has given rise to the term _enfant terrible_ (a
tragic term in spite of the jests connected with it); whilst the parent
can suffer from such slights and reproaches more from a child than from
anyone else, even when the child is not beloved, because the child is so
unmistakably sincere in them.




Our Abandoned Mothers

Take a very common instance of this agonizing incompatibility. A widow
brings up her son to manhood. He meets a strange woman, and goes off
with and marries her, leaving his mother desolate. It does not occur to
him that this is at all hard on her: he does it as a matter of course,
and actually expects his mother to receive, on terms of special
affection, the woman for whom she has been abandoned. If he shewed any
sense of what he was doing, any remorse; if he mingled his tears with
hers and asked her not to think too hardly of him because he had obeyed
the inevitable destiny of a man to leave his father and mother and
cleave to his wife, she could give him her blessing and accept her
bereavement with dignity and without reproach. But the man never dreams
of such considerations. To him his mother's feeling in the matter, when
she betrays it, is unreasonable, ridiculous, and even odious, as shewing
a prejudice against his adorable bride.

I have taken the widow as an extreme and obvious case; but there are
many husbands and wives who are tired of their consorts, or disappointed
in them, or estranged from them by infidelities; and these parents, in
losing a son or a daughter through marriage, may be losing everything
they care for. No parent's love is as innocent as the love of a child:
the exclusion of all conscious sexual feeling from it does not exclude
the bitterness, jealousy, and despair at loss which characterize sexual
passion: in fact, what is called a pure love may easily be more selfish
and jealous than a carnal one. Anyhow, it is plain matter of fact that
naively selfish people sometimes try with fierce jealousy to prevent
their children marrying.




Family Affection

Until the family as we know it ceases to exist, nobody will dare to
analyze parental affection as distinguished from that general human
sympathy which has secured to many an orphan fonder care in a stranger's
house than it would have received from its actual parents. Not even
Tolstoy, in The Kreutzer Sonata, has said all that we suspect about it.
When it persists beyond the period at which it ceases to be necessary to
the child's welfare, it is apt to be morbid; and we are probably wrong
to inculcate its deliberate cultivation. The natural course is for
the parents and children to cast off the specific parental and filial
relation when they are no longer necessary to one another. The
child does this readily enough to form fresh ties, closer and more
fascinating. Parents are not always excluded from such compensations:
it happens sometimes that when the children go out at the door the lover
comes in at the window. Indeed it happens now oftener than it used to,
because people remain much longer in the sexual arena. The cultivated
Jewess no longer cuts off her hair at her marriage. The British matron
has discarded her cap and her conscientious ugliness; and a bishop's
wife at fifty has more of the air of a _femme galante_ than an actress
had at thirty-five in her grandmother's time. But as people marry later,
the facts of age and time still inexorably condemn most parents to
comparative solitude when their children marry. This may be a privation
and may be a relief: probably in healthy circumstances it is no worse
than a salutary change of habit; but even at that it is, for the moment
at least, a wrench. For though parents and children sometimes dislike
one another, there is an experience of succor and a habit of dependence
and expectation formed in infancy which naturally attaches a child to
its parent or to its nurse (a foster parent) in a quite peculiar way.
A benefit to the child may be a burden to the parent; but people become
attached to their burdens sometimes more than the burdens are attached
to them; and to "suffer little children" has become an affectionate
impulse deep in our nature.

Now there is no such impulse to suffer our sisters and brothers,
our aunts and uncles, much less our cousins. If we could choose our
relatives, we might, by selecting congenial ones, mitigate the repulsive
effect of the obligation to like them and to admit them to our intimacy.
But to have a person imposed on us as a brother merely because he
happens to have the same parents is unbearable when, as may easily
happen, he is the sort of person we should carefully avoid if he were
anyone else's brother. All Europe (except Scotland, which has clans
instead of families) draws the line at second cousins. Protestantism
draws it still closer by making the first cousin a marriageable
stranger; and the only reason for not drawing it at sisters and brothers
is that the institution of the family compels us to spend our
childhood with them, and thus imposes on us a curious relation in which
familiarity destroys romantic charm, and is yet expected to create a
specially warm affection. Such a relation is dangerously factitious and
unnatural; and the practical moral is that the less said at home about
specific family affection the better. Children, like grown-up people,
get on well enough together if they are not pushed down one another's
throats; and grown-up relatives will get on together in proportion
to their separation and their care not to presume on their blood
relationship. We should let children's feelings take their natural
course without prompting. I have seen a child scolded and called
unfeeling because it did not occur to it to make a theatrical
demonstration of affectionate delight when its mother returned after an
absence: a typical example of the way in which spurious family sentiment
is stoked up. We are, after all, sociable animals; and if we are let
alone in the matter of our affections, and well brought up otherwise,
we shall not get on any the worse with particular people because they
happen to be our brothers and sisters and cousins. The danger lies in
assuming that we shall get on any better.

The main point to grasp here is that families are not kept together at
present by family feeling but by human feeling. The family cultivates
sympathy and mutual help and consolation as any other form of kindly
association cultivates them; but the addition of a dictated compulsory
affection as an attribute of near kinship is not only unnecessary,
but positively detrimental; and the alleged tendency of modern social
development to break up the family need alarm nobody. We cannot break up
the facts of kinship nor eradicate its natural emotional consequences.
What we can do and ought to do is to set people free to behave naturally
and to change their behavior as circumstances change. To impose on
a citizen of London the family duties of a Highland cateran in the
eighteenth century is as absurd as to compel him to carry a claymore and
target instead of an umbrella. The civilized man has no special use
for cousins; and he may presently find that he has no special use for
brothers and sisters. The parent seems likely to remain indispensable;
but there is no reason why that natural tie should be made the excuse
for unnatural aggravations of it, as crushing to the parent as they are
oppressive to the child. The mother and father will not always have
to shoulder the burthen of maintenance which should fall on the Atlas
shoulders of the fatherland and motherland. Pending such reforms and
emancipations, a shattering break-up of the parental home must remain
one of the normal incidents of marriage. The parent is left lonely and
the child is not. Woe to the old if they have no impersonal interests,
no convictions, no public causes to advance, no tastes or hobbies! It is
well to be a mother but not to be a mother-in-law; and if men were cut
off artificially from intellectual and public interests as women are,
the father-in-law would be as deplorable a figure in popular tradition
as the mother-in-law.

It is not to be wondered at that some people hold that blood
relationship should be kept a secret from the persons related, and that
the happiest condition in this respect is that of the foundling who, if
he ever meets his parents or brothers or sisters, passes them by without
knowing them. And for such a view there is this to be said: that our
family system does unquestionably take the natural bond between members
of the same family, which, like all natural bonds, is not too tight to
be borne, and superimposes on it a painful burden of forced, inculcated,
suggested, and altogether unnecessary affection and responsibility which
we should do well to get rid of by making relatives as independent of
one another as possible.




The Fate of the Family

The difficulty of inducing people to talk sensibly about the family is
the same as that which I pointed out in a previous volume as
confusing discussions of marriage. Marriage is not a single invariable
institution: it changes from civilization to civilization, from religion
to religion, from civil code to civil code, from frontier to frontier.
The family is still more variable, because the number of persons
constituting a family, unlike the number of persons constituting a
marriage, varies from one to twenty: indeed, when a widower with a
family marries a widow with a family, and the two produce a third
family, even that very high number may be surpassed. And the conditions
may vary between opposite extremes: for example, in a London or Paris
slum every child adds to the burden of poverty and helps to starve the
parents and all the other children, whereas in a settlement of pioneer
colonists every child, from the moment it is big enough to lend a hand
to the family industry, is an investment in which the only danger is
that of temporary over-capitalization. Then there are the variations
in family sentiment. Sometimes the family organization is as frankly
political as the organization of an army or an industry: fathers being
no more expected to be sentimental about their children than colonels
about soldiers, or factory owners about their employees, though the
mother may be allowed a little tenderness if her character is weak. The
Roman father was a despot: the Chinese father is an object of worship:
the sentimental modern western father is often a play-fellow looked to
for toys and pocket-money. The farmer sees his children constantly: the
squire sees them only during the holidays, and not then oftener than he
can help: the tram conductor, when employed by a joint stock company,
sometimes never sees them at all.

Under such circumstances phrases like The Influence of Home Life, The
Family, The Domestic Hearth, and so on, are no more specific than The
Mammals, or The Man In The Street; and the pious generalizations founded
so glibly on them by our sentimental moralists are unworkable.
When households average twelve persons with the sexes about equally
represented, the results may be fairly good. When they average three the
results may be very bad indeed; and to lump the two together under
the general term The Family is to confuse the question hopelessly. The
modern small family is much too stuffy: children "brought up at home"
in it are unfit for society. But here again circumstances differ. If the
parents live in what is called a garden suburb, where there is a good
deal of social intercourse, and the family, instead of keeping itself to
itself, as the evil old saying is, and glowering at the neighbors over
the blinds of the long street in which nobody knows his neighbor and
everyone wishes to deceive him as to his income and social importance,
is in effect broken up by school life, by out-of-door habits, and by
frank neighborly intercourse through dances and concerts and theatricals
and excursions and the like, families of four may turn out much less
barbarous citizens than families of ten which attain the Boer ideal of
being out of sight of one another's chimney smoke.

All one can say is, roughly, that the homelier the home, and the more
familiar the family, the worse for everybody concerned. The family ideal
is a humbug and a nuisance: one might as reasonably talk of the barrack
ideal, or the forecastle ideal, or any other substitution of the
machinery of social organization for the end of it, which must always
be the fullest and most capable life: in short, the most godly life. And
this significant word reminds us that though the popular conception of
heaven includes a Holy Family, it does not attach to that family
the notion of a separate home, or a private nursery or kitchen or
mother-in-law, or anything that constitutes the family as we know it.
Even blood relationship is miraculously abstracted from it; and the
Father is the father of all children, the mother the mother of all
mothers and babies, and the Son the Son of Man and the Savior of his
brothers: one whose chief utterance on the subject of the conventional
family was an invitation to all of us to leave our families and follow
him, and to leave the dead to bury the dead, and not debauch ourselves
at that gloomy festival the family funeral, with its sequel of hideous
mourning and grief which is either affected or morbid.




Family Mourning

I do not know how far this detestable custom of mourning is carried in
France; but judging from the appearance of the French people I should
say that a Frenchwoman goes into mourning for her cousins to the
seventeenth degree. The result is that when I cross the Channel I seem
to have reached a country devastated by war or pestilence. It is really
suffering only from the family. Will anyone pretend that England has
not the best of this striking difference? Yet it is such senseless and
unnatural conventions as this that make us so impatient of what we call
family feeling. Even apart from its insufferable pretensions, the family
needs hearty discrediting; for there is hardly any vulnerable part of it
that could not be amputated with advantage.




Art Teaching

By art teaching I hasten to say that I do not mean giving children
lessons in freehand drawing and perspective. I am simply calling
attention to the fact that fine art is the only teacher except torture.
I have already pointed out that nobody, except under threat of torture,
can read a school book. The reason is that a school book is not a work
of art. Similarly, you cannot listen to a lesson or a sermon unless the
teacher or the preacher is an artist. You cannot read the Bible if you
have no sense of literary art. The reason why the continental European
is, to the Englishman or American, so surprisingly ignorant of the
Bible, is that the authorized English version is a great work of
literary art, and the continental versions are comparatively artless.
To read a dull book; to listen to a tedious play or prosy sermon or
lecture; to stare at uninteresting pictures or ugly buildings: nothing,
short of disease, is more dreadful than this. The violence done to our
souls by it leaves injuries and produces subtle maladies which have
never been properly studied by psycho-pathologists. Yet we are so inured
to it in school, where practically all the teachers are bores trying
to do the work of artists, and all the books artless, that we acquire
a truly frightful power of enduring boredom. We even acquire the notion
that fine art is lascivious and destructive to the character. In church,
in the House of Commons, at public meetings, we sit solemnly listening
to bores and twaddlers because from the time we could walk or speak we
have been snubbed, scolded, bullied, beaten and imprisoned whenever we
dared to resent being bored or twaddled at, or to express our natural
impatience and derision of bores and twaddlers. And when a man arises
with a soul of sufficient native strength to break the bonds of this
inculcated reverence and to expose and deride and tweak the noses of our
humbugs and panjandrums, like Voltaire or Dickens, we are shocked and
scandalized, even when we cannot help laughing. Worse, we dread and
persecute those who can see and declare the truth, because their
sincerity and insight reflects on our delusion and blindness. We are
all like Nell Gwynne's footman, who defended Nell's reputation with his
fists, not because he believed her to be what he called an honest woman,
but because he objected to be scorned as the footman of one who was no
better than she should be.

This wretched power of allowing ourselves to be bored may seem to give
the fine arts a chance sometimes. People will sit through a performance
of Beethoven's ninth symphony or of Wagner's Ring just as they will sit
through a dull sermon or a front bench politician saying nothing for two
hours whilst his unfortunate country is perishing through the delay
of its business in Parliament. But their endurance is very bad for the
ninth symphony, because they never hiss when it is murdered. I have
heard an Italian conductor (no longer living) take the _adagio_ of that
symphony at a lively _allegretto_, slowing down for the warmer major
sections into the speed and manner of the heroine's death song in a
Verdi opera; and the listeners, far from relieving my excruciation by
rising with yells of fury and hurling their programs and opera glasses
at the miscreant, behaved just as they do when Richter conducts it. The
mass of imposture that thrives on this combination of ignorance with
despairing endurance is incalculable. Given a public trained from
childhood to stand anything tedious, and so saturated with school
discipline that even with the doors open and no schoolmasters to stop
them they will sit there helplessly until the end of the concert or
opera gives them leave to go home; and you will have in great capitals
hundreds of thousands of pounds spent every night in the season on
professedly artistic entertainments which have no other effect on fine
art than to exacerbate the hatred in which it is already secretly held
in England.

Fortunately, there are arts that cannot be cut off from the people by
bad performances. We can read books for ourselves; and we can play
a good deal of fine music for ourselves with the help of a pianola.
Nothing stands between us and the actual handwork of the great masters
of painting except distance; and modern photographic methods of
reproduction are in some cases quite and in many nearly as effective in
conveying the artist's message as a modern edition of Shakespear's plays
is in conveying the message that first existed in his handwriting. The
reproduction of great feats of musical execution is already on the
way: the phonograph, for all its wheezing and snarling and braying, is
steadily improving in its manners; and what with this improvement on the
one hand, and on the other that blessed selective faculty which enables
us to ignore a good deal of disagreeable noise if there is a thread
of music in the middle of it (few critics of the phonograph seem to be
conscious of the very considerable mechanical noise set up by choirs
and orchestras) we have at last reached a point at which, for example,
a person living in an English village where the church music is the only
music, and that music is made by a few well-intentioned ladies with
the help of a harmonium, can hear masses by Palestrina very passably
executed, and can thereby be led to the discovery that Jackson in F and
Hymns Ancient and Modern are not perhaps the last word of beauty and
propriety in the praise of God.

In short, there is a vast body of art now within the reach of everybody.
The difficulty is that this art, which alone can educate us in grace of
body and soul, and which alone can make the history of the past live for
us or the hope of the future shine for us, which alone can give delicacy
and nobility to our crude lusts, which is the appointed vehicle of
inspiration and the method of the communion of saints, is actually
branded as sinful among us because, wherever it arises, there is
resistance to tyranny, breaking of fetters, and the breath of freedom.
The attempt to suppress art is not wholly successful: we might as well
try to suppress oxygen. But it is carried far enough to inflict on huge
numbers of people a most injurious art starvation, and to corrupt a
great deal of the art that is tolerated. You will find in England plenty
of rich families with little more culture than their dogs and horses.
And you will find poor families, cut off by poverty and town life
from the contemplation of the beauty of the earth, with its dresses of
leaves, its scarves of cloud, and its contours of hill and valley, who
would positively be happier as hogs, so little have they cultivated
their humanity by the only effective instrument of culture: art. The
dearth is artificially maintained even when there are the means of
satisfying it. Story books are forbidden, picture post cards are
forbidden, theatres are forbidden, operas are forbidden, circuses are
forbidden, sweetmeats are forbidden, pretty colors are forbidden, all
exactly as vice is forbidden. The Creator is explicitly prayed to, and
implicitly convicted of indecency every day. An association of vice and
sin with everything that is delightful and of goodness with everything
that is wretched and detestable is set up. All the most perilous (and
glorious) appetites and propensities are at once inflamed by starvation
and uneducated by art. All the wholesome conditions which art imposes on
appetite are waived: instead of cultivated men and women restrained by
a thousand delicacies, repelled by ugliness, chilled by vulgarity,
horrified by coarseness, deeply and sweetly moved by the graces that art
has revealed to them and nursed in them, we get indiscriminate rapacity
in pursuit of pleasure and a parade of the grossest stimulations in
catering for it. We have a continual clamor for goodness, beauty,
virtue, and sanctity, with such an appalling inability to recognize
it or love it when it arrives that it is more dangerous to be a great
prophet or poet than to promote twenty companies for swindling simple
folk out of their savings. Do not for a moment suppose that uncultivated
people are merely indifferent to high and noble qualities. They hate
them malignantly. At best, such qualities are like rare and beautiful
birds: when they appear the whole country takes down its guns; but the
birds receive the statuary tribute of having their corpses stuffed.

And it really all comes from the habit of preventing children from
being troublesome. You are so careful of your boy's morals, knowing how
troublesome they may be, that you keep him away from the Venus of Milo
only to find him in the arms of the scullery maid or someone much worse.
You decide that the Hermes of Praxiteles and Wagner's Tristan are not
suited for young girls; and your daughter marries somebody appallingly
unlike either Hermes or Tristan solely to escape from your parental
protection. You have not stifled a single passion nor averted a single
danger: you have depraved the passions by starving them, and broken down
all the defences which so effectively protect children brought up in
freedom. You have men who imagine themselves to be ministers of religion
openly declaring that when they pass through the streets they have
to keep out in the wheeled traffic to avoid the temptations of the
pavement. You have them organizing hunts of the women who tempt
them--poor creatures whom no artist would touch without a shudder--and
wildly clamoring for more clothes to disguise and conceal the body, and
for the abolition of pictures, statues, theatres, and pretty colors.
And incredible as it seems, these unhappy lunatics are left at large,
unrebuked, even admired and revered, whilst artists have to struggle for
toleration. To them an undraped human body is the most monstrous, the
most blighting, the most obscene, the most unbearable spectacle in the
universe. To an artist it is, at its best, the most admirable spectacle
in nature, and, at its average, an object of indifference. If every rag
of clothing miraculously dropped from the inhabitants of London at noon
tomorrow (say as a preliminary to the Great Judgment), the artistic
people would not turn a hair; but the artless people would go mad and
call on the mountains to hide them. I submit that this indicates a
thoroughly healthy state on the part of the artists, and a thoroughly
morbid one on the part of the artless. And the healthy state is
attainable in a cold country like ours only by familiarity with the
undraped figure acquired through pictures, statues, and theatrical
representations in which an illusion of natural clotheslessness is
produced and made poetic.

In short, we all grow up stupid and mad to just the extent to which we
have not been artistically educated; and the fact that this taint of
stupidity and madness has to be tolerated because it is general, and is
even boasted of as characteristically English, makes the situation all
the worse. It is becoming exceedingly grave at present, because the last
ray of art is being cut off from our schools by the discontinuance of
religious education.




The Impossibility of Secular Education

Now children must be taught some sort of religion. Secular education is
an impossibility. Secular education comes to this: that the only reason
for ceasing to do evil and learning to do well is that if you do not you
will be caned. This is worse than being taught in a church school that
if you become a dissenter you will go to hell; for hell is presented as
the instrument of something eternal, divine, and inevitable: you cannot
evade it the moment the schoolmaster's back is turned. What confuses
this issue and leads even highly intelligent religious persons to
advocate secular education as a means of rescuing children from the
strife of rival proselytizers is the failure to distinguish between
the child's personal subjective need for a religion and its right to
an impartially communicated historical objective knowledge of all the
creeds and Churches. Just as a child, no matter what its race and color
may be, should know that there are black men and brown men and yellow
men, and, no matter what its political convictions may be, that
there are Monarchists and Republicans and Positivists, Socialists and
Unsocialists, so it should know that there are Christians and Mahometans
and Buddhists and Shintoists and so forth, and that they are on the
average just as honest and well-behaved as its own father. For example,
it should not be told that Allah is a false god set up by the Turks and
Arabs, who will all be damned for taking that liberty; but it should be
told that many English people think so, and that many Turks and Arabs
think the converse about English people. It should be taught that Allah
is simply the name by which God is known to Turks and Arabs, who are
just as eligible for salvation as any Christian. Further, that the
practical reason why a Turkish child should pray in a mosque and an
English child in a church is that as worship is organized in Turkey in
mosques in the name of Mahomet and in England in churches in the name
of Christ, a Turkish child joining the Church of England or an English
child following Mahomet will find that it has no place for its worship
and no organization of its religion within its reach. Any other teaching
of the history and present facts of religion is false teaching, and is
politically extremely dangerous in an empire in which a huge majority of
the fellow subjects of the governing island do not profess the religion
of that island.

But this objectivity, though intellectually honest, tells the child
only what other people believe. What it should itself believe is quite
another matter. The sort of Rationalism which says to a child "You must
suspend your judgment until you are old enough to choose your religion"
is Rationalism gone mad. The child must have a conscience and a code
of honor (which is the essence of religion) even if it be only a
provisional one, to be revised at its confirmation. For confirmation is
meant to signalize a spiritual coming of age, and may be a repudiation.
Really active souls have many confirmations and repudiations as their
life deepens and their knowledge widens. But what is to guide the child
before its first confirmation? Not mere orders, because orders must
have a sanction of some sort or why should the child obey them? If, as a
Secularist, you refuse to teach any sanction, you must say "You will
be punished if you disobey." "Yes," says the child to itself, "if I am
found out; but wait until your back is turned and I will do as I like,
and lie about it." There can be no objective punishment for successful
fraud; and as no espionage can cover the whole range of a child's
conduct, the upshot is that the child becomes a liar and schemer with an
atrophied conscience. And a good many of the orders given to it are not
obeyed after all. Thus the Secularist who is not a fool is forced to
appeal to the child's vital impulse towards perfection, to the divine
spark; and no resolution not to call this impulse an impulse of loyalty
to the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, or obedience to the Will of God,
or any other standard theological term, can alter the fact that the
Secularist has stepped outside Secularism and is educating the child
religiously, even if he insists on repudiating that pious adverb and
substituting the word metaphysically.




Natural Selection as a Religion

We must make up our minds to it therefore that whatever measures we may
be forced to take to prevent the recruiting sergeants of the Churches,
free or established, from obtaining an exclusive right of entry to
schools, we shall not be able to exclude religion from them. The most
horrible of all religions: that which teaches us to regard ourselves
as the helpless prey of a series of senseless accidents called Natural
Selection, is allowed and even welcomed in so-called secular schools
because it is, in a sense, the negation of all religion; but for school
purposes a religion is a belief which affects conduct; and no belief
affects conduct more radically and often so disastrously as the belief
that the universe is a product of Natural Selection. What is more, the
theory of Natural Selection cannot be kept out of schools, because
many of the natural facts that present the most plausible appearance
of design can be accounted for by Natural Selection; and it would be so
absurd to keep a child in delusive ignorance of so potent a factor
in evolution as to keep it in ignorance of radiation or capillary
attraction. Even if you make a religion of Natural Selection, and
teach the child to regard itself as the irresponsible prey of its
circumstances and appetites (or its heredity as you will perhaps call
them), you will none the less find that its appetites are stimulated by
your encouragement and daunted by your discouragement; that one of its
appetites is an appetite for perfection; that if you discourage this
appetite and encourage the cruder acquisitive appetites the child will
steal and lie and be a nuisance to you; and that if you encourage its
appetite for perfection and teach it to attach a peculiar sacredness
to it and place it before the other appetites, it will be a much nicer
child and you will have a much easier job, at which point you will,
in spite of your pseudoscientific jargon, find yourself back in the
old-fashioned religious teaching as deep as Dr. Watts and in fact
fathoms deeper.




Moral Instruction Leagues

And now the voices of our Moral Instruction Leagues will be lifted,
asking whether there is any reason why the appetite for perfection
should not be cultivated in rationally scientific terms instead of being
associated with the story of Jonah and the great fish and the thousand
other tales that grow up round religions. Yes: there are many reasons;
and one of them is that children all like the story of Jonah and the
whale (they insist on its being a whale in spite of demonstrations by
Bible smashers without any sense of humor that Jonah would not have
fitted into a whale's gullet--as if the story would be credible of a
whale with an enlarged throat) and that no child on earth can stand
moral instruction books or catechisms or any other statement of the case
for religion in abstract terms. The object of a moral instruction book
is not to be rational, scientific, exact, proof against controversy, nor
even credible: its object is to make children good; and if it makes them
sick instead its place is the waste-paper basket.

Take for an illustration the story of Elisha and the bears. To the
authors of the moral instruction books it is in the last degree
reprehensible. It is obviously not true as a record of fact; and the
picture it gives us of the temper of God (which is what interests an
adult reader) is shocking and blasphemous. But it is a capital story for
a child. It interests a child because it is about bears; and it leaves
the child with an impression that children who poke fun at old gentlemen
and make rude remarks about bald heads are not nice children, which is
a highly desirable impression, and just as much as a child is capable
of receiving from the story. When a story is about God and a child,
children take God for granted and criticize the child. Adults do the
opposite, and are thereby led to talk great nonsense about the bad
effect of Bible stories on infants.

But let no one think that a child or anyone else can learn religion from
a teacher or a book or by any academic process whatever. It is only
by an unfettered access to the whole body of Fine Art: that is, to the
whole body of inspired revelation, that we can build up that conception
of divinity to which all virtue is an aspiration. And to hope to find
this body of art purified from all that is obsolete or dangerous
or fierce or lusty, or to pick and choose what will be good for any
particular child, much less for all children, is the shallowest
of vanities. Such schoolmasterly selection is neither possible nor
desirable. Ignorance of evil is not virtue but imbecility: admiring
it is like giving a prize for honesty to a man who has not stolen your
watch because he did not know you had one. Virtue chooses good from
evil; and without knowledge there can be no choice. And even this is a
dangerous simplification of what actually occurs. We are not choosing:
we are growing. Were you to cut all of what you call the evil out of
a child, it would drop dead. If you try to stretch it to full human
stature when it is ten years old, you will simply pull it into two
pieces and be hanged. And when you try to do this morally, which is what
parents and schoolmasters are doing every day, you ought to be hanged;
and some day, when we take a sensible view of the matter, you will be;
and serve you right. The child does not stand between a good and a
bad angel: what it has to deal with is a middling angel who, in normal
healthy cases, wants to be a good angel as fast as it can without
killing itself in the process, which is a dangerous one.

Therefore there is no question of providing the child with a carefully
regulated access to good art. There is no good art, any more than there
is good anything else in the absolute sense. Art that is too good for
the child will either teach it nothing or drive it mad, as the Bible has
driven many people mad who might have kept their sanity had they been
allowed to read much lower forms of literature. The practical moral is
that we must read whatever stories, see whatever pictures, hear whatever
songs and symphonies, go to whatever plays we like. We shall not like
those which have nothing to say to us; and though everyone has a right
to bias our choice, no one has a right to deprive us of it by keeping us
from any work of art or any work of art from us.

I may now say without danger of being misunderstood that the popular
English compromise called Cowper Templeism (unsectarian Bible education)
is not so silly as it looks. It is true that the Bible inculcates half
a dozen religions: some of them barbarous; some cynical and pessimistic;
some amoristic and romantic; some sceptical and challenging; some
kindly, simple, and intuitional; some sophistical and intellectual; none
suited to the character and conditions of western civilization unless it
be the Christianity which was finally suppressed by the Crucifixion, and
has never been put into practice by any State before or since. But the
Bible contains the ancient literature of a very remarkable Oriental
race; and the imposition of this literature, on whatever false
pretences, on our children left them more literate than if they knew
no literature at all, which was the practical alternative. And as our
Authorized Version is a great work of art as well, to know it was better
than knowing no art, which also was the practical alternative. It is
at least not a school book; and it is not a bad story book, horrible as
some of the stories are. Therefore as between the Bible and the blank
represented by secular education, the choice is with the Bible.




The Bible

But the Bible is not sufficient. The real Bible of modern Europe is the
whole body of great literature in which the inspiration and revelation
of Hebrew Scripture has been continued to the present day. Nietzsche's
Thus Spake Zoroaster is less comforting to the ill and unhappy than the
Psalms; but it is much truer, subtler, and more edifying. The pleasure
we get from the rhetoric of the book of Job and its tragic picture of a
bewildered soul cannot disguise the ignoble irrelevance of the retort of
God with which it closes, or supply the need of such modern revelations
as Shelley's Prometheus or The Niblung's Ring of Richard Wagner. There
is nothing in the Bible greater in inspiration than Beethoven's ninth
symphony; and the power of modern music to convey that inspiration to
a modern man is far greater than that of Elizabethan English, which is,
except for people steeped in the Bible from childhood like Sir Walter
Scott and Ruskin, a dead language.

Besides, many who have no ear for literature or for music are accessible
to architecture, to pictures, to statues, to dresses, and to the arts of
the stage. Every device of art should be brought to bear on the young;
so that they may discover some form of it that delights them naturally;
for there will come to all of them that period between dawning
adolescence and full maturity when the pleasures and emotions of art
will have to satisfy cravings which, if starved or insulted, may become
morbid and seek disgraceful satisfactions, and, if prematurely gratified
otherwise than poetically, may destroy the stamina of the race. And it
must be borne in mind that the most dangerous art for this necessary
purpose is the art that presents itself as religious ecstasy. Young
people are ripe for love long before they are ripe for religion. Only
a very foolish person would substitute the Imitation of Christ for
Treasure Island as a present for a boy or girl, or for Byron's Don Juan
as a present for a swain or lass. Pickwick is the safest saint for us in
our nonage. Flaubert's Temptation of St Anthony is an excellent book
for a man of fifty, perhaps the best within reach as a healthy study of
visionary ecstasy; but for the purposes of a boy of fifteen Ivanhoe and
the Templar make a much better saint and devil. And the boy of
fifteen will find this out for himself if he is allowed to wander in a
well-stocked literary garden, and hear bands and see pictures and spend
his pennies on cinematograph shows. His choice may often be rather
disgusting to his elders when they want him to choose the best before he
is ready for it. The greatest Protestant Manifesto ever written, as
far as I know, is Houston Chamberlain's Foundations of the Nineteenth
Century: everybody capable of it should read it. Probably the History of
Maria Monk is at the opposite extreme of merit (this is a guess: I have
never read it); but it is certain that a boy let loose in a library
would go for Maria Monk and have no use whatever for Mr Chamberlain. I
should probably have read Maria Monk myself if I had not had the Arabian
Nights and their like to occupy me better. In art, children, like
adults, will find their level if they are left free to find it, and not
restricted to what adults think good for them. Just at present our
young people are going mad over ragtimes, apparently because syncopated
rhythms are new to them. If they had learnt what can be done with
syncopation from Beethoven's third Leonora overture, they would enjoy
the ragtimes all the more; but they would put them in their proper place
as amusing vulgarities.




Artist Idolatry

But there are more dangerous influences than ragtimes waiting for people
brought up in ignorance of fine art. Nothing is more pitiably ridiculous
than the wild worship of artists by those who have never been seasoned
in youth to the enchantments of art. Tenors and prima donnas, pianists
and violinists, actors and actresses enjoy powers of seduction which in
the middle ages would have exposed them to the risk of being burnt
for sorcery. But as they exercise this power by singing, playing, and
acting, no great harm is done except perhaps to themselves. Far graver
are the powers enjoyed by brilliant persons who are also connoisseurs
in art. The influence they can exercise on young people who have been
brought up in the darkness and wretchedness of a home without art, and
in whom a natural bent towards art has always been baffled and snubbed,
is incredible to those who have not witnessed and understood it. He (or
she) who reveals the world of art to them opens heaven to them. They
become satellites, disciples, worshippers of the apostle. Now the
apostle may be a voluptuary without much conscience. Nature may have
given him enough virtue to suffice in a reasonable environment. But this
allowance may not be enough to defend him against the temptation and
demoralization of finding himself a little god on the strength of
what ought to be a quite ordinary culture. He may find adorers in
all directions in our uncultivated society among people of stronger
character than himself, not one of whom, if they had been artistically
educated, would have had anything to learn from him or regarded him
as in any way extraordinary apart from his actual achievements as an
artist. Tartuffe is not always a priest. Indeed he is not always a
rascal: he is often a weak man absurdly credited with omniscience and
perfection, and taking unfair advantages only because they are offered
to him and he is too weak to refuse. Give everyone his culture, and no
one will offer him more than his due.

In thus delivering our children from the idolatry of the artist, we
shall not destroy for them the enchantment of art: on the contrary, we
shall teach them to demand art everywhere as a condition attainable
by cultivating the body, mind, and heart. Art, said Morris, is the
expression of pleasure in work. And certainly, when work is made
detestable by slavery, there is no art. It is only when learning is
made a slavery by tyrannical teachers that art becomes loathsome to the
pupil.




"The Machine"

When we set to work at a Constitution to secure freedom for children, we
had better bear in mind that the children may not be at all obliged to
us for our pains. Rousseau said that men are born free; and this saying,
in its proper bearings, was and is a great and true saying; yet let it
not lead us into the error of supposing that all men long for freedom
and embrace it when it is offered to them. On the contrary, it has to
be forced on them; and even then they will give it the slip if it is not
religiously inculcated and strongly safeguarded.

Besides, men are born docile, and must in the nature of things remain so
with regard to everything they do not understand. Now political science
and the art of government are among the things they do not understand,
and indeed are not at present allowed to understand. They can be
enslaved by a system, as we are at present, because it happens to be
there, and nobody understands it. An intelligently worked Capitalist
system, as Comte saw, would give us all that most of us are intelligent
enough to want. What makes it produce such unspeakably vile results is
that it is an automatic system which is as little understood by those
who profit by it in money as by those who are starved and degraded by
it: our millionaires and statesmen are manifestly no more "captains
of industry" or scientific politicians than our bookmakers are
mathematicians. For some time past a significant word has been coming
into use as a substitute for Destiny, Fate, and Providence. It is "The
Machine": the machine that has no god in it. Why do governments do
nothing in spite of reports of Royal Commissions that establish the most
frightful urgency? Why do our philanthropic millionaires do nothing,
though they are ready to throw bucketfuls of gold into the streets? The
Machine will not let them. Always the Machine. In short, they dont know
how.

They try to reform Society as an old lady might try to restore a broken
down locomotive by prodding it with a knitting needle. And this is not
at all because they are born fools, but because they have been educated,
not into manhood and freedom, but into blindness and slavery by
their parents and schoolmasters, themselves the victims of a similar
misdirection, and consequently of The Machine. They do not want
liberty. They have not been educated to want it. They choose slavery and
inequality; and all the other evils are automatically added to them.

And yet we must have The Machine. It is only in unskilled hands under
ignorant direction that machinery is dangerous. We can no more govern
modern communities without political machinery than we can feed and
clothe them without industrial machinery. Shatter The Machine, and you
get Anarchy. And yet The Machine works so detestably at present that we
have people who advocate Anarchy and call themselves Anarchists.




The Provocation to Anarchism

What is valid in Anarchism is that all Governments try to simplify their
task by destroying liberty and glorifying authority in general and their
own deeds in particular. But the difficulty in combining law and
order with free institutions is not a natural one. It is a matter of
inculcation. If people are brought up to be slaves, it is useless and
dangerous to let them loose at the age of twenty-one and say "Now you
are free." No one with the tamed soul and broken spirit of a slave can
be free. It is like saying to a laborer brought up on a family income of
thirteen shillings a week, "Here is one hundred thousand pounds: now you
are wealthy." Nothing can make such a man really wealthy. Freedom and
wealth are difficult and responsible conditions to which men must be
accustomed and socially trained from birth. A nation that is free at
twenty-one is not free at all; just as a man first enriched at fifty
remains poor all his life, even if he does not curtail it by drinking
himself to death in the first wild ecstasy of being able to swallow as
much as he likes for the first time. You cannot govern men brought up
as slaves otherwise than as slaves are governed. You may pile Bills
of Right and Habeas Corpus Acts on Great Charters; promulgate American
Constitutions; burn the chateaux and guillotine the seigneurs; chop
off the heads of kings and queens and set up Democracy on the ruins of
feudalism: the end of it all for us is that already in the twentieth
century there has been as much brute coercion and savage intolerance, as
much flogging and hanging, as much impudent injustice on the bench
and lustful rancor in the pulpit, as much naive resort to torture,
persecution, and suppression of free speech and freedom of the press,
as much war, as much of the vilest excess of mutilation, rapine, and
delirious indiscriminate slaughter of helpless non-combatants, old
and young, as much prostitution of professional talent, literary and
political, in defence of manifest wrong, as much cowardly sycophancy
giving fine names to all this villainy or pretending that it is "greatly
exaggerated," as we can find any record of from the days when the
advocacy of liberty was a capital offence and Democracy was hardly
thinkable. Democracy exhibits the vanity of Louis XIV, the savagery
of Peter of Russia, the nepotism and provinciality of Napoleon, the
fickleness of Catherine II: in short, all the childishnesses of all the
despots without any of the qualities that enabled the greatest of them
to fascinate and dominate their contemporaries.

And the flatterers of Democracy are as impudently servile to the
successful, and insolent to common honest folk, as the flatterers of
the monarchs. Democracy in America has led to the withdrawal of ordinary
refined persons from politics; and the same result is coming in England
as fast as we make Democracy as democratic as it is in America. This is
true also of popular religion: it is so horribly irreligious that nobody
with the smallest pretence to culture, or the least inkling of what
the great prophets vainly tried to make the world understand, will have
anything to do with it except for purely secular reasons.




Imagination

Before we can clearly understand how baleful is this condition of
intimidation in which we live, it is necessary to clear up the confusion
made by our use of the word imagination to denote two very different
powers of mind. One is the power to imagine things as they are not:
this I call the romantic imagination. The other is the power to imagine
things as they are without actually sensing them; and this I will call
the realistic imagination. Take for example marriage and war. One man
has a vision of perpetual bliss with a domestic angel at home, and of
flashing sabres, thundering guns, victorious cavalry charges, and routed
enemies in the field. That is romantic imagination; and the mischief it
does is incalculable. It begins in silly and selfish expectations of
the impossible, and ends in spiteful disappointment, sour grievance,
cynicism, and misanthropic resistance to any attempt to better a
hopeless world. The wise man knows that imagination is not only a means
of pleasing himself and beguiling tedious hours with romances and fairy
tales and fools' paradises (a quite defensible and delightful amusement
when you know exactly what you are doing and where fancy ends and facts
begin), but also a means of foreseeing and being prepared for realities
as yet unexperienced, and of testing the possibility and desirability of
serious Utopias. He does not expect his wife to be an angel; nor does he
overlook the facts that war depends on the rousing of all the murderous
blackguardism still latent in mankind; that every victory means a
defeat; that fatigue, hunger, terror, and disease are the raw material
which romancers work up into military glory; and that soldiers for the
most part go to war as children go to school, because they are afraid
not to. They are afraid even to say they are afraid, as such candor is
punishable by death in the military code.

A very little realistic imagination gives an ambitious person enormous
power over the multitudinous victims of the romantic imagination. For
the romancer not only pleases himself with fictitious glories: he also
terrifies himself with imaginary dangers. He does not even picture what
these dangers are: he conceives the unknown as always dangerous. When
you say to a realist "You must do this" or "You must not do that," he
instantly asks what will happen to him if he does (or does not, as the
case may be). Failing an unromantic convincing answer, he does just as
he pleases unless he can find for himself a real reason for refraining.
In short, though you can intimidate him, you cannot bluff him. But
you can always bluff the romantic person: indeed his grasp of real
considerations is so feeble that you find it necessary to bluff him even
when you have solid considerations to offer him instead. The campaigns
of Napoleon, with their atmosphere of glory, illustrate this. In
the Russian campaign Napoleon's marshals achieved miracles of bluff,
especially Ney, who, with a handful of men, monstrously outnumbered,
repeatedly kept the Russian troops paralyzed with terror by pure
bounce. Napoleon himself, much more a realist than Ney (that was why
he dominated him), would probably have surrendered; for sometimes the
bravest of the brave will achieve successes never attempted by the
cleverest of the clever. Wellington was a completer realist than
Napoleon. It was impossible to persuade Wellington that he was beaten
until he actually was beaten. He was unbluffable; and if Napoleon had
understood the nature of Wellington's strength instead of returning
Wellington's snobbish contempt for him by an academic contempt for
Wellington, he would not have left the attack at Waterloo to Ney and
D'Erlon, who, on that field, did not know when they were beaten, whereas
Wellington knew precisely when he was not beaten. The unbluffable
would have triumphed anyhow, probably, because Napoleon was an academic
soldier, doing the academic thing (the attack in columns and so forth)
with superlative ability and energy; whilst Wellington was an original
soldier who, instead of outdoing the terrible academic columns with
still more terrible and academic columns, outwitted them with the thin
red line, not of heroes, but, as this uncompromising realist never
hesitated to testify, of the scum of the earth.




Government by Bullies

These picturesque martial incidents are being reproduced every day in
our ordinary life. We are bluffed by hardy simpletons and headstrong
bounders as the Russians were bluffed by Ney; and our Wellingtons
are threadbound by slave-democracy as Gulliver was threadbound by the
Lilliputians. We are a mass of people living in a submissive routine to
which we have been drilled from our childhood. When you ask us to take
the simplest step outside that routine, we say shyly, "Oh, I really
couldnt," or "Oh, I shouldnt like to," without being able to point out
the smallest harm that could possibly ensue: victims, not of a rational
fear of real dangers, but of pure abstract fear, the quintessence of
cowardice, the very negation of "the fear of God." Dotted about among
us are a few spirits relatively free from this inculcated paralysis,
sometimes because they are half-witted, sometimes because they are
unscrupulously selfish, sometimes because they are realists as to money
and unimaginative as to other things, sometimes even because they are
exceptionally able, but always because they are not afraid of shadows
nor oppressed with nightmares. And we see these few rising as if by
magic into power and affluence, and forming, with the millionaires who
have accidentally gained huge riches by the occasional windfalls of our
commerce, the governing class. Now nothing is more disastrous than
a governing class that does not know how to govern. And how can this
rabble of the casual products of luck, cunning, and folly, be expected
to know how to govern? The merely lucky ones and the hereditary ones do
not owe their position to their qualifications at all. As to the rest,
the realism which seems their essential qualification often consists not
only in a lack of romantic imagination, which lack is a merit, but
of the realistic, constructive, Utopian imagination, which lack is
a ghastly defect. Freedom from imaginative illusion is therefore no
guarantee whatever of nobility of character: that is why inculcated
submissiveness makes us slaves to people much worse than ourselves,
and why it is so important that submissiveness should no longer be
inculcated.

And yet as long as you have the compulsory school as we know it, we
shall have submissiveness inculcated. What is more, until the active
hours of child life are organized separately from the active hours of
adult life, so that adults can enjoy the society of children in reason
without being tormented, disturbed, harried, burdened, and hindered
in their work by them as they would be now if there were no compulsory
schools and no children hypnotized into the belief that they must tamely
go to them and be imprisoned and beaten and over-tasked in them, we
shall have schools under one pretext or another; and we shall have all
the evil consequences and all the social hopelessness that result from
turning a nation of potential freemen and freewomen into a nation of
two-legged spoilt spaniels with everything crushed out of their nature
except dread of the whip. Liberty is the breath of life to nations; and
liberty is the one thing that parents, schoolmasters, and rulers spend
their lives in extirpating for the sake of an immediately quiet and
finally disastrous life.


Notes on this etext:

     This text was taken from a printed volume containing the
     plays "Misalliance", "The Dark Lady of the Sonnets",
     "Fanny's First Play", and the essay "A Treatise on Parents
     and Children".

     Notes on the editing:  Italicized text is delimited with
     underlines ("_").  Punctuation and spelling retained as in
     the printed text. Shaw intentionally spelled many words
     according to a non-standard system.  For example, "don't" is
     given as "dont" (without apostrophe), "Dr." is given as "Dr"
     (without a period at the end), and "Shakespeare" is given as
     "Shakespear" (no "e" at the end).  The pound (currency)
     symbol has been replaced by the word "pounds".

========================================
========================================

YOU NEVER CAN TELL

By George Bernard Shaw




ACT I

In a dentist's operating room on a fine August morning in 1896. Not the
usual tiny London den, but the best sitting room of a furnished lodging
in a terrace on the sea front at a fashionable watering place. The
operating chair, with a gas pump and cylinder beside it, is half way
between the centre of the room and one of the corners. If you look into
the room through the window which lights it, you will see the fireplace
in the middle of the wall opposite you, with the door beside it to your
left; an M.R.C.S. diploma in a frame hung on the chimneypiece; an easy
chair covered in black leather on the hearth; a neat stool and bench,
with vice, tools, and a mortar and pestle in the corner to the right.
Near this bench stands a slender machine like a whip provided with a
stand, a pedal, and an exaggerated winch. Recognising this as a dental
drill, you shudder and look away to your left, where you can see another
window, underneath which stands a writing table, with a blotter and a
diary on it, and a chair. Next the writing table, towards the door, is
a leather covered sofa. The opposite wall, close on your right, is
occupied mostly by a bookcase. The operating chair is under your nose,
facing you, with the cabinet of instruments handy to it on your left.
You observe that the professional furniture and apparatus are new,
and that the wall paper, designed, with the taste of an undertaker,
in festoons and urns, the carpet with its symmetrical plans of rich,
cabbagy nosegays, the glass gasalier with lustres; the ornamental gilt
rimmed blue candlesticks on the ends of the mantelshelf, also glass
draped with lustres, and the ormolu clock under a glass-cover in the
middle between them, its uselessness emphasized by a cheap American
clock disrespectfully placed beside it and now indicating 12 o'clock
noon, all combine with the black marble which gives the fireplace the
air of a miniature family vault, to suggest early Victorian commercial
respectability, belief in money, Bible fetichism, fear of hell always at
war with fear of poverty, instinctive horror of the passionate character
of art, love and Roman Catholic religion, and all the first fruits of
plutocracy in the early generations of the industrial revolution.

There is no shadow of this on the two persons who are occupying the room
just now. One of them, a very pretty woman in miniature, her tiny figure
dressed with the daintiest gaiety, is of a later generation, being
hardly eighteen yet. This darling little creature clearly does not
belong to the room, or even to the country; for her complexion, though
very delicate, has been burnt biscuit color by some warmer sun than
England's; and yet there is, for a very subtle observer, a link between
them. For she has a glass of water in her hand, and a rapidly clearing
cloud of Spartan obstinacy on her tiny firm set mouth and quaintly
squared eyebrows. If the least line of conscience could be traced
between those eyebrows, an Evangelical might cherish some faint hope
of finding her a sheep in wolf's clothing--for her frock is recklessly
pretty--but as the cloud vanishes it leaves her frontal sinus as
smoothly free from conviction of sin as a kitten's.

The dentist, contemplating her with the self-satisfaction of a
successful operator, is a young man of thirty or thereabouts. He does
not give the impression of being much of a workman: his professional
manner evidently strikes him as being a joke, and is underlain by a
thoughtless pleasantry which betrays the young gentleman still unsettled
and in search of amusing adventures, behind the newly set-up dentist
in search of patients. He is not without gravity of demeanor; but the
strained nostrils stamp it as the gravity of the humorist. His eyes are
clear, alert, of sceptically moderate size, and yet a little rash; his
forehead is an excellent one, with plenty of room behind it; his nose
and chin cavalierly handsome. On the whole, an attractive, noticeable
beginner, of whose prospects a man of business might form a tolerably
favorable estimate.

THE YOUNG LADY (handing him the glass). Thank you. (In spite of the
biscuit complexion she has not the slightest foreign accent.)

THE DENTIST (putting it down on the ledge of his cabinet of
instruments). That was my first tooth.

THE YOUNG LADY (aghast). Your first! Do you mean to say that you began
practising on me?

THE DENTIST. Every dentist has to begin on somebody.

THE YOUNG LADY. Yes: somebody in a hospital, not people who pay.

THE DENTIST (laughing). Oh, the hospital doesn't count. I only meant my
first tooth in private practice. Why didn't you let me give you gas?

THE YOUNG LADY. Because you said it would be five shillings extra.

THE DENTIST (shocked). Oh, don't say that. It makes me feel as if I had
hurt you for the sake of five shillings.

THE YOUNG LADY (with cool insolence). Well, so you have! (She gets up.)
Why shouldn't you? it's your business to hurt people. (It amuses him to
be treated in this fashion: he chuckles secretly as he proceeds to clean
and replace his instruments. She shakes her dress into order; looks
inquisitively about her; and goes to the window.) You have a good view
of the sea from these rooms! Are they expensive?

THE DENTIST. Yes.

THE YOUNG LADY. You don't own the whole house, do you?

THE DENTIST. No.

THE YOUNG LADY (taking the chair which stands at the writing-table
and looking critically at it as she spins it round on one leg.) Your
furniture isn't quite the latest thing, is it?

THE DENTIST. It's my landlord's.

THE YOUNG LADY. Does he own that nice comfortable Bath chair? (pointing
to the operating chair.)

THE DENTIST. No: I have that on the hire-purchase system.

THE YOUNG LADY (disparagingly). I thought so. (Looking about her again
in search of further conclusions.) I suppose you haven't been here long?

THE DENTIST. Six weeks. Is there anything else you would like to know?

THE YOUNG LADY (the hint quite lost on her). Any family?

THE DENTIST. I am not married.

THE YOUNG LADY. Of course not: anybody can see that. I meant sisters and
mother and that sort of thing.

THE DENTIST. Not on the premises.

THE YOUNG LADY. Hm! If you've been here six weeks, and mine was your
first tooth, the practice can't be very large, can it?

THE DENTIST. Not as yet. (He shuts the cabinet, having tidied up
everything.)

THE YOUNG LADY. Well, good luck! (She takes our her purse.) Five
shillings, you said it would be?

THE DENTIST. Five shillings.

THE YOUNG LADY (producing a crown piece). Do you charge five shillings
for everything?

THE DENTIST. Yes.

THE YOUNG LADY. Why?

THE DENTIST. It's my system. I'm what's called a five shilling dentist.

THE YOUNG LADY. How nice! Well, here! (holding up the crown piece) a
nice new five shilling piece! your first fee! Make a hole in it with the
thing you drill people's teeth with and wear it on your watch-chain.

THE DENTIST. Thank you.

THE PARLOR MAID (appearing at the door). The young lady's brother, sir.

A handsome man in miniature, obviously the young lady's twin, comes
in eagerly. He wears a suit of terra-cotta cashmere, the elegantly cut
frock coat lined in brown silk, and carries in his hand a brown tall
hat and tan gloves to match. He has his sister's delicate biscuit
complexion, and is built on the same small scale; but he is elastic
and strong in muscle, decisive in movement, unexpectedly deeptoned and
trenchant in speech, and with perfect manners and a finished personal
style which might be envied by a man twice his age. Suavity and
self-possession are points of honor with him; and though this, rightly
considered, is only the modern mode of boyish self-consciousness,
its effect is none the less staggering to his elders, and would be
insufferable in a less prepossessing youth. He is promptitude itself,
and has a question ready the moment he enters.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN. Am I on time?

THE YOUNG LADY. No: it's all over.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN. Did you howl?

THE YOUNG LADY. Oh, something awful. Mr. Valentine: this is my brother
Phil. Phil: this is Mr. Valentine, our new dentist. (Valentine and Phil
bow to one another. She proceeds, all in one breath.) He's only been
here six weeks; and he's a bachelor. The house isn't his; and the
furniture is the landlord's; but the professional plant is hired. He
got my tooth out beautifully at the first go; and he and I are great
friends.

PHILIP. Been asking a lot of questions?

THE YOUNG LADY (as if incapable of doing such a thing). Oh, no.

PHILIP. Glad to hear it. (To Valentine.) So good of you not to mind us,
Mr. Valentine. The fact is, we've never been in England before; and our
mother tells us that the people here simply won't stand us. Come and
lunch with us. (Valentine, bewildered by the leaps and bounds with which
their acquaintanceship is proceeding, gasps; but he has no opportunity
of speaking, as the conversation of the twins is swift and continuous.)

THE YOUNG LADY. Oh, do, Mr. Valentine.

PHILIP. At the Marine Hotel--half past one.

THE YOUNG LADY. We shall be able to tell mamma that a respectable
Englishman has promised to lunch with us.

PHILIP. Say no more, Mr. Valentine: you'll come.

VALENTINE. Say no more! I haven't said anything. May I ask whom I have
the pleasure of entertaining? It's really quite impossible for me to
lunch at the Marine Hotel with two perfect strangers.

THE YOUNG LADY (flippantly). Ooooh! what bosh! One patient in six weeks!
What difference does it make to you?

PHILIP (maturely). No, Dolly: my knowledge of human nature confirms
Mr. Valentine's judgment. He is right. Let me introduce Miss Dorothy
Clandon, commonly called Dolly. (Valentine bows to Dolly. She nods to
him.) I'm Philip Clandon. We're from Madeira, but perfectly respectable,
so far.

VALENTINE. Clandon! Are you related to--

DOLLY (unexpectedly crying out in despair). Yes, we are.

VALENTINE (astonished). I beg your pardon?

DOLLY. Oh, we are, we are. It's all over, Phil: they know all about us
in England. (To Valentine.) Oh, you can't think how maddening it is to
be related to a celebrated person, and never be valued anywhere for our
own sakes.

VALENTINE. But excuse me: the gentleman I was thinking of is not
celebrated.

DOLLY (staring at him). Gentleman! (Phil is also puzzled.)

VALENTINE. Yes. I was going to ask whether you were by any chance a
daughter of Mr. Densmore Clandon of Newbury Hall.

DOLLY (vacantly). No.

PHILIP. Well come, Dolly: how do you know you're not?

DOLLY (cheered). Oh, I forgot. Of course. Perhaps I am.

VALENTINE. Don't you know?

PHILIP. Not in the least.

DOLLY. It's a wise child--

PHILIP (cutting her short). Sh! (Valentine starts nervously; for the
sound made by Philip, though but momentary, is like cutting a sheet of
silk in two with a flash of lightning. It is the result of long practice
in checking Dolly's indiscretions.) The fact is, Mr. Valentine, we are
the children of the celebrated Mrs. Lanfrey Clandon, an authoress of
great repute--in Madeira. No household is complete without her works.
We came to England to get away from them. The are called the Twentieth
Century Treatises.

DOLLY. Twentieth Century Cooking.

PHILIP. Twentieth Century Creeds.

DOLLY. Twentieth Century Clothing.

PHILIP. Twentieth Century Conduct.

DOLLY. Twentieth Century Children.

PHILIP. Twentieth Century Parents.

DOLLY. Cloth limp, half a dollar.

PHILIP. Or mounted on linen for hard family use, two dollars. No family
should be without them. Read them, Mr. Valentine: they'll improve your
mind.

DOLLY. But not till we've gone, please.

PHILIP. Quite so: we prefer people with unimproved minds. Our own minds
are in that fresh and unspoiled condition.

VALENTINE (dubiously). Hm!

DOLLY (echoing him inquiringly). Hm? Phil: he prefers people whose minds
are improved.

PHILIP. In that case we shall have to introduce him to the other member
of the family: the Woman of the Twentieth Century; our sister Gloria!

DOLLY (dithyrambically). Nature's masterpiece!

PHILIP. Learning's daughter!

DOLLY. Madeira's pride!

PHILIP. Beauty's paragon!

DOLLY (suddenly descending to prose). Bosh! No complexion.

VALENTINE (desperately). May I have a word?

PHILIP (politely). Excuse us. Go ahead.

DOLLY (very nicely). So sorry.

VALENTINE (attempting to take them paternally). I really must give a
hint to you young people--

DOLLY (breaking out again). Oh, come: I like that. How old are you?

PHILIP. Over thirty.

DOLLY. He's not.

PHILIP (confidently). He is.

DOLLY (emphatically). Twenty-seven.

PHILIP (imperturbably). Thirty-three.

DOLLY. Stuff!

PHILIP (to Valentine). I appeal to you, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE (remonstrating). Well, really--(resigning himself.)
Thirty-one.

PHILIP (to Dolly). You were wrong.

DOLLY. So were you.

PHILIP (suddenly conscientious). We're forgetting our manners, Dolly.

DOLLY (remorseful). Yes, so we are.

PHILIP (apologetic). We interrupted you, Mr. Valentine.

DOLLY. You were going to improve our minds, I think.

VALENTINE. The fact is, your--

PHILIP (anticipating him). Our appearance?

DOLLY. Our manners?

VALENTINE (ad misericordiam). Oh, do let me speak.

DOLLY. The old story. We talk too much.

PHILIP. We do. Shut up, both. (He seats himself on the arm of the
opposing chair.)

DOLLY. Mum! (She sits down in the writing-table chair, and closes her
lips tight with the tips of her fingers.)

VALENTINE. Thank you. (He brings the stool from the bench in the corner;
places it between them; and sits down with a judicial air. They attend
to him with extreme gravity. He addresses himself first to Dolly.)
Now may I ask, to begin with, have you ever been in an English seaside
resort before? (She shakes her head slowly and solemnly. He turns to
Phil, who shakes his head quickly and expressively.) I thought so. Well,
Mr. Clandon, our acquaintance has been short; but it has been voluble;
and I have gathered enough to convince me that you are neither of you
capable of conceiving what life in an English seaside resort is. Believe
me, it's not a question of manners and appearance. In those respects we
enjoy a freedom unknown in Madeira. (Dolly shakes her head
vehemently.) Oh, yes, I assure you. Lord de Cresci's sister bicycles in
knickerbockers; and the rector's wife advocates dress reform and wears
hygienic boots. (Dolly furtively looks at her own shoe: Valentine
catches her in the act, and deftly adds) No, that's not the sort of boot
I mean. (Dolly's shoe vanishes.) We don't bother much about dress and
manners in England, because, as a nation we don't dress well and we've
no manners. But--and now will you excuse my frankness? (They nod.) Thank
you. Well, in a seaside resort there's one thing you must have before
anybody can afford to be seen going about with you; and that's a father,
alive or dead. (He looks at them alternately, with emphasis. They
meet his gaze like martyrs.) Am I to infer that you have omitted that
indispensable part of your social equipment? (They confirm him by
melancholy nods.) Them I'm sorry to say that if you are going to stay
here for any length of time, it will be impossible for me to accept
your kind invitation to lunch. (He rises with an air of finality, and
replaces the stool by the bench.)

PHILIP (rising with grave politeness). Come, Dolly. (He gives her his
arm.)

DOLLY. Good morning. (They go together to the door with perfect
dignity.)

VALENTINE (overwhelmed with remorse). Oh, stop, stop. (They halt and
turn, arm in arm.) You make me feel a perfect beast.

DOLLY. That's your conscience: not us.

VALENTINE (energetically, throwing off all pretence of a professional
manner). My conscience! My conscience has been my ruin. Listen to me.
Twice before I have set up as a respectable medical practitioner in
various parts of England. On both occasions I acted conscientiously, and
told my patients the brute truth instead of what they wanted to be told.
Result, ruin. Now I've set up as a dentist, a five shilling dentist; and
I've done with conscience forever. This is my last chance. I spent my
last sovereign on moving in; and I haven't paid a shilling of rent yet.
I'm eating and drinking on credit; my landlord is as rich as a Jew and
as hard as nails; and I've made five shillings in six weeks. If I
swerve by a hair's breadth from the straight line of the most rigid
respectability, I'm done for. Under such a circumstance, is it fair to
ask me to lunch with you when you don't know your own father?

DOLLY. After all, our grandfather is a canon of Lincoln Cathedral.

VALENTINE (like a castaway mariner who sees a sail on the horizon).
What! Have you a grandfather?

DOLLY. Only one.

VALENTINE. My dear, good young friends, why on earth didn't you tell me
that before? A cannon of Lincoln! That makes it all right, of course.
Just excuse me while I change my coat. (He reaches the door in a bound
and vanishes. Dolly and Phil stare after him, and then stare at one
another. Missing their audience, they droop and become commonplace at
once.)

PHILIP (throwing away Dolly's arm and coming ill-humoredly towards
the operating chair). That wretched bankrupt ivory snatcher makes a
compliment of allowing us to stand him a lunch--probably the first
square meal he has had for months. (He gives the chair a kick, as if it
were Valentine.)

DOLLY. It's too beastly. I won't stand it any longer, Phil. Here in
England everybody asks whether you have a father the very first thing.

PHILIP. I won't stand it either. Mamma must tell us who he was.

DOLLY. Or who he is. He may be alive.

PHILIP. I hope not. No man alive shall father me.

DOLLY. He might have a lot of money, though.

PHILIP. I doubt it. My knowledge of human nature leads me to believe
that if he had a lot of money he wouldn't have got rid of his
affectionate family so easily. Anyhow, let's look at the bright side of
things. Depend on it, he's dead. (He goes to the hearth and stands with
his back to the fireplace, spreading himself. The parlor maid appears.
The twins, under observation, instantly shine out again with their
former brilliancy.)

THE PARLOR MAID. Two ladies for you, miss. Your mother and sister, miss,
I think.

Mrs. Clandon and Gloria come in. Mrs. Clandon is between forty and
fifty, with a slight tendency to soft, sedentary fat, and a fair
remainder of good looks, none the worse preserved because she has
evidently followed the old tribal matronly fashion of making no
pretension in that direction after her marriage, and might almost be
suspected of wearing a cap at home. She carries herself artificially
well, as women were taught to do as a part of good manners by dancing
masters and reclining boards before these were superseded by the modern
artistic cult of beauty and health. Her hair, a flaxen hazel fading into
white, is crimped, and parted in the middle with the ends plaited and
made into a knot, from which observant people of a certain age infer
that Mrs. Clandon had sufficient individuality and good taste to stand
out resolutely against the now forgotten chignon in her girlhood. In
short, she is distinctly old fashioned for her age in dress and manners.
But she belongs to the forefront of her own period (say 1860-80) in a
jealously assertive attitude of character and intellect, and in being
a woman of cultivated interests rather than passionately developed
personal affections. Her voice and ways are entirely kindly and humane;
and she lends herself conscientiously to the occasional demonstrations
of fondness by which her children mark their esteem for her; but
displays of personal sentiment secretly embarrass her: passion in her
is humanitarian rather than human: she feels strongly about social
questions and principles, not about persons. Only, one observes that
this reasonableness and intense personal privacy, which leaves her
relations with Gloria and Phil much as they might be between her and the
children of any other woman, breaks down in the case of Dolly. Though
almost every word she addresses to her is necessarily in the nature of a
remonstrance for some breach of decorum, the tenderness in her voice is
unmistakable; and it is not surprising that years of such remonstrance
have left Dolly hopelessly spoiled.

Gloria, who is hardly past twenty, is a much more formidable person than
her mother. She is the incarnation of haughty highmindedness, raging
with the impatience of an impetuous, dominative character paralyzed by
the impotence of her youth, and unwillingly disciplined by the constant
danger of ridicule from her lighter-handed juniors. Unlike her mother,
she is all passion; and the conflict of her passion with her obstinate
pride and intense fastidiousness results in a freezing coldness of
manner. In an ugly woman all this would be repulsive; but Gloria is
an attractive woman. Her deep chestnut hair, olive brown skin, long
eyelashes, shaded grey eyes that often flash like stars, delicately
turned full lips, and compact and supple, but muscularly plump figure
appeal with disdainful frankness to the senses and imagination. A very
dangerous girl, one would say, if the moral passions were not also
marked, and even nobly marked, in a fine brow. Her tailor-made
skirt-and-jacket dress of saffron brown cloth, seems conventional when
her back is turned; but it displays in front a blouse of sea-green silk
which upsets its conventionality with one stroke, and sets her apart as
effectually as the twins from the ordinary run of fashionable seaside
humanity.

Mrs. Clandon comes a little way into the room, looking round to see
who is present. Gloria, who studiously avoids encouraging the twins by
betraying any interest in them, wanders to the window and looks out with
her thoughts far away. The parlor maid, instead of withdrawing, shuts
the door and waits at it.

MRS. CLANDON. Well, children? How is the toothache, Dolly?

DOLLY. Cured, thank Heaven. I've had it out. (She sits down on the step
of the operating chair. Mrs. Clandon takes the writing-table chair.)

PHILIP (striking in gravely from the hearth). And the dentist, a
first-rate professional man of the highest standing, is coming to lunch
with us.

MRS. CLANDON (looking round apprehensively at the servant). Phil!

THE PARLOR MAID. Beg pardon, ma'am. I'm waiting for Mr. Valentine. I
have a message for him.

DOLLY. Who from?

MRS. CLANDON (shocked). Dolly! (Dolly catches her lips with her finger
tips, suppressing a little splutter of mirth.)

THE PARLOR MAID. Only the landlord, ma'am.

Valentine, in a blue serge suit, with a straw hat in his hand, comes
back in high spirits, out of breath with the haste he has made. Gloria
turns from the window and studies him with freezing attention.

PHILIP. Let me introduce you, Mr. Valentine. My mother, Mrs. Lanfrey
Clandon. (Mrs. Clandon bows. Valentine bows, self-possessed and quite
equal to the occasion.) My sister Gloria. (Gloria bows with cold dignity
and sits down on the sofa. Valentine falls in love at first sight and
is miserably confused. He fingers his hat nervously, and makes her a
sneaking bow.)

MRS. CLANDON. I understand that we are to have the pleasure of seeing
you at luncheon to-day, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE. Thank you--er--if you don't mind--I mean if you will be so
kind--(to the parlor maid testily) What is it?

THE PARLOR MAID. The landlord, sir, wishes to speak to you before you go
out.

VALENTINE. Oh, tell him I have four patients here. (The Clandons look
surprised, except Phil, who is imperturbable.) If he wouldn't mind
waiting just two minutes, I--I'll slip down and see him for a moment.
(Throwing himself confidentially on her sense of the position.) Say I'm
busy, but that I want to see him.

THE PARLOR MAID (reassuringly). Yes, sir. (She goes.)

MRS. CLANDON (on the point of rising). We are detaining you, I am
afraid.

VALENTINE. Not at all, not at all. Your presence here will be the
greatest help to me. The fact is, I owe six week's rent; and I've had
no patients until to-day. My interview with my landlord will be
considerably smoothed by the apparent boom in my business.

DOLLY (vexed). Oh, how tiresome of you to let it all out! And we've
just been pretending that you were a respectable professional man in a
first-rate position.

MRS. CLANDON (horrified). Oh, Dolly, Dolly! My dearest, how can you be
so rude? (To Valentine.) Will you excuse these barbarian children of
mine, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE. Thank you, I'm used to them. Would it be too much to ask you
to wait five minutes while I get rid of my landlord downstairs?

DOLLY. Don't be long. We're hungry.

MRS. CLANDON (again remonstrating). Dolly, dear!

VALENTINE (to Dolly). All right. (To Mrs. Clandon.) Thank you: I shan't
be long. (He steals a look at Gloria as he turns to go. She is looking
gravely at him. He falls into confusion.) I--er--er--yes--thank you
(he succeeds at last in blundering himself out of the room; but the
exhibition is a pitiful one).

PHILIP. Did you observe? (Pointing to Gloria.) Love at first sight. You
can add his scalp to your collection, Gloria.

MRS. CLANDON. Sh--sh, pray, Phil. He may have heard you.

PHILIP. Not he. (Bracing himself for a scene.) And now look here, mamma.
(He takes the stool from the bench; and seats himself majestically in
the middle of the room, taking a leaf out of Valentine's book. Dolly,
feeling that her position on the step of the operating chair is unworthy
of the dignity of the occasion, rises, looking important and determined;
crosses to the window; and stands with her back to the end of the
writing-table, her hands behind her and on the table. Mrs. Clandon looks
at them, wondering what is coming. Gloria becomes attentive. Philip
straightens his back; places his knuckles symmetrically on his knees;
and opens his case.) Dolly and I have been talking over things a good
deal lately; and I don't think, judging from my knowledge of human
nature--we don't think that you (speaking very staccato, with the words
detached) quite appreciate the fact--

DOLLY (seating herself on the end of the table with a spring). That
we've grown up.

MRS. CLANDON. Indeed? In what way have I given you any reason to
complain?

PHILIP. Well, there are certain matters upon which we are beginning to
feel that you might take us a little more into your confidence.

MRS. CLANDON (rising, with all the placidity of her age suddenly broken
up; and a curious hard excitement, dignified but dogged, ladylike
but implacable--the manner of the Old Guard of the Women's Rights
movement--coming upon her). Phil: take care. Remember what I have
always taught you. There are two sorts of family life, Phil; and
your experience of human nature only extends, so far, to one of them.
(Rhetorically.) The sort you know is based on mutual respect,
on recognition of the right of every member of the household to
independence and privacy (her emphasis on "privacy" is intense) in their
personal concerns. And because you have always enjoyed that, it seems
such a matter of course to you that you don't value it. But (with biting
acrimony) there is another sort of family life: a life in which husbands
open their wives' letters, and call on them to account for every
farthing of their expenditure and every moment of their time; in which
women do the same to their children; in which no room is private and
no hour sacred; in which duty, obedience, affection, home, morality
and religion are detestable tyrannies, and life is a vulgar round of
punishments and lies, coercion and rebellion, jealousy, suspicion,
recrimination--Oh! I cannot describe it to you: fortunately for you, you
know nothing about it. (She sits down, panting. Gloria has listened to
her with flashing eyes, sharing all her indignation.)

DOLLY (inaccessible to rhetoric). See Twentieth Century Parents, chapter
on Liberty, passim.

MRS. CLANDON (touching her shoulder affectionately, soothed even by a
gibe from her). My dear Dolly: if you only knew how glad I am that it is
nothing but a joke to you, though it is such bitter earnest to me. (More
resolutely, turning to Philip.) Phil, I never ask you questions about
your private concerns. You are not going to question me, are you?

PHILIP. I think it due to ourselves to say that the question we wanted
to ask is as much our business as yours.

DOLLY. Besides, it can't be good to keep a lot of questions bottled up
inside you. You did it, mamma; but see how awfully it's broken out again
in me.

MRS. CLANDON. I see you want to ask your question. Ask it.

DOLLY AND PHILIP (beginning simultaneously). Who-- (They stop.)

PHILIP. Now look here, Dolly: am I going to conduct this business or are
you?

DOLLY. You.

PHILIP. Then hold your mouth. (Dolly does so literally.) The question is
a simple one. When the ivory snatcher--

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Phil!

PHILIP. Dentist is an ugly word. The man of ivory and gold asked us
whether we were the children of Mr. Densmore Clandon of Newbury Hall. In
pursuance of the precepts in your treatise on Twentieth Century Conduct,
and your repeated personal exhortations to us to curtail the number of
unnecessary lies we tell, we replied truthfully the we didn't know.

DOLLY. Neither did we.

PHILIP. Sh! The result was that the gum architect made considerable
difficulties about accepting our invitation to lunch, although I doubt
if he has had anything but tea and bread and butter for a fortnight
past. Now my knowledge of human nature leads me to believe that we had a
father, and that you probably know who he was.

MRS. CLANDON (her agitation returning). Stop, Phil. Your father is
nothing to you, nor to me (vehemently). That is enough. (The twins are
silenced, but not satisfied. Their faces fall. But Gloria, who has been
following the altercation attentively, suddenly intervenes.)

GLORIA (advancing). Mother: we have a right to know.

MRS. CLANDON (rising and facing her). Gloria! "We!" Who is "we"?

GLORIA (steadfastly). We three. (Her tone is unmistakable: she is
pitting her strength against her mother for the first time. The twins
instantly go over to the enemy.)

MRS. CLANDON (wounded). In your mouth "we" used to mean you and I,
Gloria.

PHILIP (rising decisively and putting away the stool). We're hurting
you: let's drop it. We didn't think you'd mind. I don't want to know.

DOLLY (coming off the table). I'm sure I don't. Oh, don't look like
that, mamma. (She looks angrily at Gloria.)

MRS. CLANDON (touching her eyes hastily with her handkerchief and
sitting down again). Thank you, my dear. Thanks, Phil.

GLORIA (inexorably). We have a right to know, mother.

MRS. CLANDON (indignantly). Ah! You insist.

GLORIA. Do you intend that we shall never know?

DOLLY. Oh, Gloria, don't. It's barbarous.

GLORIA (with quiet scorn). What is the use of being weak? You see
what has happened with this gentleman here, mother. The same thing has
happened to me.

MRS. CLANDON } (all { What do you mean?

DOLLY } together). { Oh, tell us.

PHILIP } { What happened to you?

GLORIA. Oh, nothing of any consequence. (She turns away from them and
goes up to the easy chair at the fireplace, where she sits down, almost
with her back to them. As they wait expectantly, she adds, over her
shoulder, with studied indifference.) On board the steamer the first
officer did me the honor to propose to me.

DOLLY. No, it was to me.

MRS. CLANDON. The first officer! Are you serious, Gloria? What did you
say to him? (correcting herself) Excuse me: I have no right to ask that.

GLORIA. The answer is pretty obvious. A woman who does not know who her
father was cannot accept such an offer.

MRS. CLANDON. Surely you did not want to accept it?

GLORIA (turning a little and raising her voice). No; but suppose I had
wanted to!

PHILIP. Did that difficulty strike you, Dolly?

DOLLY. No, I accepted him.

GLORIA } (all crying { Accepted him!

MRS. CLANDON } out { Dolly!

PHILIP } together) { Oh, I say!

DOLLY (naively). He did look such a fool!

MRS. CLANDON. But why did you do such a thing, Dolly?

DOLLY. For fun, I suppose. He had to measure my finger for a ring. You'd
have done the same thing yourself.

MRS. CLANDON. No, Dolly, I would not. As a matter of fact the first
officer did propose to me; and I told him to keep that sort of thing for
women were young enough to be amused by it. He appears to have acted on
my advice. (She rises and goes to the hearth.) Gloria: I am sorry you
think me weak; but I cannot tell you what you want. You are all too
young.

PHILIP. This is rather a startling departure from Twentieth Century
principles.

DOLLY (quoting). "Answer all your children's questions, and answer them
truthfully, as soon as they are old enough to ask them." See Twentieth
Century Motherhood--

PHILIP. Page one--

DOLLY. Chapter one--

PHILIP. Sentence one.

MRS. CLANDON. My dears: I did not say that you were too young to know.
I said you were too young to be taken into my confidence. You are very
bright children, all of you; but I am glad for your sakes that you are
still very inexperienced and consequently very unsympathetic. There are
some experiences of mine that I cannot bear to speak of except to those
who have gone through what I have gone through. I hope you will never
be qualified for such confidences. But I will take care that you shall
learn all you want to know. Will that satisfy you?

PHILIP. Another grievance, Dolly.

DOLLY. We're not sympathetic.

GLORIA (leaning forward in her chair and looking earnestly up at her
mother). Mother: I did not mean to be unsympathetic.

MRS. CLANDON (affectionately). Of course not, dear. Do you think I don't
understand?

GLORIA (rising). But, mother--

MRS. CLANDON (drawing back a little). Yes?

GLORIA (obstinately). It is nonsense to tell us that our father is
nothing to us.

MRS. CLANDON (provoked to sudden resolution). Do you remember your
father?

GLORIA (meditatively, as if the recollection were a tender one). I am
not quite sure. I think so.

MRS. CLANDON (grimly). You are not sure?

GLORIA. No.

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet force). Gloria: if I had ever struck you--
(Gloria recoils: Philip and Dolly are disagreeably shocked; all
three start at her, revolted as she continues)--struck you purposely,
deliberately, with the intention of hurting you, with a whip bought for
the purpose! Would you remember that, do you think? (Gloria utters an
exclamation of indignant repulsion.) That would have been your last
recollection of your father, Gloria, if I had not taken you away from
him. I have kept him out of your life: keep him now out of mine by never
mentioning him to me again. (Gloria, with a shudder, covers her face
with her hands, until, hearing someone at the door, she turns away and
pretends to occupy herself looking at the names of the books in the
bookcase. Mrs. Clandon sits down on the sofa. Valentine returns.).

VALENTINE. I hope I've not kept you waiting. That landlord of mine is
really an extraordinary old character.

DOLLY (eagerly). Oh, tell us. How long has he given you to pay?

MRS. CLANDON (distracted by her child's bad manners). Dolly, Dolly,
Dolly dear! You must not ask questions.

DOLLY (demurely). So sorry. You'll tell us, won't you, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE. He doesn't want his rent at all. He's broken his tooth on
a Brazil nut; and he wants me to look at it and to lunch with him
afterwards.

DOLLY. Then have him up and pull his tooth out at once; and we'll bring
him to lunch, too. Tell the maid to fetch him along. (She runs to the
bell and rings it vigorously. Then, with a sudden doubt she turns to
Valentine and adds) I suppose he's respectable--really respectable.

VALENTINE. Perfectly. Not like me.

DOLLY. Honest Injun? (Mrs. Clandon gasps faintly; but her powers of
remonstrance are exhausted.)

VALENTINE. Honest Injun!

DOLLY. Then off with you and bring him up.

VALENTINE (looking dubiously at Mrs. Clandon). I daresay he'd be
delighted if--er--?

MRS. CLANDON (rising and looking at her watch). I shall be happy to see
your friend at lunch, if you can persuade him to come; but I can't wait
to see him now: I have an appointment at the hotel at a quarter to one
with an old friend whom I have not seen since I left England eighteen
years ago. Will you excuse me?

VALENTINE. Certainly, Mrs. Clandon.

GLORIA. Shall I come?

MRS. CLANDON. No, dear. I want to be alone. (She goes out, evidently
still a good deal troubled. Valentine opens the door for her and follows
her out.)

PHILIP (significantly--to Dolly). Hmhm!

DOLLY (significantly to Philip). Ahah! (The parlor maid answers the
bell.)

DOLLY. Show the old gentleman up.

THE PARLOR MAID (puzzled). Madam?

DOLLY. The old gentleman with the toothache.

PHILIP. The landlord.

THE PARLOR MAID. Mr. Crampton, Sir?

PHILIP. Is his name Crampton?

DOLLY (to Philip). Sounds rheumaticky, doesn't it?

PHILIP. Chalkstones, probably.

DOLLY (over her shoulder, to the parlor maid). Show Mr. Crampstones up.
(Goes R. to writing-table chair).

THE PARLOR MAID (correcting her). Mr. Crampton, miss. (She goes.)

DOLLY (repeating it to herself like a lesson). Crampton, Crampton,
Crampton, Crampton, Crampton. (She sits down studiously at the
writing-table.) I must get that name right, or Heaven knows what I shall
call him.

GLORIA. Phil: can you believe such a horrible thing as that about our
father--what mother said just now?

PHILIP. Oh, there are lots of people of that kind. Old Chalice used to
thrash his wife and daughters with a cartwhip.

DOLLY (contemptuously). Yes, a Portuguese!

PHILIP. When you come to men who are brutes, there is much in common
between the Portuguese and the English variety, Doll. Trust my knowledge
of human nature. (He resumes his position on the hearthrug with an
elderly and responsible air.)

GLORIA (with angered remorse). I don't think we shall ever play again at
our old game of guessing what our father was to be like. Dolly: are you
sorry for your father--the father with lots of money?

DOLLY. Oh, come! What about your father--the lonely old man with the
tender aching heart? He's pretty well burst up, I think.

PHILIP. There can be no doubt that the governor is an exploded
superstition. (Valentine is heard talking to somebody outside the door.)
But hark: he comes.

GLORIA (nervously). Who?

DOLLY. Chalkstones.

PHILIP. Sh! Attention. (They put on their best manners. Philip adds in
a lower voice to Gloria) If he's good enough for the lunch, I'll nod to
Dolly; and if she nods to you, invite him straight away.

(Valentine comes back with his landlord. Mr. Fergus Crampton is a man of
about sixty, tall, hard and stringy, with an atrociously obstinate, ill
tempered, grasping mouth, and a querulously dogmatic voice. Withal he
is highly nervous and sensitive, judging by his thin transparent skin
marked with multitudinous lines, and his slender fingers. His consequent
capacity for suffering acutely from all the dislike that his temper and
obstinacy can bring upon him is proved by his wistful, wounded eyes,
by a plaintive note in his voice, a painful want of confidence in his
welcome, and a constant but indifferently successful effort to correct
his natural incivility of manner and proneness to take offence. By his
keen brows and forehead he is clearly a shrewd man; and there is no
sign of straitened means or commercial diffidence about him: he is
well dressed, and would be classed at a guess as a prosperous master
manufacturer in a business inherited from an old family in the
aristocracy of trade. His navy blue coat is not of the usual fashionable
pattern. It is not exactly a pilot's coat; but it is cut that way,
double breasted, and with stout buttons and broad lapels, a coat for
a shipyard rather than a counting house. He has taken a fancy to
Valentine, who cares nothing for his crossness of grain and treats
him with a sort of disrespectful humanity, for which he is secretly
grateful.)

VALENTINE. May I introduce--this is Mr. Crampton--Miss Dorothy Clandon,
Mr. Philip Clandon, Miss Clandon. (Crampton stands nervously bowing.
They all bow.) Sit down, Mr. Crampton.

DOLLY (pointing to the operating chair). That is the most comfortable
chair, Mr. Ch--crampton.

CRAMPTON. Thank you; but won't this young lady--(indicating Gloria, who
is close to the chair)?

GLORIA. Thank you, Mr. Crampton: we are just going.

VALENTINE (bustling him across to the chair with good-humored
peremptoriness). Sit down, sit down. You're tired.

CRAMPTON. Well, perhaps as I am considerably the oldest person present,
I-- (He finishes the sentence by sitting down a little rheumatically in
the operating chair. Meanwhile, Philip, having studied him critically
during his passage across the room, nods to Dolly; and Dolly nods to
Gloria.)

GLORIA. Mr. Crampton: we understand that we are preventing Mr. Valentine
from lunching with you by taking him away ourselves. My mother would be
very glad, indeed, if you would come too.

CRAMPTON (gratefully, after looking at her earnestly for a moment).
Thank you. I will come with pleasure.

GLORIA } (politely { Thank you very much--er--

DOLLY } murmuring).{ So glad--er--

PHILIP } { Delighted, I'm sure--er--

(The conversation drops. Gloria and Dolly look at one another; then at
Valentine and Philip. Valentine and Philip, unequal to the occasion,
look away from them at one another, and are instantly so disconcerted by
catching one another's eye, that they look back again and catch the eyes
of Gloria and Dolly. Thus, catching one another all round, they all look
at nothing and are quite at a loss. Crampton looks about him, waiting
for them to begin. The silence becomes unbearable.)

DOLLY (suddenly, to keep things going). How old are you, Mr. Crampton?

GLORIA (hastily). I am afraid we must be going, Mr. Valentine. It is
understood, then, that we meet at half past one. (She makes for the
door. Philip goes with her. Valentine retreats to the bell.)

VALENTINE. Half past one. (He rings the bell.) Many thanks. (He follows
Gloria and Philip to the door, and goes out with them.)

DOLLY (who has meanwhile stolen across to Crampton). Make him give you
gas. It's five shillings extra: but it's worth it.

CRAMPTON (amused). Very well. (Looking more earnestly at her.) So you
want to know my age, do you? I'm fifty-seven.

DOLLY (with conviction). You look it.

CRAMPTON (grimly). I dare say I do.

DOLLY. What are you looking at me so hard for? Anything wrong? (She
feels whether her hat is right.)

CRAMPTON. You're like somebody.

DOLLY. Who?

CRAMPTON. Well, you have a curious look of my mother.

DOLLY (incredulously). Your mother!!! Quite sure you don't mean your
daughter?

CRAMPTON (suddenly blackening with hate). Yes: I'm quite sure I don't
mean my daughter.

DOLLY (sympathetically). Tooth bad?

CRAMPTON. No, no: nothing. A twinge of memory, Miss Clandon, not of
toothache.

DOLLY. Have it out. "Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow:" with gas,
five shillings extra.

CRAMPTON (vindictively). No, not a sorrow. An injury that was done me
once: that's all. I don't forget injuries; and I don't want to forget
them. (His features settle into an implacable frown.)

(re-enter Philip: to look for Dolly. He comes down behind her
unobserved.)

DOLLY (looking critically at Crampton's expression). I don't think we
shall like you when you are brooding over your sorrows.

PHILIP (who has entered the room unobserved, and stolen behind her).
My sister means well, Mr. Crampton: but she is indiscreet. Now Dolly,
outside! (He takes her towards the door.)

DOLLY (in a perfectly audible undertone). He says he's only fifty-seven;
and he thinks me the image of his mother; and he hates his daughter;
and-- (She is interrupted by the return of Valentine.)

VALENTINE. Miss Clandon has gone on.

PHILIP. Don't forget half past one.

DOLLY. Mind you leave Mr. Crampton with enough teeth to eat with. (They
go out. Valentine comes down to his cabinet, and opens it.)

CRAMPTON. That's a spoiled child, Mr. Valentine. That's one of your
modern products. When I was her age, I had many a good hiding fresh in
my memory to teach me manners.

VALENTINE (taking up his dental mirror and probe from the shelf in front
of the cabinet). What did you think of her sister?

CRAMPTON. You liked her better, eh?

VALENTINE (rhapsodically). She struck me as being-- (He checks himself,
and adds, prosaically) However, that's not business. (He places himself
behind Crampton's right shoulder and assumes his professional tone.)
Open, please. (Crampton opens his mouth. Valentine puts the mirror in,
and examines his teeth.) Hm! You have broken that one. What a pity to
spoil such a splendid set of teeth! Why do you crack nuts with them? (He
withdraws the mirror, and comes forward to converse with Crampton.)

CRAMPTON. I've always cracked nuts with them: what else are they for?
(Dogmatically.) The proper way to keep teeth good is to give them plenty
of use on bones and nuts, and wash them every day with soap-- plain
yellow soap.

VALENTINE. Soap! Why soap?

CRAMPTON. I began using it as a boy because I was made to; and I've used
it ever since. And I never had toothache in my life.

VALENTINE. Don't you find it rather nasty?

CRAMPTON. I found that most things that were good for me were nasty. But
I was taught to put up with them, and made to put up with them. I'm used
to it now: in fact, I like the taste when the soap is really good.

VALENTINE (making a wry face in spite of himself). You seem to have been
very carefully educated, Mr. Crampton.

CRAMPTON (grimly). I wasn't spoiled, at all events.

VALENTINE (smiling a little to himself). Are you quite sure?

CRAMPTON. What d'y' mean?

VALENTINE. Well, your teeth are good, I admit. But I've seen just as
good in very self-indulgent mouths. (He goes to the ledge of cabinet and
changes the probe for another one.)

CRAMPTON. It's not the effect on the teeth: it's the effect on the
character.

VALENTINE (placably). Oh, the character, I see. (He recommences
operations.) A little wider, please. Hm! That one will have to come out:
it's past saving. (He withdraws the probe and again comes to the side of
the chair to converse.) Don't be alarmed: you shan't feel anything. I'll
give you gas.

CRAMPTON. Rubbish, man: I want none of your gas. Out with it. People
were taught to bear necessary pain in my day.

VALENTINE. Oh, if you like being hurt, all right. I'll hurt you as much
as you like, without any extra charge for the beneficial effect on your
character.

CRAMPTON (rising and glaring at him). Young man: you owe me six weeks'
rent.

VALENTINE. I do.

CRAMPTON. Can you pay me?

VALENTINE. No.

CRAMPTON (satisfied with his advantage). I thought not. How soon d'y'
think you'll be able to pay me if you have no better manners than to
make game of your patients? (He sits down again.)

VALENTINE. My good sir: my patients haven't all formed their characters
on kitchen soap.

CRAMPTON (suddenly gripping him by the arm as he turns away again to the
cabinet). So much the worse for them. I tell you you don't understand my
character. If I could spare all my teeth, I'd make you pull them all
out one after another to shew you what a properly hardened man can go
through with when he's made up his mind to do it. (He nods at him to
enforce the effect of this declaration, and releases him.)

VALENTINE (his careless pleasantry quite unruffled). And you want to be
more hardened, do you?

CRAMPTON. Yes.

VALENTINE (strolling away to the bell). Well, you're quite hard enough
for me already--as a landlord. (Crampton receives this with a growl of
grim humor. Valentine rings the bell, and remarks in a cheerful, casual
way, whilst waiting for it to be answered.) Why did you never get
married, Mr. Crampton? A wife and children would have taken some of the
hardness out of you.

CRAMPTON (with unexpected ferocity). What the devil is that to you? (The
parlor maid appears at the door.)

VALENTINE (politely). Some warm water, please. (She retires: and
Valentine comes back to the cabinet, not at all put out by Crampton's
rudeness, and carries on the conversation whilst he selects a forceps
and places it ready to his hand with a gag and a drinking glass.) You
were asking me what the devil that was to me. Well, I have an idea of
getting married myself.

CRAMPTON (with grumbling irony). Naturally, sir, naturally. When a young
man has come to his last farthing, and is within twenty-four hours of
having his furniture distrained upon by his landlord, he marries. I've
noticed that before. Well, marry; and be miserable.

VALENTINE. Oh, come, what do you know about it?

CRAMPTON. I'm not a bachelor.

VALENTINE. Then there is a Mrs. Crampton?

CRAMPTON (wincing with a pang of resentment). Yes--damn her!

VALENTINE (unperturbed). Hm! A father, too, perhaps, as well as a
husband, Mr. Crampton?

CRAMPTON. Three children.

VALENTINE (politely). Damn them?--eh?

CRAMPTON (jealously). No, sir: the children are as much mine as hers.
(The parlor maid brings in a jug of hot water.)

VALENTINE. Thank you. (He takes the jug from her, and brings it to the
cabinet, continuing in the same idle strain) I really should like to
know your family, Mr. Crampton. (The parlor maid goes out: and he pours
some hot water into the drinking glass.)

CRAMPTON. Sorry I can't introduce you, sir. I'm happy to say that I
don't know where they are, and don't care, so long as they keep out of
my way. (Valentine, with a hitch of his eyebrows and shoulders, drops
the forceps with a clink into the glass of hot water.) You needn't warm
that thing to use on me. I'm not afraid of the cold steel. (Valentine
stoops to arrange the gas pump and cylinder beside the chair.) What's
that heavy thing?

VALENTINE. Oh, never mind. Something to put my foot on, to get the
necessary purchase for a good pull. (Crampton looks alarmed in spite of
himself. Valentine stands upright and places the glass with the forceps
in it ready to his hand, chatting on with provoking indifference.) And
so you advise me not to get married, Mr. Crampton? (He stoops to fit the
handle on the apparatus by which the chair is raised and lowered.)

CRAMPTON (irritably). I advise you to get my tooth out and have done
reminding me of my wife. Come along, man. (He grips the arms of the
chair and braces himself.)

VALENTINE (pausing, with his hand on the lever, to look up at him and
say). What do you bet that I don't get that tooth out without your
feeling it?

CRAMPTON. Your six week's rent, young man. Don't you gammon me.

VALENTINE (jumping at the bet and winding him aloft vigorously). Done!
Are you ready? (Crampton, who has lost his grip of the chair in his
alarm at its sudden ascent, folds his arms: sits stiffly upright: and
prepares for the worst. Valentine lets down the back of the chair to an
obtuse angle.)

CRAMPTON (clutching at the arms of the chair as he falls back). Take
care man. I'm quite helpless in this po---

VALENTINE (deftly stopping him with the gag, and snatching up the
mouthpiece of the gas machine). You'll be more helpless presently. (He
presses the mouthpiece over Crampton's mouth and nose, leaning over
his chest so as to hold his head and shoulders well down on the chair.
Crampton makes an inarticulate sound in the mouthpiece and tries to
lay hands on Valentine, whom he supposes to be in front of him. After
a moment his arms wave aimlessly, then subside and drop. He is quite
insensible. Valentine, with an exclamation of somewhat preoccupied
triumph, throws aside the mouthpiece quickly: picks up the forceps
adroitly from the glass: and--the curtain falls.)

END OF ACT I.




ACT II


On the terrace at the Marine Hotel. It is a square flagged platform,
with a parapet of heavy oil jar pilasters supporting a broad stone
coping on the outer edge, which stands up over the sea like a cliff.
The head waiter of the establishment, busy laying napkins on a luncheon
table with his back to the sea, has the hotel on his right, and on his
left, in the corner nearest the sea, the flight of steps leading down to
the beach.

When he looks down the terrace in front of him he sees a little to his
left a solitary guest, a middle-aged gentleman sitting on a chair of
iron laths at a little iron table with a bowl of lump sugar and three
wasps on it, reading the Standard, with his umbrella up to defend him
from the sun, which, in August and at less than an hour after noon, is
toasting his protended insteps. Just opposite him, at the hotel side of
the terrace, there is a garden seat of the ordinary esplanade pattern.
Access to the hotel for visitors is by an entrance in the middle of
its facade, reached by a couple of steps on a broad square of raised
pavement. Nearer the parapet there lurks a way to the kitchen, masked by
a little trellis porch. The table at which the waiter is occupied is a
long one, set across the terrace with covers and chairs for five, two at
each side and one at the end next the hotel. Against the parapet another
table is prepared as a buffet to serve from.

The waiter is a remarkable person in his way. A silky old man,
white-haired and delicate looking, but so cheerful and contented that
in his encouraging presence ambition stands rebuked as vulgarity, and
imagination as treason to the abounding sufficiency and interest of
the actual. He has a certain expression peculiar to men who have been
extraordinarily successful in their calling, and who, whilst aware of
the vanity of success, are untouched by envy.

The gentleman at the iron table is not dressed for the seaside. He wears
his London frock coat and gloves; and his tall silk hat is on the table
beside the sugar bowl. The excellent condition and quality of these
garments, the gold-rimmed folding spectacles through which he is reading
the Standard, and the Times at his elbow overlaying the local paper,
all testify to his respectability. He is about fifty, clean shaven, and
close-cropped, with the corners of his mouth turned down purposely, as
if he suspected them of wanting to turn up, and was determined not to
let them have their way. He has large expansive ears, cod colored eyes,
and a brow kept resolutely wide open, as if, again, he had resolved in
his youth to be truthful, magnanimous, and incorruptible, but had never
succeeded in making that habit of mind automatic and unconscious. Still,
he is by no means to be laughed at. There is no sign of stupidity or
infirmity of will about him: on the contrary, he would pass anywhere
at sight as a man of more than average professional capacity and
responsibility. Just at present he is enjoying the weather and the sea
too much to be out of patience; but he has exhausted all the news in his
papers and is at present reduced to the advertisements, which are not
sufficiently succulent to induce him to persevere with them.


THE GENTLEMAN (yawning and giving up the paper as a bad job). Waiter!

WAITER. Sir? (coming down C.)

THE GENTLEMAN. Are you quite sure Mrs. Clandon is coming back before
lunch?

WAITER. Quite sure, sir. She expects you at a quarter to one, sir. (The
gentleman, soothed at once by the waiter's voice, looks at him with a
lazy smile. It is a quiet voice, with a gentle melody in it that gives
sympathetic interest to his most commonplace remark; and he speaks with
the sweetest propriety, neither dropping his aitches nor misplacing
them, nor committing any other vulgarism. He looks at his watch as he
continues) Not that yet, sir, is it? 12:43, sir. Only two minutes more
to wait, sir. Nice morning, sir?

THE GENTLEMAN. Yes: very fresh after London.

WAITER. Yes, sir: so all our visitors say, sir. Very nice family, Mrs.
Clandon's, sir.

THE GENTLEMAN. You like them, do you?

WAITER. Yes, sir. They have a free way with them that is very taking,
sir, very taking indeed, sir: especially the young lady and gentleman.

THE GENTLEMAN. Miss Dorothea and Mr. Philip, I suppose.

WAITER. Yes, sir. The young lady, in giving an order, or the like
of that, will say, "Remember, William, we came to this hotel on
your account, having heard what a perfect waiter you are." The young
gentleman will tell me that I remind him strongly of his father (the
gentleman starts at this) and that he expects me to act by him as such.
(Soothing, sunny cadence.) Oh, very pleasant, sir, very affable and
pleasant indeed!

THE GENTLEMAN. You like his father! (He laughs at the notion.)

WAITER. Oh, we must not take what they say too seriously, sir. Of
course, sir, if it were true, the young lady would have seen the
resemblance, too, sir.

THE GENTLEMAN. Did she?

WAITER. No, sir. She thought me like the bust of Shakespear in Stratford
Church, sir. That is why she calls me William, sir. My real name is
Walter, sir. (He turns to go back to the table, and sees Mrs. Clandon
coming up to the terrace from the beach by the steps.) Here is Mrs.
Clandon, sir. (To Mrs. Clandon, in an unobtrusively confidential tone)
Gentleman for you, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. We shall have two more gentlemen at lunch, William.

WAITER. Right, ma'am. Thank you, ma'am. (He withdraws into the hotel.
Mrs. Clandon comes forward looking round for her visitor, but passes
over the gentleman without any sign of recognition.)

THE GENTLEMAN (peering at her quaintly from under the umbrella). Don't
you know me?

MRS. CLANDON (incredulously, looking hard at him) Are you Finch McComas?

McCOMAS. Can't you guess? (He shuts the umbrella; puts it aside; and
jocularly plants himself with his hands on his hips to be inspected.)

MRS. CLANDON. I believe you are. (She gives him her hand. The shake that
ensues is that of old friends after a long separation.) Where's your
beard?

McCOMAS (with humorous solemnity). Would you employ a solicitor with a
beard?

MRS. CLANDON (pointing to the silk hat on the table). Is that your hat?

McCOMAS. Would you employ a solicitor with a sombrero?

MRS. CLANDON. I have thought of you all these eighteen years with the
beard and the sombrero. (She sits down on the garden seat. McComas takes
his chair again.) Do you go to the meetings of the Dialectical Society
still?

McCOMAS (gravely). I do not frequent meetings now.

MRS. CLANDON. Finch: I see what has happened. You have become
respectable.

McCOMAS. Haven't you?

MRS. CLANDON. Not a bit.

McCOMAS. You hold to your old opinions still?

MRS. CLANDON. As firmly as ever.

McCOMAS. Bless me! And you are still ready to make speeches in public,
in spite of your sex (Mrs. Clandon nods); to insist on a married
woman's right to her own separate property (she nods again); to champion
Darwin's view of the origin of species and John Stuart Mill's essay on
Liberty (nod); to read Huxley, Tyndall and George Eliot (three nods);
and to demand University degrees, the opening of the professions, and
the parliamentary franchise for women as well as men?

MRS. CLANDON (resolutely). Yes: I have not gone back one inch; and I
have educated Gloria to take up my work where I left it. That is what
has brought me back to England: I felt that I had no right to bury her
alive in Madeira--my St. Helena, Finch. I suppose she will be howled at
as I was; but she is prepared for that.

McCOMAS. Howled at! My dear good lady: there is nothing in any of those
views now-a-days to prevent her from marrying a bishop. You reproached
me just now for having become respectable. You were wrong: I hold to
our old opinions as strongly as ever. I don't go to church; and I don't
pretend I do. I call myself what I am: a Philosophic Radical, standing
for liberty and the rights of the individual, as I learnt to do from
my master Herbert Spencer. Am I howled at? No: I'm indulged as an old
fogey. I'm out of everything, because I've refused to bow the knee to
Socialism.

MRS. CLANDON (shocked). Socialism.

McCOMAS. Yes, Socialism. That's what Miss Gloria will be up to her ears
in before the end of the month if you let her loose here.

MRS. CLANDON (emphatically). But I can prove to her that Socialism is a
fallacy.

McCOMAS (touchingly). It is by proving that, Mrs. Clandon, that I have
lost all my young disciples. Be careful what you do: let her go her own
way. (With some bitterness.) We're old-fashioned: the world thinks it
has left us behind. There is only one place in all England where your
opinions would still pass as advanced.

MRS. CLANDON (scornfully unconvinced). The Church, perhaps?

McCOMAS. No, the theatre. And now to business! Why have you made me come
down here?

MRS. CLANDON. Well, partly because I wanted to see you--

McCOMAS (with good-humored irony). Thanks.

MRS. CLANDON. --and partly because I want you to explain everything
to the children. They know nothing; and now that we have come back
to England, it is impossible to leave them in ignorance any longer.
(Agitated.) Finch: I cannot bring myself to tell them. I-- (She is
interrupted by the twins and Gloria. Dolly comes tearing up the steps,
racing Philip, who combines a terrific speed with unhurried propriety of
bearing which, however, costs him the race, as Dolly reaches her mother
first and almost upsets the garden seat by the precipitancy of her
arrival.)

DOLLY (breathless). It's all right, mamma. The dentist is coming; and
he's bringing his old man.

MRS. CLANDON. Dolly, dear: don't you see Mr. McComas? (Mr. McComas
rises, smilingly.)

DOLLY (her face falling with the most disparagingly obvious
disappointment). This! Where are the flowing locks?

PHILIP (seconding her warmly). Where the beard?--the cloak?--the poetic
exterior?

DOLLY. Oh, Mr. McComas, you've gone and spoiled yourself. Why didn't you
wait till we'd seen you?

McCOMAS (taken aback, but rallying his humor to meet the emergency).
Because eighteen years is too long for a solicitor to go without having
his hair cut.

GLORIA (at the other side of McComas). How do you do, Mr. McComas? (He
turns; and she takes his hand and presses it, with a frank straight look
into his eyes.) We are glad to meet you at last.

McCOMAS. Miss Gloria, I presume? (Gloria smiles assent, and releases his
hand after a final pressure. She then retires behind the garden seat,
leaning over the back beside Mrs. Clandon.) And this young gentleman?

PHILIP. I was christened in a comparatively prosaic mood. My name is--

DOLLY (completing his sentence for him declamatorily). "Norval. On the
Grampian hills"--

PHILIP (declaiming gravely). "My father feeds his flock, a frugal
swain"--

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Dear, dear children: don't be silly.
Everything is so new to them here, Finch, that they are in the wildest
spirits. They think every Englishman they meet is a joke.

DOLLY. Well, so he is: it's not our fault.

PHILIP. My knowledge of human nature is fairly extensive, Mr. McComas;
but I find it impossible to take the inhabitants of this island
seriously.

McCOMAS. I presume, sir, you are Master Philip (offering his hand)?

PHILIP (taking McComas's hand and looking solemnly at him). I was Master
Philip--was so for many years; just as you were once Master Finch. (He
gives his hand a single shake and drops it; then turns away, exclaiming
meditatively) How strange it is to look back on our boyhood! (McComas
stares after him, not at all pleased.)

DOLLY (to Mrs. Clandon). Has Finch had a drink?

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Dearest: Mr. McComas will lunch with us.

DOLLY. Have you ordered for seven? Don't forget the old gentleman.

MRS. CLANDON. I have not forgotten him, dear. What is his name?

DOLLY. Chalkstones. He'll be here at half past one. (To McComas.) Are we
like what you expected?

MRS. CLANDON (changing her tone to a more earnest one). Dolly: Mr.
McComas has something more serious than that to tell you. Children: I
have asked my old friend to answer the question you asked this morning.
He is your father's friend as well as mine: and he will tell you the
story more fairly than I could. (Turning her head from them to Gloria.)
Gloria: are you satisfied?

GLORIA (gravely attentive). Mr. McComas is very kind.

McCOMAS (nervously). Not at all, my dear young lady: not at all. At the
same time, this is rather sudden. I was hardly prepared--er--

DOLLY (suspiciously). Oh, we don't want anything prepared.

PHILIP (exhorting him). Tell us the truth.

DOLLY (emphatically). Bald headed.

McCOMAS (nettled). I hope you intend to take what I have to say
seriously.

PHILIP (with profound mock gravity). I hope it will deserve it, Mr.
McComas. My knowledge of human nature teaches me not to expect too much.

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Phil--

PHILIP. Yes, mother, all right. I beg your pardon, Mr. McComas: don't
mind us.

DOLLY (in conciliation). We mean well.

PHILIP. Shut up, both.

(Dolly holds her lips. McComas takes a chair from the luncheon table;
places it between the little table and the garden seat with Dolly on his
right and Philip on his left; and settles himself in it with the air
of a man about to begin a long communication. The Clandons match him
expectantly.)

McCOMAS. Ahem! Your father--

DOLLY (interrupting). How old is he?

PHILIP. Sh!

MRS. CLANDON (softly). Dear Dolly: don't let us interrupt Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS (emphatically). Thank you, Mrs. Clandon. Thank you. (To Dolly.)
Your father is fifty-seven.

DOLLY (with a bound, startled and excited). Fifty-seven! Where does he
live?

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Dolly, Dolly!

McCOMAS (stopping her). Let me answer that, Mrs. Clandon. The answer
will surprise you considerably. He lives in this town. (Mrs.
Clandon rises. She and Gloria look at one another in the greatest
consternation.)

DOLLY (with conviction). I knew it! Phil: Chalkstones is our father.

McCOMAS. Chalkstones!

DOLLY. Oh, Crampstones, or whatever it is. He said I was like his
mother. I knew he must mean his daughter.

PHILIP (very seriously). Mr. McComas: I desire to consider your feelings
in every possible way: but I warn you that if you stretch the long arm
of coincidence to the length of telling me that Mr. Crampton of this
town is my father, I shall decline to entertain the information for a
moment.

McCOMAS. And pray why?

PHILIP. Because I have seen the gentleman; and he is entirely unfit
to be my father, or Dolly's father, or Gloria's father, or my mother's
husband.

McCOMAS. Oh, indeed! Well, sir, let me tell you that whether you like it
or not, he is your father, and your sister' father, and Mrs. Clandon's
husband. Now! What have you to say to that!

DOLLY (whimpering). You needn't be so cross. Crampton isn't your father.

PHILIP. Mr. McComas: your conduct is heartless. Here you find a family
enjoying the unspeakable peace and freedom of being orphans. We have
never seen the face of a relative--never known a claim except the claim
of freely chosen friendship. And now you wish to thrust into the most
intimate relationship with us a man whom we don't know--

DOLLY (vehemently). An awful old man! (reproachfully) And you began as
if you had quite a nice father for us.

McCOMAS (angrily). How do you know that he is not nice? And what right
have you to choose your own father? (raising his voice.) Let me tell
you, Miss Clandon, that you are too young to--

DOLLY (interrupting him suddenly and eagerly). Stop, I forgot! Has he
any money?

McCOMAS. He has a great deal of money.

DOLLY (delighted). Oh, what did I always say, Phil?

PHILIP. Dolly: we have perhaps been condemning the old man too hastily.
Proceed, Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS. I shall not proceed, sir. I am too hurt, too shocked, to
proceed.

MRS. CLANDON (urgently). Finch: do you realize what is happening? Do you
understand that my children have invited that man to lunch, and that he
will be here in a few moments?

McCOMAS (completely upset). What! do you mean--am I to understand--is
it--

PHILIP (impressively). Steady, Finch. Think it out slowly and carefully.
He's coming--coming to lunch.

GLORIA. Which of us is to tell him the truth? Have you thought of that?

MRS. CLANDON. Finch: you must tell him.

DOLLY Oh, Finch is no good at telling things. Look at the mess he has
made of telling us.

McCOMAS. I have not been allowed to speak. I protest against this.

DOLLY (taking his arm coaxingly). Dear Finch: don't be cross.

MRS. CLANDON. Gloria: let us go in. He may arrive at any moment.

GLORIA (proudly). Do not stir, mother. I shall not stir. We must not run
away.

MRS. CLANDON (delicately rebuking her). My dear: we cannot sit down to
lunch just as we are. We shall come back again. We must have no bravado.
(Gloria winces, and goes into the hotel without a word.) Come, Dolly.
(As she goes into the hotel door, the waiter comes out with plates,
etc., for two additional covers on a tray.)

WAITER. Gentlemen come yet, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON. Two more to come yet, thank you. They will be here,
immediately. (She goes into the hotel. The waiter takes his tray to the
service table.)

PHILIP. I have an idea. Mr. McComas: this communication should be made,
should it not, by a man of infinite tact?

McCOMAS. It will require tact, certainly.

PHILIP Good! Dolly: whose tact were you noticing only this morning?

DOLLY (seizing the idea with rapture). Oh, yes, I declare! William!

PHILIP. The very man! (Calling) William!

WAITER. Coming, sir.

McCOMAS (horrified). The waiter! Stop, stop! I will not permit this. I--

WAITER (presenting himself between Philip and McComas). Yes, sir.
(McComas's complexion fades into stone grey; and all movement and
expression desert his eyes. He sits down stupefied.)

PHILIP. William: you remember my request to you to regard me as your
son?

WAITER (with respectful indulgence). Yes, sir. Anything you please, sir.

PHILIP. William: at the very outset of your career as my father, a rival
has appeared on the scene.

WAITER. Your real father, sir? Well, that was to be expected, sooner or
later, sir, wasn't it? (Turning with a happy smile to McComas.) Is it
you, sir?

McCOMAS (renerved by indignation). Certainly not. My children know how
to behave themselves.

PHILIP. No, William: this gentleman was very nearly my father: he wooed
my mother, but wooed her in vain.

McCOMAS (outraged). Well, of all the--

PHILIP. Sh! Consequently, he is only our solicitor. Do you know one
Crampton, of this town?

WAITER. Cock-eyed Crampton, sir, of the Crooked Billet, is it?

PHILIP. I don't know. Finch: does he keep a public house?

McCOMAS (rising scandalized). No, no, no. Your father, sir, is a
well-known yacht builder, an eminent man here.

WAITER (impressed). Oh, beg pardon, sir, I'm sure. A son of Mr.
Crampton's! Dear me!

PHILIP. Mr. Crampton is coming to lunch with us.

WAITER (puzzled). Yes, sir. (Diplomatically.) Don't usually lunch with
his family, perhaps, sir?

PHILIP (impressively). William: he does not know that we are his family.
He has not seen us for eighteen years. He won't know us. (To emphasize
the communication he seats himself on the iron table with a spring, and
looks at the waiter with his lips compressed and his legs swinging.)

DOLLY. We want you to break the news to him, William.

WAITER. But I should think he'd guess when he sees your mother, miss.
(Philip's legs become motionless at this elucidation. He contemplates
the waiter raptly.)

DOLLY (dazzled). I never thought of that.

PHILIP. Nor I. (Coming off the table and turning reproachfully on
McComas.) Nor you.

DOLLY. And you a solicitor!

PHILIP. Finch: Your professional incompetence is appalling. William:
your sagacity puts us all to shame.

DOLLY You really are like Shakespear, William.

WAITER. Not at all, sir. Don't mention it, miss. Most happy, I'm
sure, sir. (Goes back modestly to the luncheon table and lays the two
additional covers, one at the end next the steps, and the other so as to
make a third on the side furthest from the balustrade.)

PHILIP (abruptly). Finch: come and wash your hands. (Seizes his arm and
leads him toward the hotel.)

McCOMAS. I am thoroughly vexed and hurt, Mr. Clandon--

PHILIP (interrupting him). You will get used to us. Come, Dolly.
(McComas shakes him off and marches into the hotel. Philip follows with
unruffled composure.)

DOLLY (turning for a moment on the steps as she follows them). Keep your
wits about you, William. There will be fire-works.

WAITER. Right, miss. You may depend on me, miss. (She goes into the
hotel.)

(Valentine comes lightly up the steps from the beach, followed doggedly
by Crampton. Valentine carries a walking stick. Crampton, either
because he is old and chilly, or with some idea of extenuating the
unfashionableness of his reefer jacket, wears a light overcoat. He stops
at the chair left by McComas in the middle of the terrace, and steadies
himself for a moment by placing his hand on the back of it.)

CRAMPTON. Those steps make me giddy. (He passes his hand over his
forehead.) I have not got over that infernal gas yet.

(He goes to the iron chair, so that he can lean his elbows on the little
table to prop his head as he sits. He soon recovers, and begins to
unbutton his overcoat. Meanwhile Valentine interviews the waiter.)

VALENTINE. Waiter!

WAITER (coming forward between them). Yes, sir.

VALENTINE. Mrs. Lanfrey Clandon.

WAITER (with a sweet smile of welcome). Yes, sir. We're expecting you,
sir. That is your table, sir. Mrs. Clandon will be down presently, sir.
The young lady and young gentleman were just talking about your friend,
sir.

VALENTINE. Indeed!

WAITER (smoothly melodious). Yes, sire. Great flow of spirits, sir. A
vein of pleasantry, as you might say, sir. (Quickly, to Crampton, who
has risen to get the overcoat off.) Beg pardon, sir, but if you'll allow
me (helping him to get the overcoat off and taking it from him). Thank
you, sir. (Crampton sits down again; and the waiter resumes the broken
melody.) The young gentleman's latest is that you're his father, sir.

CRAMPTON. What!

WAITER. Only his joke, sir, his favourite joke. Yesterday, I was to be
his father. To-day, as soon as he knew you were coming, sir, he tried to
put it up on me that you were his father, his long lost father--not seen
you for eighteen years, he said.

CRAMPTON (startled). Eighteen years!

WAITER. Yes, sir. (With gentle archness.) But I was up to his tricks,
sir. I saw the idea coming into his head as he stood there, thinking
what new joke he'd have with me. Yes, sir: that's the sort he is: very
pleasant, ve--ry off hand and affable indeed, sir. (Again changing his
tempo to say to Valentine, who is putting his stick down against the
corner of the garden seat) If you'll allow me, sir? (Taking Valentine's
stick.) Thank you, sir. (Valentine strolls up to the luncheon table and
looks at the menu. The waiter turns to Crampton and resumes his lay.)
Even the solicitor took up the joke, although he was in a manner of
speaking in my confidence about the young gentleman, sir. Yes, sir, I
assure you, sir. You would never imagine what respectable professional
gentlemen from London will do on an outing, when the sea air takes them,
sir.

CRAMPTON. Oh, there's a solicitor with them, is there?

WAITER. The family solicitor, sir--yes, sir. Name of McComas, sir. (He
goes towards hotel entrance with coat and stick, happily unconscious of
the bomblike effect the name has produced on Crampton.)

CRAMPTON (rising in angry alarm). McComas! (Calls to Valentine.)
Valentine! (Again, fiercely.) Valentine!! (Valentine turns.) This is a
plant, a conspiracy. This is my family--my children--my infernal wife.

VALENTINE (coolly). On, indeed! Interesting meeting! (He resumes his
study of the menu.)

CRAMPTON. Meeting! Not for me. Let me out of this. (Calling to the
waiter.) Give me that coat.

WAITER. Yes, sir. (He comes back, puts Valentine's stick carefully down
against the luncheon table; and delicately shakes the coat out and holds
it for Crampton to put on.) I seem to have done the young gentleman an
injustice, sir, haven't I, sir.

CRAMPTON. Rrrh! (He stops on the point of putting his arms into the
sleeves, and turns to Valentine with sudden suspicion.) Valentine: you
are in this. You made this plot. You--

VALENTINE (decisively). Bosh! (He throws the menu down and goes round
the table to look out unconcernedly over the parapet.)

CRAMPTON (angrily). What d'ye-- (McComas, followed by Philip and Dolly,
comes out. He vacillates for a moment on seeing Crampton.)

WAITER (softly--interrupting Crampton). Steady, sir. Here they come,
sir. (He takes up the stick and makes for the hotel, throwing the coat
across his arm. McComas turns the corners of his mouth resolutely down
and crosses to Crampton, who draws back and glares, with his hands
behind him. McComas, with his brow opener than ever, confronts him in
the majesty of a spotless conscience.)

WAITER (aside, as he passes Philip on his way out). I've broke it to
him, sir.

PHILIP. Invaluable William! (He passes on to the table.)

DOLLY (aside to the waiter). How did he take it?

WAITER (aside to her). Startled at first, miss; but resigned--very
resigned, indeed, miss. (He takes the stick and coat into the hotel.)

McCOMAS (having stared Crampton out of countenance). So here you are,
Mr. Crampton.

CRAMPTON. Yes, here--caught in a trap--a mean trap. Are those my
children?

PHILIP (with deadly politeness). Is this our father, Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS. Yes--er-- (He loses countenance himself and stops.)

DOLLY (conventionally). Pleased to meet you again. (She wanders
idly round the table, exchanging a smile and a word of greeting with
Valentine on the way.)

PHILIP. Allow me to discharge my first duty as host by ordering your
wine. (He takes the wine list from the table. His polite attention, and
Dolly's unconcerned indifference, leave Crampton on the footing of
the casual acquaintance picked up that morning at the dentist's. The
consciousness of it goes through the father with so keen a pang that
he trembles all over; his brow becomes wet; and he stares dumbly at
his son, who, just conscious enough of his own callousness to intensely
enjoy the humor and adroitness of it, proceeds pleasantly.) Finch: some
crusted old port for you, as a respectable family solicitor, eh?

McCOMAS (firmly). Apollinaris only. I prefer to take nothing heating.
(He walks away to the side of the terrace, like a man putting temptation
behind him.)

PHILIP. Valentine--?

VALENTINE. Would Lager be considered vulgar?

PHILIP. Probably. We'll order some. Dolly takes it. (Turning to Crampton
with cheerful politeness.) And now, Mr. Crampton, what can we do for
you?

CRAMPTON. What d'ye mean, boy?

PHILIP. Boy! (Very solemnly.) Whose fault is it that I am a boy?

(Crampton snatches the wine list rudely from him and irresolutely
pretends to read it. Philip abandons it to him with perfect politeness.)

DOLLY (looking over Crampton's right shoulder). The whisky's on the last
page but one.

CRAMPTON. Let me alone, child.

DOLLY. Child! No, no: you may call me Dolly if you like; but you mustn't
call me child. (She slips her arm through Philip's; and the two stand
looking at Crampton as if he were some eccentric stranger.)

CRAMPTON (mopping his brow in rage and agony, and yet relieved even by
their playing with him). McComas: we are--ha!--going to have a pleasant
meal.

McCOMAS (pusillanimously). There is no reason why it should not be
pleasant. (He looks abjectly gloomy.)

PHILIP. Finch's face is a feast in itself. (Mrs. Clandon and Gloria come
from the hotel. Mrs. Clandon advances with courageous self-possession
and marked dignity of manner. She stops at the foot of the steps to
address Valentine, who is in her path. Gloria also stops, looking at
Crampton with a certain repulsion.)

MRS. CLANDON. Glad to see you again, Mr. Valentine. (He smiles. She
passes on and confronts Crampton, intending to address him with perfect
composure; but his aspect shakes her. She stops suddenly and says
anxiously, with a touch of remorse.) Fergus: you are greatly changed.

CRAMPTON (grimly). I daresay. A man does change in eighteen years.

MRS. CLANDON (troubled). I--I did not mean that. I hope your health is
good.

CRAMPTON. Thank you. No: it's not my health. It's my happiness: that's
the change you meant, I think. (Breaking out suddenly.) Look at her,
McComas! Look at her; and look at me! (He utters a half laugh, half
sob.)

PHILIP. Sh! (Pointing to the hotel entrance, where the waiter has just
appeared.) Order before William!

DOLLY (touching Crampton's arm warningly with her finger). Ahem! (The
waiter goes to the service table and beckons to the kitchen entrance,
whence issue a young waiter with soup plates, and a cook, in white apron
and cap, with the soup tureen. The young waiter remains and serves: the
cook goes out, and reappears from time to time bringing in the courses.
He carves, but does not serve. The waiter comes to the end of the
luncheon table next the steps.)

MRS. CLANDON (as they all assemble about the table). I think you have
all met one another already to-day. Oh, no, excuse me. (Introducing) Mr.
Valentine: Mr. McComas. (She goes to the end of the table nearest the
hotel.) Fergus: will you take the head of the table, please.

CRAMPTON. Ha! (Bitterly.) The head of the table!

WAITER (holding the chair for him with inoffensive encouragement). This
end, sir. (Crampton submits, and takes his seat.) Thank you, sir.

MRS. CLANDON. Mr. Valentine: will you take that side (indicating the
side nearest the parapet) with Gloria? (Valentine and Gloria take their
places, Gloria next Crampton and Valentine next Mrs. Clandon.) Finch:
I must put you on this side, between Dolly and Phil. You must protect
yourself as best you can. (The three take the remaining side of the
table, Dolly next her mother, Phil next his father, and McComas between
them. Soup is served.)

WAITER (to Crampton). Thick or clear, sir?

CRAMPTON (to Mrs. Clandon). Does nobody ask a blessing in this
household?

PHILIP (interposing smartly). Let us first settle what we are about to
receive. William!

WAITER. Yes, sir. (He glides swiftly round the table to Phil's left
elbow. On his way he whispers to the young waiter) Thick.

PHILIP. Two small Lagers for the children as usual, William; and one
large for this gentleman (indicating Valentine). Large Apollinaris for
Mr. McComas.

WAITER. Yes, sir.

DOLLY. Have a six of Irish in it, Finch?

McCOMAS (scandalized). No--no, thank you.

PHILIP. Number 413 for my mother and Miss Gloria as before; and--
(turning enquiringly to Crampton) Eh?

CRAMPTON (scowling and about to reply offensively). I--

WAITER (striking in mellifluously). All right, sir. We know what Mr.
Crampton likes here, sir. (He goes into the hotel.)

PHILIP (looking gravely at his father). You frequent bars. Bad habit!
(The cook, accompanied by a waiter with a supply of hot plates, brings
in the fish from the kitchen to the service table, and begins slicing
it.)

CRAMPTON. You have learnt your lesson from your mother, I see.

MRS. CLANDON. Phil: will you please remember that your jokes are apt to
irritate people who are not accustomed to us, and that your father is
our guest to-day.

CRAMPTON (bitterly). Yes, a guest at the head of my own table. (The soup
plates are removed.)

DOLLY (sympathetically). Yes: it's embarrassing, isn't it? It's just as
bad for us, you know.

PHILIP. Sh! Dolly: we are both wanting in tact. (To Crampton.) We mean
well, Mr. Crampton; but we are not yet strong in the filial line.
(The waiter returns from the hotel with the drinks.) William: come and
restore good feeling.

WAITER (cheerfully). Yes, sir. Certainly, sir. Small Lager for you, sir.
(To Crampton.) Seltzer and Irish, sir. (To McComas.) Apollinaris, sir.
(To Dolly.) Small Lager, miss. (To Mrs. Clandon, pouring out wine.) 413,
madam. (To Valentine.) Large Lager for you, sir. (To Gloria.) 413, miss.

DOLLY (drinking). To the family!

PHILIP. (drinking). Hearth and Home! (Fish is served.)

McCOMAS (with an obviously forced attempt at cheerful domesticity). We
are getting on very nicely after all.

DOLLY (critically). After all! After all what, Finch?

CRAMPTON (sarcastically). He means that you are getting on very nicely
in spite of the presence of your father. Do I take your point rightly,
Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS (disconcerted). No, no. I only said "after all" to round off the
sentence. I--er--er--er---

WAITER (tactfully). Turbot, sir?

McCOMAS (intensely grateful for the interruption). Thank you, waiter:
thank you.

WAITER (sotto voce). Don't mention it, sir. (He returns to the service
table.)

CRAMPTON (to Phil). Have you thought of choosing a profession yet?

PHILIP. I am keeping my mind open on that subject. William!

WAITER. Yes, sir.

PHILIP. How long do you think it would take me to learn to be a really
smart waiter?

WAITER. Can't be learnt, sir. It's in the character, sir.
(Confidentially to Valentine, who is looking about for something.) Bread
for the lady, sir? yes, sir. (He serves bread to Gloria, and resumes at
his former pitch.) Very few are born to it, sir.

PHILIP. You don't happen to have such a thing as a son, yourself, have
you?

WAITER. Yes, sir: oh, yes, sir. (To Gloria, again dropping his voice.)
A little more fish, miss? you won't care for the joint in the middle of
the day.

GLORIA. No, thank you. (The fish plates are removed.)

DOLLY. Is your son a waiter, too, William?

WAITER (serving Gloria with fowl). Oh, no, miss, he's too impetuous.
He's at the Bar.

McCOMAS (patronizingly). A potman, eh?

WAITER (with a touch of melancholy, as if recalling a disappointment
softened by time). No, sir: the other bar--your profession, sir. A Q.C.,
sir.

McCOMAS (embarrassed). I'm sure I beg your pardon.

WAITER. Not at all, sir. Very natural mistake, I'm sure, sir. I've often
wished he was a potman, sir. Would have been off my hands ever so much
sooner, sir. (Aside to Valentine, who is again in difficulties.) Salt at
your elbow, sir. (Resuming.) Yes, sir: had to support him until he was
thirty-seven, sir. But doing well now, sir: very satisfactory indeed,
sir. Nothing less than fifty guineas, sir.

McCOMAS. Democracy, Crampton!--modern democracy!

WAITER (calmly). No, sir, not democracy: only education, sir.
Scholarships, sir. Cambridge Local, sir. Sidney Sussex College, sir.
(Dolly plucks his sleeve and whispers as he bends down.) Stone ginger,
miss? Right, miss. (To McComas.) Very good thing for him, sir: he never
had any turn for real work, sir. (He goes into the hotel, leaving the
company somewhat overwhelmed by his son's eminence.)

VALENTINE. Which of us dare give that man an order again!

DOLLY. I hope he won't mind my sending him for ginger-beer.

CRAMPTON (doggedly). While he's a waiter it's his business to wait. If
you had treated him as a waiter ought to be treated, he'd have held his
tongue.

DOLLY. What a loss that would have been! Perhaps he'll give us an
introduction to his son and get us into London society. (The waiter
reappears with the ginger-beer.)

CRAMPTON (growling contemptuously). London society! London society!!
You're not fit for any society, child.

DOLLY (losing her temper). Now look here, Mr. Crampton. If you think--

WAITER (softly, at her elbow). Stone ginger, miss.

DOLLY (taken aback, recovers her good humor after a long breath and says
sweetly). Thank you, dear William. You were just in time. (She drinks.)

McCOMAS (making a fresh effort to lead the conversation into
dispassionate regions). If I may be allowed to change the subject, Miss
Clandon, what is the established religion in Madeira?

GLORIA. I suppose the Portuguese religion. I never inquired.

DOLLY. The servants come in Lent and kneel down before you and confess
all the things they've done: and you have to pretend to forgive them. Do
they do that in England, William?

WAITER. Not usually, miss. They may in some parts: but it has not come
under my notice, miss. (Catching Mrs. Clandon's eye as the young waiter
offers her the salad bowl.) You like it without dressing, ma'am: yes,
ma'am, I have some for you. (To his young colleague, motioning him to
serve Gloria.) This side, Jo. (He takes a special portion of salad from
the service table and puts it beside Mrs. Clandon's plate. In doing so
he observes that Dolly is making a wry face.) Only a bit of watercress,
miss, got in by mistake. (He takes her salad away.) Thank you, miss.
(To the young waiter, admonishing him to serve Dolly afresh.) Jo.
(Resuming.) Mostly members of the Church of England, miss.

DOLLY. Members of the Church of England! What's the subscription?

CRAMPTON (rising violently amid general consternation). You see how my
children have been brought up, McComas. You see it; you hear it. I call
all of you to witness-- (He becomes inarticulate, and is about to strike
his fist recklessly on the table when the waiter considerately takes
away his plate.)

MRS. CLANDON (firmly). Sit down, Fergus. There is no occasion at all
for this outburst. You must remember that Dolly is just like a foreigner
here. Pray sit down.

CRAMPTON (subsiding unwillingly). I doubt whether I ought to sit here
and countenance all this. I doubt it.

WAITER. Cheese, sir; or would you like a cold sweet?

CRAMPTON (take aback). What? Oh!--cheese, cheese.

DOLLY. Bring a box of cigarettes, William.

WAITER. All ready, miss. (He takes a box of cigarettes from the service
table and places them before Dolly, who selects one and prepares to
smoke. He then returns to his table for a box of vestas.)

CRAMPTON (staring aghast at Dolly). Does she smoke?

DOLLY (out of patience). Really, Mr. Crampton, I'm afraid I'm spoiling
your lunch. I'll go and have my cigarette on the beach. (She leaves
the table with petulant suddenness and goes down the steps. The waiter
attempts to give her the matches; but she is gone before he can reach
her.)

CRAMPTON (furiously). Margaret: call that girl back. Call her back, I
say.

McCOMAS (trying to make peace). Come, Crampton: never mind. She's her
father's daughter: that's all.

MRS. CLANDON (with deep resentment). I hope not, Finch. (She rises: they
all rise a little.) Mr. Valentine: will you excuse me: I am afraid Dolly
is hurt and put out by what has passed. I must go to her.

CRAMPTON. To take her part against me, you mean.

MRS. CLANDON (ignoring him). Gloria: will you take my place whilst I am
away, dear. (She crosses to the steps. Crampton's eyes follow her with
bitter hatred. The rest watch her in embarrassed silence, feeling the
incident to be a very painful one.)

WAITER (intercepting her at the top of the steps and offering her a box
of vestas). Young lady forgot the matches, ma'am. If you would be so
good, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON (surprised into grateful politeness by the witchery of his
sweet and cheerful tones). Thank you very much. (She takes the matches
and goes down to the beach. The waiter shepherds his assistant along
with him into the hotel by the kitchen entrance, leaving the luncheon
party to themselves.)

CRAMPTON (throwing himself back in his chair). There's a mother for you,
McComas! There's a mother for you!

GLORIA (steadfastly). Yes: a good mother.

CRAMPTON. And a bad father? That's what you mean, eh?

VALENTINE (rising indignantly and addressing Gloria). Miss Clandon: I--

CRAMPTON (turning on him). That girl's name is Crampton, Mr. Valentine,
not Clandon. Do you wish to join them in insulting me?

VALENTINE (ignoring him). I'm overwhelmed, Miss Clandon. It's all my
fault: I brought him here: I'm responsible for him. And I'm ashamed of
him.

CRAMPTON. What d'y' mean?

GLORIA (rising coldly). No harm has been done, Mr. Valentine. We have
all been a little childish, I am afraid. Our party has been a failure:
let us break it up and have done with it. (She puts her chair aside
and turns to the steps, adding, with slighting composure, as she passes
Crampton.) Good-bye, father.

(She descends the steps with cold, disgusted indifference. They all look
after her, and so do not notice the return of the waiter from the hotel,
laden with Crampton's coat, Valentine's stick, a couple of shawls and
parasols, a white canvas umbrella, and some camp stools.)

CRAMPTON (to himself, staring after Gloria with a ghastly expression).
Father! Father!! (He strikes his fist violently on the table.) Now--

WAITER (offering the coat). This is yours, sir, I think, sir. (Crampton
glares at him; then snatches it rudely and comes down the terrace
towards the garden seat, struggling with the coat in his angry efforts
to put it on. McComas rises and goes to his assistance; then takes
his hat and umbrella from the little iron table, and turns towards the
steps. Meanwhile the waiter, after thanking Crampton with unruffled
sweetness for taking the coat, offers some of his burden to Phil.) The
ladies' sunshades, sir. Nasty glare off the sea to-day, sir: very trying
to the complexion, sir. I shall carry down the camp stools myself, sir.

PHILIP. You are old, Father William; but you are the most considerate of
men. No: keep the sunshades and give me the camp stools (taking them).

WAITER (with flattering gratitude). Thank you, sir.

PHILIP. Finch: share with me (giving him a couple). Come along. (They go
down the steps together.)

VALENTINE (to the waiter). Leave me something to bring down--one of
these. (Offering to take a sunshade.)

WAITER (discreetly). That's the younger lady's, sir. (Valentine lets
it go.) Thank you, sir. If you'll allow me, sir, I think you had better
have this. (He puts down the sunshades on Crampton's chair, and
produces from the tail pocket of his dress coat, a book with a lady's
handkerchief between the leaves, marking the page.) The eldest young
lady is reading it at present. (Valentine takes it eagerly.) Thank you,
sir. Schopenhauer, sir, you see. (He takes up the sunshades again.) Very
interesting author, sir: especially on the subject of ladies, sir. (He
goes down the steps. Valentine, about to follow him, recollects Crampton
and changes his mind.)

VALENTINE (coming rather excitedly to Crampton). Now look here,
Crampton: are you at all ashamed of yourself?

CRAMPTON (pugnaciously). Ashamed of myself! What for?

VALENTINE. For behaving like a bear. What will your daughter think of me
for having brought you here?

CRAMPTON. I was not thinking of what my daughter was thinking of you.

VALENTINE. No, you were thinking of yourself. You're a perfect maniac.

CRAMPTON (heartrent). She told you what I am--a father--a father robbed
of his children. What are the hearts of this generation like? Am I to
come here after all these years--to see what my children are for
the first time! to hear their voices!--and carry it all off like a
fashionable visitor; drop in to lunch; be Mr. Crampton--M i s t e
r Crampton! What right have they to talk to me like that? I'm their
father: do they deny that? I'm a man, with the feelings of our common
humanity: have I no rights, no claims? In all these years who have I
had round me? Servants, clerks, business acquaintances. I've had respect
from them--aye, kindness. Would one of them have spoken to me as that
girl spoke?--would one of them have laughed at me as that boy was
laughing at me all the time? (Frantically.) My own children! M i s t e r
Crampton! My--

VALENTINE. Come, come: they're only children. The only one of them
that's worth anything called you father.

CRAMPTON (wildly). Yes: "good-bye, father." Oh, yes: she got at my
feelings--with a stab!

VALENTINE (taking this in very bad part). Now look here, Crampton: you
just let her alone: she's treated you very well. I had a much worse time
of it at lunch than you.

CRAMPTON. You!

VALENTINE (with growing impetuosity). Yes: I. I sat next to her; and
I never said a single thing to her the whole time--couldn't think of a
blessed word. And not a word did she say to me.

CRAMPTON. Well?

VALENTINE. Well? Well??? (Tackling him very seriously and talking
faster and faster.) Crampton: do you know what's been the matter with me
to-day? You don't suppose, do you, that I'm in the habit of playing such
tricks on my patients as I played on you?

CRAMPTON. I hope not.

VALENTINE. The explanation is that I'm stark mad, or rather that I've
never been in my real senses before. I'm capable of anything: I've grown
up at last: I'm a Man; and it's your daughter that's made a man of me.

CRAMPTON (incredulously). Are you in love with my daughter?

VALENTINE (his words now coming in a perfect torrent). Love! Nonsense:
it's something far above and beyond that. It's life, it's faith, it's
strength, certainty, paradise--

CRAMPTON (interrupting him with acrid contempt). Rubbish, man! What have
you to keep a wife on? You can't marry her.

VALENTINE. Who wants to marry her? I'll kiss her hands; I'll kneel at
her feet; I'll live for her; I'll die for her; and that'll be enough for
me. Look at her book! See! (He kisses the handkerchief.) If you offered
me all your money for this excuse for going down to the beach and
speaking to her again, I'd only laugh at you. (He rushes buoyantly off
to the steps, where he bounces right into the arms of the waiter, who
is coming up form the beach. The two save themselves from falling by
clutching one another tightly round the waist and whirling one another
around.)

WAITER (delicately). Steady, sir, steady.

VALENTINE (shocked at his own violence). I beg your pardon.

WAITER. Not at all, sir, not at all. Very natural, sir, I'm sure, sir,
at your age. The lady has sent me for her book, sir. Might I take the
liberty of asking you to let her have it at once, sir?

VALENTINE. With pleasure. And if you will allow me to present you with a
professional man's earnings for six weeks-- (offering him Dolly's crown
piece.)

WAITER (as if the sum were beyond his utmost expectations). Thank you,
sir: much obliged. (Valentine dashes down the steps.) Very high-spirited
young gentleman, sir: very manly and straight set up.

CRAMPTON (in grumbling disparagement). And making his fortune in a
hurry, no doubt. I know what his six weeks' earnings come to. (He
crosses the terrace to the iron table, and sits down.)

WAITER (philosophically). Well, sir, you never can tell. That's a
principle in life with me, sir, if you'll excuse my having such a thing,
sir. (Delicately sinking the philosopher in the waiter for a moment.)
Perhaps you haven't noticed that you hadn't touched that seltzer and
Irish, sir, when the party broke up. (He takes the tumbler from the
luncheon table, and sets if before Crampton.) Yes, sir, you never can
tell. There was my son, sir! who ever thought that he would rise to wear
a silk gown, sir? And yet to-day, sir, nothing less than fifty guineas,
sir. What a lesson, sir!

CRAMPTON. Well, I hope he is grateful to you, and recognizes what he
owes you.

WAITER. We get on together very well, very well indeed, sir, considering
the difference in our stations. (With another of his irresistible
transitions.) A small lump of sugar, sir, will take the flatness out of
the seltzer without noticeably sweetening the drink, sir. Allow me,
sir. (He drops a lump of sugar into the tumbler.) But as I say to him,
where's the difference after all? If I must put on a dress coat to show
what I am, sir, he must put on a wig and gown to show what he is. If
my income is mostly tips, and there's a pretence that I don't get them,
why, his income is mostly fees, sir; and I understand there's a pretence
that he don't get them! If he likes society, and his profession brings
him into contact with all ranks, so does mine, too, sir. If it's a
little against a barrister to have a waiter for his father, sir, it's
a little against a waiter to have a barrister for a son: many people
consider it a great liberty, sir, I assure you, sir. Can I get you
anything else, sir?

CRAMPTON. No, thank you. (With bitter humility.) I suppose that's no
objection to my sitting here for a while: I can't disturb the party on
the beach here.

WAITER (with emotion). Very kind of you, sir, to put it as if it was not
a compliment and an honour to us, Mr. Crampton, very kind indeed. The
more you are at home here, sir, the better for us.

CRAMPTON (in poignant irony). Home!

WAITER (reflectively). Well, yes, sir: that's a way of looking at it,
too, sir. I have always said that the great advantage of a hotel is that
it's a refuge from home life, sir.

CRAMPTON. I missed that advantage to-day, I think.

WAITER. You did, sir, you did. Dear me! It's the unexpected that always
happens, isn't it? (Shaking his head.) You never can tell, sir: you
never can tell. (He goes into the hotel.)

CRAMPTON (his eyes shining hardly as he props his drawn, miserable face
on his hands). Home! Home!! (He drops his arms on the table and bows his
head on them, but presently hears someone approaching and hastily sits
bolt upright. It is Gloria, who has come up the steps alone, with her
sunshade and her book in her hands. He looks defiantly at her, with
the brutal obstinacy of his mouth and the wistfulness of his eyes
contradicting each other pathetically. She comes to the corner of the
garden seat and stands with her back to it, leaning against the end of
it, and looking down at him as if wondering at his weakness: too curious
about him to be cold, but supremely indifferent to their kinship.) Well?

GLORIA. I want to speak with you for a moment.

CRAMPTON (looking steadily at her). Indeed? That's surprising. You meet
your father after eighteen years; and you actually want to speak to
him for a moment! That's touching: isn't it? (He rests his head on his
hands, and looks down and away from her, in gloomy reflection.)

GLORIA. All that is what seems to me so nonsensical, so uncalled for.
What do you expect us to feel for you--to do for you? What is it you
want? Why are you less civil to us than other people are? You are
evidently not very fond of us--why should you be? But surely we can meet
without quarrelling.

CRAMPTON (a dreadful grey shade passing over his face). Do you realize
that I am your father?

GLORIA. Perfectly.

CRAMPTON. Do you know what is due to me as your father?

GLORIA. For instance---?

CRAMPTON (rising as if to combat a monster). For instance! For
instance!! For instance, duty, affection, respect, obedience--

GLORIA (quitting her careless leaning attitude and confronting him
promptly and proudly). I obey nothing but my sense of what is right.
I respect nothing that is not noble. That is my duty. (She adds, less
firmly) As to affection, it is not within my control. I am not sure
that I quite know what affection means. (She turns away with an evident
distaste for that part of the subject, and goes to the luncheon table
for a comfortable chair, putting down her book and sunshade.)

CRAMPTON (following her with his eyes). Do you really mean what you are
saying?

GLORIA (turning on him quickly and severely). Excuse me: that is an
uncivil question. I am speaking seriously to you; and I expect you to
take me seriously. (She takes one of the luncheon chairs; turns it away
from the table; and sits down a little wearily, saying) Can you not
discuss this matter coolly and rationally?

CRAMPTON. Coolly and rationally! No, I can't. Do you understand that? I
can't.

GLORIA (emphatically). No. That I c a n n o t understand. I have no
sympathy with--

CRAMPTON (shrinking nervously). Stop! Don't say anything more yet; you
don't know what you're doing. Do you want to drive me mad? (She frowns,
finding such petulance intolerable. He adds hastily) No: I'm not angry:
indeed I'm not. Wait, wait: give me a little time to think. (He
stands for a moment, screwing and clinching his brows and hands in his
perplexity; then takes the end chair from the luncheon table and
sits down beside her, saying, with a touching effort to be gentle and
patient) Now, I think I have it. At least I'll try.

GLORIA (firmly). You see! Everything comes right if we only think it
resolutely out.

CRAMPTON (in sudden dread). No: don't think. I want you to feel: that's
the only thing that can help us. Listen! Do you--but first--I forgot.
What's your name? I mean you pet name. They can't very well call you
Sophronia.

GLORIA (with astonished disgust). Sophronia! My name is Gloria. I am
always called by it.

CRAMPTON (his temper rising again). Your name is Sophronia, girl: you
were called after your aunt Sophronia, my sister: she gave you your
first Bible with your name written in it.

GLORIA. Then my mother gave me a new name.

CRAMPTON (angrily). She had no right to do it. I will not allow this.

GLORIA. You had no right to give me your sister's name. I don't know
her.

CRAMPTON. You're talking nonsense. There are bounds to what I will put
up with. I will not have it. Do you hear that?

GLORIA (rising warningly). Are you resolved to quarrel?

CRAMPTON (terrified, pleading). No, no: sit down. Sit down, won't you?
(She looks at him, keeping him in suspense. He forces himself to utter
the obnoxious name.) Gloria. (She marks her satisfaction with a slight
tightening of the lips, and sits down.) There! You see I only want to
shew you that I am your father, my--my dear child. (The endearment is
so plaintively inept that she smiles in spite of herself, and resigns
herself to indulge him a little.) Listen now. What I want to ask you is
this. Don't you remember me at all? You were only a tiny child when you
were taken away from me; but you took plenty of notice of things. Can't
you remember someone whom you loved, or (shyly) at least liked in a
childish way? Come! someone who let you stay in his study and look at
his toy boats, as you thought them? (He looks anxiously into her face
for some response, and continues less hopefully and more urgently)
Someone who let you do as you liked there and never said a word to you
except to tell you that you must sit still and not speak? Someone who
was something that no one else was to you--who was your father.

GLORIA (unmoved). If you describe things to me, no doubt I shall
presently imagine that I remember them. But I really remember nothing.

CRAMPTON (wistfully). Has your mother never told you anything about me?

GLORIA. She has never mentioned your name to me. (He groans
involuntarily. She looks at him rather contemptuously and continues)
Except once; and then she did remind me of something I had forgotten.

CRAMPTON (looking up hopefully). What was that?

GLORIA (mercilessly). The whip you bought to beat me with.

CRAMPTON (gnashing his teeth). Oh! To bring that up against me! To turn
from me! When you need never have known. (Under a grinding, agonized
breath.) Curse her!

GLORIA (springing up). You wretch! (With intense emphasis.) You wretch!!
You dare curse my mother!

CRAMPTON. Stop; or you'll be sorry afterwards. I'm your father.

GLORIA. How I hate the name! How I love the name of mother! You had
better go.

CRAMPTON. I--I'm choking. You want to kill me. Some--I-- (His voice
stifles: he is almost in a fit.)

GLORIA (going up to the balustrade with cool, quick resourcefulness, and
calling over to the beach). Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE (answering from below). Yes.

GLORIA. Come here a moment, please. Mr. Crampton wants you. (She returns
to the table and pours out a glass of water.)

CRAMPTON (recovering his speech). No: let me alone. I don't want him.
I'm all right, I tell you. I need neither his help nor yours. (He rises
and pulls himself together.) As you say, I had better go. (He puts on
his hat.) Is that your last word?

GLORIA. I hope so. (He looks stubbornly at her for a moment; nods
grimly, as if he agreed to that; and goes into the hotel. She looks at
him with equal steadiness until he disappears, when she makes a gesture
of relief, and turns to speak to Valentine, who comes running up the
steps.)

VALENTINE (panting). What's the matter? (Looking round.) Where's
Crampton?

GLORIA. Gone. (Valentine's face lights up with sudden joy, dread,
and mischief. He has just realized that he is alone with Gloria. She
continues indifferently) I thought he was ill; but he recovered himself.
He wouldn't wait for you. I am sorry. (She goes for her book and
parasol.)

VALENTINE. So much the better. He gets on my nerves after a while.
(Pretending to forget himself.) How could that man have so beautiful a
daughter!

GLORIA (taken aback for a moment; then answering him with polite but
intentional contempt). That seems to be an attempt at what is called a
pretty speech. Let me say at once, Mr. Valentine, that pretty speeches
make very sickly conversation. Pray let us be friends, if we are to be
friends, in a sensible and wholesome way. I have no intention of getting
married; and unless you are content to accept that state of things, we
had much better not cultivate each other's acquaintance.

VALENTINE (cautiously). I see. May I ask just this one question? Is
your objection an objection to marriage as an institution, or merely an
objection to marrying me personally?

GLORIA. I do not know you well enough, Mr. Valentine, to have any
opinion on the subject of your personal merits. (She turns away from him
with infinite indifference, and sits down with her book on the garden
seat.) I do not think the conditions of marriage at present are such as
any self-respecting woman can accept.

VALENTINE (instantly changing his tone for one of cordial sincerity, as
if he frankly accepted her terms and was delighted and reassured by her
principles). Oh, then that's a point of sympathy between us already. I
quite agree with you: the conditions are most unfair. (He takes off his
hat and throws it gaily on the iron table.) No: what I want is to get
rid of all that nonsense. (He sits down beside her, so naturally that
she does not think of objecting, and proceeds, with enthusiasm) Don't
you think it a horrible thing that a man and a woman can hardly know one
another without being supposed to have designs of that kind? As if there
were no other interests--no other subjects of conversation--as if women
were capable of nothing better!

GLORIA (interested). Ah, now you are beginning to talk humanly and
sensibly, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE (with a gleam in his eye at the success of his hunter's
guile). Of course!--two intelligent people like us. Isn't it pleasant,
in this stupid, convention-ridden world, to meet with someone on the
same plane--someone with an unprejudiced, enlightened mind?

GLORIA (earnestly). I hope to meet many such people in England.

VALENTINE (dubiously). Hm! There are a good many people here-- nearly
forty millions. They're not all consumptive members of the highly
educated classes like the people in Madeira.

GLORIA (now full of her subject). Oh, everybody is stupid and prejudiced
in Madeira--weak, sentimental creatures! I hate weakness; and I hate
sentiment.

VALENTINE. That's what makes you so inspiring.

GLORIA (with a slight laugh). Am I inspiring?

VALENTINE Yes. Strength's infectious.

GLORIA. Weakness is, I know.

VALENTINE (with conviction). Y o u're strong. Do you know that you
changed the world for me this morning? I was in the dumps, thinking of
my unpaid rent, frightened about the future. When you came in, I was
dazzled. (Her brow clouds a little. He goes on quickly.) That was silly,
of course; but really and truly something happened to me. Explain it
how you will, my blood got-- (he hesitates, trying to think of a
sufficiently unimpassioned word) --oxygenated: my muscles braced; my
mind cleared; my courage rose. That's odd, isn't it? considering that I
am not at all a sentimental man.

GLORIA (uneasily, rising). Let us go back to the beach.

VALENTINE (darkly--looking up at her). What! you feel it, too?

GLORIA. Feel what?

VALENTINE. Dread.

GLORIA. Dread!

VALENTINE. As if something were going to happen. It came over me
suddenly just before you proposed that we should run away to the others.

GLORIA (amazed). That's strange--very strange! I had the same
presentiment.

VALENTINE. How extraordinary! (Rising.) Well: shall we run away?

GLORIA. Run away! Oh, no: that would be childish. (She sits down
again. He resumes his seat beside her, and watches her with a gravely
sympathetic air. She is thoughtful and a little troubled as she adds) I
wonder what is the scientific explanation of those fancies that cross us
occasionally!

VALENTINE. Ah, I wonder! It's a curiously helpless sensation: isn't it?

GLORIA (rebelling against the word). Helpless?

VALENTINE. Yes. As if Nature, after allowing us to belong to ourselves
and do what we judged right and reasonable for all these years, were
suddenly lifting her great hand to take us--her two little children--by
the scruff's of our little necks, and use us, in spite of ourselves, for
her own purposes, in her own way.

GLORIA. Isn't that rather fanciful?

VALENTINE (with a new and startling transition to a tone of utter
recklessness). I don't know. I don't care. (Bursting out reproachfully.)
Oh, Miss Clandon, Miss Clandon: how could you?

GLORIA. What have I done?

VALENTINE. Thrown this enchantment on me. I'm honestly trying to be
sensible--scientific--everything that you wish me to be. But--but-- oh,
don't you see what you have set to work in my imagination?

GLORIA (with indignant, scornful sternness). I hope you are not going to
be so foolish--so vulgar--as to say love.

VALENTINE (with ironical haste to disclaim such a weakness). No, no, no.
Not love: we know better than that. Let's call it chemistry. You can't
deny that there is such a thing as chemical action, chemical affinity,
chemical combination--the most irresistible of all natural forces. Well,
you're attracting me irresistibly--chemically.

GLORIA (contemptuously). Nonsense!

VALENTINE. Of course it's nonsense, you stupid girl. (Gloria recoils
in outraged surprise.) Yes, stupid girl: t h a t's a scientific fact,
anyhow. You're a prig--a feminine prig: that's what you are. (Rising.)
Now I suppose you've done with me for ever. (He goes to the iron table
and takes up his hat.)

GLORIA (with elaborate calm, sitting up like a High-school-mistress
posing to be photographed). That shows how very little you understand my
real character. I am not in the least offended. (He pauses and puts his
hat down again.) I am always willing to be told of my own defects, Mr.
Valentine, by my friends, even when they are as absurdly mistaken about
me as you are. I have many faults--very serious faults--of character and
temper; but if there is one thing that I am not, it is what you call a
prig. (She closes her lips trimly and looks steadily and challengingly
at him as she sits more collectedly than ever.)

VALENTINE (returning to the end of the garden seat to confront her more
emphatically). Oh, yes, you are. My reason tells me so: my knowledge
tells me so: my experience tells me so.

GLORIA. Excuse my reminding you that your reason and your knowledge and
your experience are not infallible. At least I hope not.

VALENTINE. I must believe them. Unless you wish me to believe my eyes,
my heart, my instincts, my imagination, which are all telling me the
most monstrous lies about you.

GLORIA (the collectedness beginning to relax). Lies!

VALENTINE (obstinately). Yes, lies. (He sits down again beside her.) Do
you expect me to believe that you are the most beautiful woman in the
world?

GLORIA. That is ridiculous, and rather personal.

VALENTINE. Of course it's ridiculous. Well, that's what my eyes tell
me. (Gloria makes a movement of contemptuous protest.) No: I'm not
flattering. I tell you I don't believe it. (She is ashamed to find that
this does not quite please her either.) Do you think that if you were
to turn away in disgust from my weakness, I should sit down here and cry
like a child?

GLORIA (beginning to find that she must speak shortly and pointedly to
keep her voice steady). Why should you, pray?

VALENTINE (with a stir of feeling beginning to agitate his voice).
Of course not: I'm not such an idiot. And yet my heart tells me I
should--my fool of a heart. But I'll argue with my heart and bring it to
reason. If I loved you a thousand times, I'll force myself to look the
truth steadily in the face. After all, it's easy to be sensible: the
facts are the facts. What's this place? it's not heaven: it's the Marine
Hotel. What's the time? it's not eternity: it's about half past one in
the afternoon. What am I? a dentist--a five shilling dentist!

GLORIA. And I am a feminine prig.

VALENTINE. (passionately). No, no: I can't face that: I must have one
illusion left--the illusion about you. I love you. (He turns towards her
as if the impulse to touch her were ungovernable: she rises and stands
on her guard wrathfully. He springs up impatiently and retreats a step.)
Oh, what a fool I am!--an idiot! You don't understand: I might as well
talk to the stones on the beach. (He turns away, discouraged.)

GLORIA (reassured by his withdrawal, and a little remorseful). I am
sorry. I do not mean to be unsympathetic, Mr. Valentine; but what can I
say?

VALENTINE (returning to her with all his recklessness of manner replaced
by an engaging and chivalrous respect). You can say nothing, Miss
Clandon. I beg your pardon: it was my own fault, or rather my own bad
luck. You see, it all depended on your naturally liking me. (She is
about to speak: he stops her deprecatingly.) Oh, I know you mustn't tell
me whether you like me or not; but--

GLORIA (her principles up in arms at once). Must not! Why not? I am a
free woman: why should I not tell you?

VALENTINE (pleading in terror, and retreating). Don't. I'm afraid to
hear.

GLORIA (no longer scornful). You need not be afraid. I think you are
sentimental, and a little foolish; but I like you.

VALENTINE (dropping into the iron chair as if crushed). Then it's all
over. (He becomes the picture of despair.)

GLORIA (puzzled, approaching him). But why?

VALENTINE. Because liking is not enough. Now that I think down into it
seriously, I don't know whether I like you or not.

GLORIA (looking down at him with wondering concern). I'm sorry.

VALENTINE (in an agony of restrained passion). Oh, don't pity me. Your
voice is tearing my heart to pieces. Let me alone, Gloria. You go down
into the very depths of me, troubling and stirring me--I can't struggle
with it--I can't tell you--

GLORIA (breaking down suddenly). Oh, stop telling me what you feel: I
can't bear it.

VALENTINE (springing up triumphantly, the agonized voice now solid,
ringing, and jubilant). Ah, it's come at last--my moment of courage. (He
seizes her hands: she looks at him in terror.) Our moment of courage!
(He draws her to him; kisses her with impetuous strength; and laughs
boyishly.) Now you've done it, Gloria. It's all over: we're in love with
one another. (She can only gasp at him.) But what a dragon you were! And
how hideously afraid I was!

PHILIP'S VOICE (calling from the beach). Valentine!

DOLLY'S VOICE. Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE. Good-bye. Forgive me. (He rapidly kisses her hands, and runs
away to the steps, where he meets Mrs. Clandon, ascending. Gloria, quite
lost, can only start after him.)

MRS. CLANDON. The children want you, Mr. Valentine. (She looks anxiously
around.) Is he gone?

VALENTINE (puzzled). He? (Recollecting.) Oh, Crampton. Gone this long
time, Mrs. Clandon. (He runs off buoyantly down the steps.)

GLORIA (sinking upon the seat). Mother!

MRS. CLANDON (hurrying to her in alarm). What is it, dear?

GLORIA (with heartfelt, appealing reproach). Why didn't you educate me
properly?

MRS. CLANDON (amazed). My child: I did my best.

GLORIA. Oh, you taught me nothing--nothing.

MRS. CLANDON. What is the matter with you?

GLORIA (with the most intense expression). Only shame--shame-- shame.
(Blushing unendurably, she covers her face with her hands and turns away
from her mother.)

END OF ACT II.




ACT III


The Clandon's sitting room in the hotel. An expensive apartment on the
ground floor, with a French window leading to the gardens. In the centre
of the room is a substantial table, surrounded by chairs, and draped
with a maroon cloth on which opulently bound hotel and railway guides
are displayed. A visitor entering through the window and coming down to
this central table would have the fireplace on his left, and a writing
table against the wall on his right, next the door, which is further
down. He would, if his taste lay that way, admire the wall decoration
of Lincrusta Walton in plum color and bronze lacquer, with dado and
cornice; the ormolu consoles in the corners; the vases on pillar
pedestals of veined marble with bases of polished black wood, one on
each side of the window; the ornamental cabinet next the vase on the
side nearest the fireplace, its centre compartment closed by an inlaid
door, and its corners rounded off with curved panes of glass protecting
shelves of cheap blue and white pottery; the bamboo tea table, with
folding shelves, in the corresponding space on the other side of
the window; the pictures of ocean steamers and Landseer's dogs; the
saddlebag ottoman in line with the door but on the other side of the
room; the two comfortable seats of the same pattern on the hearthrug;
and finally, on turning round and looking up, the massive brass
pole above the window, sustaining a pair of maroon rep curtains with
decorated borders of staid green. Altogether, a room well arranged
to flatter the occupant's sense of importance, and reconcile him to a
charge of a pound a day for its use.

Mrs. Clandon sits at the writing table, correcting proofs. Gloria is
standing at the window, looking out in a tormented revery.

The clock on the mantelpiece strikes five with a sickly clink, the bell
being unable to bear up against the black marble cenotaph in which it is
immured.

MRS. CLANDON. Five! I don't think we need wait any longer for the
children. The are sure to get tea somewhere.

GLORIA (wearily). Shall I ring?

MRS. CLANDON. Do, my dear. (Gloria goes to the hearth and rings.) I have
finished these proofs at last, thank goodness!

GLORIA (strolling listlessly across the room and coming behind her
mother's chair). What proofs?

MRS. CLANDON The new edition of Twentieth Century Women.

GLORIA (with a bitter smile). There's a chapter missing.

MRS. CLANDON (beginning to hunt among her proofs). Is there? Surely not.

GLORIA. I mean an unwritten one. Perhaps I shall write it for you--when
I know the end of it. (She goes back to the window.)

MRS. CLANDON. Gloria! More enigmas!

GLORIA. Oh, no. The same enigma.

MRS. CLANDON (puzzled and rather troubled; after watching her for a
moment). My dear.

GLORIA (returning). Yes.

MRS. CLANDON. You know I never ask questions.

GLORIA (kneeling beside her chair). I know, I know. (She suddenly throws
her arms about her mother and embraces her almost passionately.)

MRS. CLANDON. (gently, smiling but embarrassed). My dear: you are
getting quite sentimental.

GLORIA (recoiling). Ah, no, no. Oh, don't say that. Oh! (She rises and
turns away with a gesture as if tearing herself.)

MRS. CLANDON (mildly). My dear: what is the matter? What-- (The waiter
enters with the tea tray.)

WAITER (balmily). This was what you rang for, ma'am, I hope?

MRS. CLANDON. Thank you, yes. (She turns her chair away from the writing
table, and sits down again. Gloria crosses to the hearth and sits
crouching there with her face averted.)

WAITER (placing the tray temporarily on the centre table). I thought so,
ma'am. Curious how the nerves seem to give out in the afternoon without
a cup of tea. (He fetches the tea table and places it in front of Mrs.
Cladon, conversing meanwhile.) the young lady and gentleman have just
come back, ma'am: they have been out in a boat, ma'am. Very pleasant on
a fine afternoon like this--very pleasant and invigorating indeed. (He
takes the tray from the centre table and puts it on the tea table.)
Mr. McComas will not come to tea, ma'am: he has gone to call upon Mr.
Crampton. (He takes a couple of chairs and sets one at each end of the
tea table.)

GLORIA (looking round with an impulse of terror). And the other
gentleman?

WAITER (reassuringly, as he unconsciously drops for a moment into
the measure of "I've been roaming," which he sang as a boy.) Oh, he's
coming, miss, he's coming. He has been rowing the boat, miss, and has
just run down the road to the chemist's for something to put on the
blisters. But he will be here directly, miss--directly. (Gloria, in
ungovernable apprehension, rises and hurries towards the door.)

MRS. CLANDON. (half rising). Glo-- (Gloria goes out. Mrs. Clandon looks
perplexedly at the waiter, whose composure is unruffled.)

WAITER (cheerfully). Anything more, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON. Nothing, thank you.

WAITER. Thank you, ma'am. (As he withdraws, Phil and Dolly, in the
highest spirits, come tearing in. He holds the door open for them; then
goes out and closes it.)

DOLLY (ravenously). Oh, give me some tea. (Mrs. Clandon pours out a cup
for her.) We've been out in a boat. Valentine will be here presently.

PHILIP. He is unaccustomed to navigation. Where's Gloria?

MRS. CLANDON (anxiously, as she pours out his tea). Phil: there is
something the matter with Gloria. Has anything happened? (Phil and Dolly
look at one another and stifle a laugh.) What is it?

PHILIP (sitting down on her left). Romeo--

DOLLY (sitting down on her right). --and Juliet.

PHILIP (taking his cup of tea from Mrs. Clandon). Yes, my dear mother:
the old, old story. Dolly: don't take all the milk. (He deftly takes the
jug from her.) Yes: in the spring--

DOLLY. --a young man's fancy--

PHILIP. --lightly turns to--thank you (to Mrs. Clandon, who has passed
the biscuits) --thoughts of love. It also occurs in the autumn. The
young man in this case is--

DOLLY. Valentine.

PHILIP. And his fancy has turned to Gloria to the extent of--

DOLLY. --kissing her--

PHILIP. --on the terrace--

DOLLY (correcting him). --on the lips, before everybody.

MRS. CLANDON (incredulously). Phil! Dolly! Are you joking? (They shake
their heads.) Did she allow it?

PHILIP. We waited to see him struck to earth by the lightning of her
scorn;--

DOLLY. --but he wasn't.

PHILIP. She appeared to like it.

DOLLY. As far as we could judge. (Stopping Phil, who is about to pour
out another cup.) No: you've sworn off two cups.

MRS. CLANDON (much troubled). Children: you must not be here when Mr.
Valentine comes. I must speak very seriously to him about this.

PHILIP. To ask him his intentions? What a violation of Twentieth Century
principles!

DOLLY. Quite right, mamma: bring him to book. Make the most of the
nineteenth century while it lasts.

PHILIP. Sh! Here he is. (Valentine comes in.)

VALENTINE Very sorry to be late for tea, Mrs. Clandon. (She takes up the
tea-pot.) No, thank you: I never take any. No doubt Miss Dolly and Phil
have explained what happened to me.

PHILIP (momentously rising). Yes, Valentine: we have explained.

DOLLY (significantly, also rising). We have explained very thoroughly.

PHILIP. It was our duty. (Very seriously.) Come, Dolly. (He offers Dolly
his arm, which she takes. They look sadly at him, and go out gravely,
arm in arm. Valentine stares after them, puzzled; then looks at Mrs.
Clandon for an explanation.)

MRS. CLANDON (rising and leaving the tea table). Will you sit down,
Mr. Valentine. I want to speak to you a little, if you will allow me.
(Valentine sits down slowly on the ottoman, his conscience presaging
a bad quarter of an hour. Mrs. Clandon takes Phil's chair, and seats
herself deliberately at a convenient distance from him.) I must begin by
throwing myself somewhat at your consideration. I am going to speak of a
subject of which I know very little--perhaps nothing. I mean love.

VALENTINE. Love!

MRS. CLANDON. Yes, love. Oh, you need not look so alarmed as that, Mr.
Valentine: I am not in love with you.

VALENTINE (overwhelmed). Oh, really, Mrs.-- (Recovering himself.) I
should be only too proud if you were.

MRS. CLANDON. Thank you, Mr. Valentine. But I am too old to begin.

VALENTINE. Begin! Have you never--?

MRS. CLANDON. Never. My case is a very common one, Mr. Valentine. I
married before I was old enough to know what I was doing. As you have
seen for yourself, the result was a bitter disappointment for both my
husband and myself. So you see, though I am a married woman, I have
never been in love; I have never had a love affair; and to be quite
frank with you, Mr. Valentine, what I have seen of the love affairs of
other people has not led me to regret that deficiency in my experience.
(Valentine, looking very glum, glances sceptically at her, and says
nothing. Her color rises a little; and she adds, with restrained anger)
You do not believe me?

VALENTINE (confused at having his thought read). Oh, why not? Why not?

MRS. CLANDON. Let me tell you, Mr. Valentine, that a life devoted to
the Cause of Humanity has enthusiasms and passions to offer which far
transcend the selfish personal infatuations and sentimentalities
of romance. Those are not your enthusiasms and passions, I take it?
(Valentine, quite aware that she despises him for it, answers in the
negative with a melancholy shake of the head.) I thought not. Well, I am
equally at a disadvantage in discussing those so-called affairs of the
heart in which you appear to be an expert.

VALENTINE (restlessly). What are you driving at, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON. I think you know.

VALENTINE. Gloria?

MRS. CLANDON. Yes. Gloria.

VALENTINE (surrendering). Well, yes: I'm in love with Gloria.
(Interposing as she is about to speak.) I know what you're going to say:
I've no money.

MRS. CLANDON. I care very little about money, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE. Then you're very different to all the other mothers who have
interviewed me.

MRS. CLANDON. Ah, now we are coming to it, Mr. Valentine. You are an old
hand at this. (He opens his mouth to protest: she cuts him short with
some indignation.) Oh, do you think, little as I understand these
matters, that I have not common sense enough to know that a man
who could make as much way in one interview with such a woman as my
daughter, can hardly be a novice!

VALENTINE. I assure you--

MRS. CLANDON (stopping him). I am not blaming you, Mr. Valentine. It is
Gloria's business to take care of herself; and you have a right to amuse
yourself as you please. But--

VALENTINE (protesting). Amuse myself! Oh, Mrs. Clandon!

MRS. CLANDON (relentlessly). On your honor, Mr. Valentine, are you in
earnest?

VALENTINE (desperately). On my honor I am in earnest. (She looks
searchingly at him. His sense of humor gets the better of him; and he
adds quaintly) Only, I always have been in earnest; and yet--here I am,
you see!

MRS. CLANDON. This is just what I suspected. (Severely.) Mr. Valentine:
you are one of those men who play with women's affections.

VALENTINE. Well, why not, if the Cause of Humanity is the only thing
worth being serious about? However, I understand. (Rising and taking his
hat with formal politeness.) You wish me to discontinue my visits.

MRS. CLANDON. No: I am sensible enough to be well aware that Gloria's
best chance of escape from you now is to become better acquainted with
you.

VALENTINE (unaffectedly alarmed). Oh, don't say that, Mrs. Clandon. You
don't think that, do you?

MRS. CLANDON. I have great faith, Mr. Valentine, in the sound training
Gloria's mind has had since she was a child.

VALENTINE (amazingly relieved). O-oh! Oh, that's all right. (He sits
down again and throws his hat flippantly aside with the air of a man who
has no longer anything to fear.)

MRS. CLANDON (indignant at his assurance). What do you mean?

VALENTINE (turning confidentially to her). Come: shall I teach you
something, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON (stiffly). I am always willing to learn.

VALENTINE. Have you ever studied the subject of
gunnery--artillery--cannons and war-ships and so on?

MRS. CLANDON. Has gunnery anything to do with Gloria?

VALENTINE. A great deal--by way of illustration. During this whole
century, my dear Mrs. Clandon, the progress of artillery has been a duel
between the maker of cannons and the maker of armor plates to keep the
cannon balls out. You build a ship proof against the best gun known:
somebody makes a better gun and sinks your ship. You build a heavier
ship, proof against that gun: somebody makes a heavier gun and sinks you
again. And so on. Well, the duel of sex is just like that.

MRS. CLANDON. The duel of sex!

VALENTINE. Yes: you've heard of the duel of sex, haven't you? Oh, I
forgot: you've been in Madeira: the expression has come up since your
time. Need I explain it?

MRS. CLANDON (contemptuously). No.

VALENTINE. Of course not. Now what happens in the duel of sex? The old
fashioned mother received an old fashioned education to protect her
against the wiles of man. Well, you know the result: the old fashioned
man got round her. The old fashioned woman resolved to protect her
daughter more effectually--to find some armor too strong for the old
fashioned man. So she gave her daughter a scientific education--your
plan. That was a corker for the old fashioned man: he said it wasn't
fair--unwomanly and all the rest of it. But that didn't do him any good.
So he had to give up his old fashioned plan of attack--you know--going
down on his knees and swearing to love, honor and obey, and so on.

MRS. CLANDON. Excuse me: that was what the woman swore.

VALENTINE. Was it? Ah, perhaps you're right--yes: of course it was.
Well, what did the man do? Just what the artillery man does-- went one
better than the woman--educated himself scientifically and beat her at
that game just as he had beaten her at the old game. I learnt how to
circumvent the Women's Rights woman before I was twenty- three: it's all
been found out long ago. You see, my methods are thoroughly modern.

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet disgust). No doubt.

VALENTINE. But for that very reason there's one sort of girl against
whom they are of no use.

MRS. CLANDON. Pray which sort?

VALENTINE. The thoroughly old fashioned girl. If you had brought up
Gloria in the old way, it would have taken me eighteen months to get
to the point I got to this afternoon in eighteen minutes. Yes, Mrs.
Clandon: the Higher Education of Women delivered Gloria into my hands;
and it was you who taught her to believe in the Higher Education of
Women.

MRS. CLANDON (rising). Mr. Valentine: you are very clever.

VALENTINE (rising also). Oh, Mrs. Clandon!

MRS. CLANDON And you have taught me n o t h i n g. Good-bye.

VALENTINE (horrified). Good-bye! Oh, mayn't I see her before I go?

MRS. CLANDON. I am afraid she will not return until you have gone Mr.
Valentine. She left the room expressly to avoid you.

VALENTINE (thoughtfully). That's a good sign. Good-bye. (He bows and
makes for the door, apparently well satisfied.)

MRS. CLANDON (alarmed). Why do you think it a good sign?

VALENTINE (turning near the door). Because I am mortally afraid of her;
and it looks as if she were mortally afraid of me. (He turns to go and
finds himself face to face with Gloria, who has just entered. She looks
steadfastly at him. He stares helplessly at her; then round at Mrs.
Clandon; then at Gloria again, completely at a loss.)

GLORIA (white, and controlling herself with difficulty). Mother: is what
Dolly told me true?

MRS. CLANDON. What did she tell you, dear?

GLORIA. That you have been speaking about me to this gentleman.

VALENTINE (murmuring). This gentleman! Oh!

MRS. CLANDON (sharply). Mr. Valentine: can you hold your tongue for a
moment? (He looks piteously at them; then, with a despairing shrug, goes
back to the ottoman and throws his hat on it.)

GLORIA (confronting her mother, with deep reproach). Mother: what right
had you to do it?

MRS. CLANDON. I don't think I have said anything I have no right to say,
Gloria.

VALENTINE (confirming her officiously). Nothing. Nothing whatever.
(Gloria looks at him with unspeakable indignation.) I beg your pardon.
(He sits down ignominiously on the ottoman.)

GLORIA. I cannot believe that any one has any right even to think about
things that concern me only. (She turns away from them to conceal a
painful struggle with her emotion.)

MRS. CLANDON. My dear, if I have wounded your pride--

GLORIA (turning on them for a moment). My p r i d e! My pride!! Oh, it's
gone: I have learnt now that I have no strength to be proud of. (Turning
away again.) But if a woman cannot protect herself, no one can protect
her. No one has any right to try--not even her mother. I know I have
lost your confidence, just as I have lost this man's respect;-- (She
stops to master a sob.)

VALENTINE (under his breath). This man! (Murmuring again.) Oh!

MRS. CLANDON (in an undertone). Pray be silent, sir.

GLORIA (continuing). --but I have at least the right to be left alone in
my disgrace. I am one of those weak creatures born to be mastered by the
first man whose eye is caught by them; and I must fulfill my destiny,
I suppose. At least spare me the humiliation of trying to save me. (She
sits down, with her handkerchief to her eyes, at the farther end of the
table.)

VALENTINE (jumping up). Look here--

MRS. CLANDON. Mr. Va--

VALENTINE (recklessly). No: I will speak: I've been silent for nearly
thirty seconds. (He goes up to Gloria.) Miss Clandon--

GLORIA (bitterly). Oh, not Miss Clandon: you have found that it is quite
safe to call me Gloria.

VALENTINE. No, I won't: you'll throw it in my teeth afterwards and
accuse me of disrespect. I say it's a heartbreaking falsehood that I
don't respect you. It's true that I didn't respect your old pride: why
should I? It was nothing but cowardice. I didn't respect your intellect:
I've a better one myself: it's a masculine specialty. But when the
depths stirred!--when my moment came!--when you made me brave!--ah,
then, then, t h e n!

GLORIA. Then you respected me, I suppose.

VALENTINE. No, I didn't: I adored you. (She rises quickly and turns her
back on him.) And you can never take that moment away from me. So now I
don't care what happens. (He comes down the room addressing a cheerful
explanation to nobody in particular.) I'm perfectly aware that I'm
talking nonsense. I can't help it. (To Mrs. Clandon.) I love Gloria; and
there's an end of it.

MRS. CLANDON (emphatically). Mr. Valentine: you are a most dangerous
man. Gloria: come here. (Gloria, wondering a little at the command,
obeys, and stands, with drooping head, on her mother's right hand,
Valentine being on the opposite side. Mrs. Clandon then begins, with
intense scorn.) Ask this man whom you have inspired and made brave, how
many women have inspired him before (Gloria looks up suddenly with a
flash of jealous anger and amazement); how many times he has laid the
trap in which he has caught you; how often he has baited it with the
same speeches; how much practice it has taken to make him perfect in his
chosen part in life as the Duellist of Sex.

VALENTINE. This isn't fair. You're abusing my confidence, Mrs. Clandon.

MRS. CLANDON. Ask him, Gloria.

GLORIA (in a flush of rage, going over to him with her fists clenched).
Is that true?

VALENTINE. Don't be angry--

GLORIA (interrupting him implacably). Is it true? Did you ever say that
before? Did you ever feel that before--for another woman?

VALENTINE (bluntly). Yes. (Gloria raises her clenched hands.)

MRS. CLANDON (horrified, springing to her side and catching her uplifted
arm). Gloria!! My dear! You're forgetting yourself. (Gloria, with a deep
expiration, slowly relaxes her threatening attitude.)

VALENTINE. Remember: a man's power of love and admiration is like any
other of his powers: he has to throw it away many times before he learns
what is really worthy of it.

MRS. CLANDON. Another of the old speeches, Gloria. Take care.

VALENTINE (remonstrating). Oh!

GLORIA (to Mrs. Clandon, with contemptuous self-possession). Do you
think I need to be warned now? (To Valentine.) You have tried to make me
love you.

VALENTINE. I have.

GLORIA. Well, you have succeeded in making me hate you-- passionately.

VALENTINE (philosophically). It's surprising how little difference
there is between the two. (Gloria turns indignantly away from him. He
continues, to Mrs. Clandon) I know men whose wives love them; and they
go on exactly like that.

MRS. CLANDON. Excuse me, Mr. Valentine; but had you not better go?

GLORIA. You need not send him away on my account, mother. He is nothing
to me now; and he will amuse Dolly and Phil. (She sits down with
slighting indifference, at the end of the table nearest the window.)

VALENTINE (gaily). Of course: that's the sensible way of looking at it.
Come, Mrs. Clandon: you can't quarrel with a mere butterfly like me.

MRS. CLANDON. I very greatly mistrust you, Mr. Valentine. But I do
not like to think that your unfortunate levity of disposition is mere
shamelessness and worthlessness;--

GLORIA (to herself, but aloud). It is shameless; and it is worthless.

MRS. CLANDON. --so perhaps we had better send for Phil and Dolly and
allow you to end your visit in the ordinary way.

VALENTINE (as if she had paid him the highest compliment). You overwhelm
me, Mrs. Clandon. Thank you. (The waiter enters.)

WAITER. Mr. McComas, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. Oh, certainly. Bring him in.

WAITER. He wishes to see you in the reception-room, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. Why not here?

WAITER. Well, if you will excuse my mentioning it, ma'am, I think Mr.
McComas feels that he would get fairer play if he could speak to you
away from the younger members of your family, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. Tell him they are not here.

WAITER. They are within sight of the door, ma'am; and very watchful, for
some reason or other.

MRS. CLANDON (going). Oh, very well: I'll go to him.

WAITER (holding the door open for her). Thank you, ma'am. (She goes out.
He comes back into the room, and meets the eye of Valentine, who wants
him to go.) All right, sir. Only the tea-things, sir. (Taking the tray.)
Excuse me, sir. Thank you sir. (He goes out.)

VALENTINE (to Gloria). Look here. You will forgive me, sooner or later.
Forgive me now.

GLORIA (rising to level the declaration more intensely at him). Never!
While grass grows or water runs, never, never, never!!!

VALENTINE (unabashed). Well, I don't care. I can't be unhappy about
anything. I shall never be unhappy again, never, never, never, while
grass grows or water runs. The thought of you will always make me wild
with joy. (Some quick taunt is on her lips: he interposes swiftly.) No:
I never said that before: that's new.

GLORIA. It will not be new when you say it to the next woman.

VALENTINE. Oh, don't, Gloria, don't. (He kneels at her feet.)

GLORIA. Get up. Get up! How dare you? (Phil and Dolly, racing, as usual,
for first place, burst into the room. They check themselves on seeing
what is passing. Valentine springs up.)

PHILIP (discreetly). I beg your pardon. Come, Dolly. (He turns to go.)

GLORIA (annoyed). Mother will be back in a moment, Phil. (Severely.)
Please wait here for her. (She turns away to the window, where she
stands looking out with her back to them.)

PHILIP (significantly). Oh, indeed. Hmhm!

DOLLY. Ahah!

PHILIP. You seem in excellent spirits, Valentine.

VALENTINE. I am. (Comes between them.) Now look here. You both know
what's going on, don't you? (Gloria turns quickly, as if anticipating
some fresh outrage.)

DOLLY. Perfectly.

VALENTINE. Well, it's all over. I've been refused--scorned. I'm only
here on sufferance. You understand: it's all over. Your sister is in no
sense entertaining my addresses, or condescending to interest herself
in me in any way. (Gloria, satisfied, turns back contemptuously to the
window.) Is that clear?

DOLLY. Serve you right. You were in too great a hurry.

PHILIP (patting him on the shoulder). Never mind: you'd never have been
able to call your soul your own if she'd married you. You can now begin
a new chapter in your life.

DOLLY. Chapter seventeen or thereabouts, I should imagine.

VALENTINE (much put out by this pleasantry). No: don't say things like
that. That's just the sort of thoughtless remark that makes a lot of
mischief.

DOLLY. Oh, indeed. Hmhm!

PHILIP. Ahah! (He goes to the hearth and plants himself there in his
best head-of-the-family attitude.)

McComas, looking very serious, comes in quickly with Mrs. Clandon, whose
first anxiety is about Gloria. She looks round to see where she is, and
is going to join her at the window when Gloria comes down to meet her
with a marked air of trust and affection. Finally, Mrs. Clandon takes
her former seat, and Gloria posts herself behind it. McComas, on his way
to the ottoman, is hailed by Dolly.

DOLLY. What cheer, Finch?

McCOMAS (sternly). Very serious news from your father, Miss Clandon.
Very serious news indeed. (He crosses to the ottoman, and sits down.
Dolly, looking deeply impressed, follows him and sits beside him on his
right.)

VALENTINE. Perhaps I had better go.

McCOMAS. By no means, Mr. Valentine. You are deeply concerned in this.
(Valentine takes a chair from the table and sits astride of it, leaning
over the back, near the ottoman.) Mrs. Clandon: your husband demands the
custody of his two younger children, who are not of age. (Mrs. Clandon,
in quick alarm, looks instinctively to see if Dolly is safe.)

DOLLY (touched). Oh, how nice of him! He likes us, mamma.

McCOMAS. I am sorry to have to disabuse you of any such idea, Miss
Dorothea.

DOLLY (cooing ecstatically). Dorothee-ee-ee-a! (Nestling against his
shoulder, quite overcome.) Oh, Finch!

McCOMAS (nervously, moving away). No, no, no, no!

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). D e a r e s t Dolly! (To McComas.) The
deed of separation gives me the custody of the children.

McCOMAS. It also contains a covenant that you are not to approach or
molest him in any way.

MRS. CLANDON. Well, have I done so?

McCOMAS. Whether the behavior of your younger children amounts to legal
molestation is a question on which it may be necessary to take counsel's
opinion. At all events, Mr. Crampton not only claims to have been
molested; but he believes that he was brought here by a plot in which
Mr. Valentine acted as your agent.

VALENTINE. What's that? Eh?

McCOMAS. He alleges that you drugged him, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE. So I did. (They are astonished.)

McCOMAS. But what did you do that for?

DOLLY. Five shillings extra.

McCOMAS (to Dolly, short-temperedly). I must really ask you, Miss
Clandon, not to interrupt this very serious conversation with irrelevant
interjections. (Vehemently.) I insist on having earnest matters
earnestly and reverently discussed. (This outburst produces an
apologetic silence, and puts McComas himself out of countenance. He
coughs, and starts afresh, addressing himself to Gloria.) Miss Clandon:
it is my duty to tell you that your father has also persuaded himself
that Mr. Valentine wishes to marry you--

VALENTINE (interposing adroitly). I do.

McCOMAS (offended). In that case, sir, you must not be surprised to find
yourself regarded by the young lady's father as a fortune hunter.

VALENTINE. So I am. Do you expect my wife to live on what I earn?
ten-pence a week!

McCOMAS (revolted). I have nothing more to say, sir. I shall return and
tell Mr. Crampton that this family is no place for a father. (He makes
for the door.)

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet authority). Finch! (He halts.) If Mr. Valentine
cannot be serious, you can. Sit down. (McComas, after a brief struggle
between his dignity and his friendship, succumbs, seating himself this
time midway between Dolly and Mrs. Clandon.) You know that all this is
a made up case--that Fergus does not believe in it any more than you do.
Now give me your real advice--your sincere, friendly advice: you know
I have always trusted your judgment. I promise you the children will be
quiet.

McCOMAS (resigning himself). Well, well! What I want to say is this. In
the old arrangement with your husband, Mrs. Clandon, you had him at a
terrible disadvantage.

MRS. CLANDON. How so, pray?

McCOMAS. Well, you were an advanced woman, accustomed to defy public
opinion, and with no regard for what the world might say of you.

MRS. CLANDON (proud of it). Yes: that is true. (Gloria, behind the
chair, stoops and kisses her mother's hair, a demonstration which
disconcerts her extremely.)

McCOMAS. On the other hand, Mrs. Clandon, your husband had a great
horror of anything getting into the papers. There was his business to be
considered, as well as the prejudices of an old-fashioned family.

MRS. CLANDON. Not to mention his own prejudices.

McCOMAS. Now no doubt he behaved badly, Mrs. Clandon--

MRS. CLANDON (scornfully). No doubt.

McCOMAS. But was it altogether his fault?

MRS. CLANDON. Was it mine?

McCOMAS (hastily). No. Of course not.

GLORIA (observing him attentively). You do not mean that, Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS. My dear young lady, you pick me up very sharply. But let me
just put this to you. When a man makes an unsuitable marriage (nobody's
fault, you know, but purely accidental incompatibility of tastes); when
he is deprived by that misfortune of the domestic sympathy which, I take
it, is what a man marries for; when in short, his wife is rather worse
than no wife at all (through no fault of his own, of course), is it to
be wondered at if he makes matters worse at first by blaming her,
and even, in his desperation, by occasionally drinking himself into a
violent condition or seeking sympathy elsewhere?

MRS. CLANDON. I did not blame him: I simply rescued myself and the
children from him.

McCOMAS. Yes: but you made hard terms, Mrs. Clandon. You had him at
your mercy: you brought him to his knees when you threatened to make
the matter public by applying to the Courts for a judicial separation.
Suppose he had had that power over you, and used it to take your
children away from you and bring them up in ignorance of your very
name, how would you feel? what would you do? Well, won't you make some
allowance for his feelings?--in common humanity.

MRS. CLANDON. I never discovered his feelings. I discovered his temper,
and his-- (she shivers) the rest of his common humanity.

McCOMAS (wistfully). Women can be very hard, Mrs. Clandon.

VALENTINE. That's true.

GLORIA (angrily). Be silent. (He subsides.)

McCOMAS (rallying all his forces). Let me make one last appeal. Mrs.
Clandon: believe me, there are men who have a good deal of feeling, and
kind feeling, too, which they are not able to express. What you miss
in Crampton is that mere veneer of civilization, the art of shewing
worthless attentions and paying insincere compliments in a kindly,
charming way. If you lived in London, where the whole system is one of
false good-fellowship, and you may know a man for twenty years without
finding out that he hates you like poison, you would soon have your eyes
opened. There we do unkind things in a kind way: we say bitter things in
a sweet voice: we always give our friends chloroform when we tear them
to pieces. But think of the other side of it! Think of the people who
do kind things in an unkind way--people whose touch hurts, whose voices
jar, whose tempers play them false, who wound and worry the people they
love in the very act of trying to conciliate them, and yet who need
affection as much as the rest of us. Crampton has an abominable temper,
I admit. He has no manners, no tact, no grace. He'll never be able
to gain anyone's affection unless they will take his desire for it on
trust. Is he to have none--not even pity--from his own flesh and blood?

DOLLY (quite melted). Oh, how beautiful, Finch! How nice of you!

PHILIP (with conviction). Finch: this is eloquence--positive eloquence.

DOLLY. Oh, mamma, let us give him another chance. Let us have him to
dinner.

MRS. CLANDON (unmoved). No, Dolly: I hardly got any lunch. My dear
Finch: there is not the least use in talking to me about Fergus. You
have never been married to him: I have.

McCOMAS (to Gloria). Miss Clandon: I have hitherto refrained from
appealing to you, because, if what Mr. Crampton told me to be true, you
have been more merciless even than your mother.

GLORIA (defiantly). You appeal from her strength to my weakness!

McCOMAS. Not your weakness, Miss Clandon. I appeal from her intellect to
your heart.

GLORIA. I have learnt to mistrust my heart. (With an angry glance at
Valentine.) I would tear my heart and throw it away if I could. My
answer to you is my mother's answer. (She goes to Mrs. Clandon, and
stands with her arm about her; but Mrs. Clandon, unable to endure this
sort of demonstrativeness, disengages herself as soon as she can without
hurting Gloria's feelings.)

McCOMAS (defeated). Well, I am very sorry--very sorry. I have done my
best. (He rises and prepares to go, deeply dissatisfied.)

MRS. CLANDON. But what did you expect, Finch? What do you want us to do?

McCOMAS. The first step for both you and Crampton is to obtain counsel's
opinion as to whether he is bound by the deed of separation or not. Now
why not obtain this opinion at once, and have a friendly meeting
(her face hardens)--or shall we say a neutral meeting?--to settle the
difficulty--here--in this hotel--to-night? What do you say?

MRS. CLANDON. But where is the counsel's opinion to come from?

McCOMAS. It has dropped down on us out of the clouds. On my way back
here from Crampton's I met a most eminent Q.C., a man whom I briefed in
the case that made his name for him. He has come down here from Saturday
to Monday for the sea air, and to visit a relative of his who lives
here. He has been good enough to say that if I can arrange a meeting
of the parties he will come and help us with his opinion. Now do let us
seize this chance of a quiet friendly family adjustment. Let me bring my
friend here and try to persuade Crampton to come, too. Come: consent.

MRS. CLANDON (rather ominously, after a moment's consideration). Finch:
I don't want counsel's opinion, because I intend to be guided by my own
opinion. I don't want to meet Fergus again, because I don't like him,
and don't believe the meeting will do any good. However (rising), you
have persuaded the children that he is not quite hopeless. Do as you
please.

McCOMAS (taking her hand and shaking it). Thank you, Mrs. Clandon. Will
nine o'clock suit you?

MRS. CLANDON. Perfectly. Phil: will you ring, please. (Phil rings the
bell.) But if I am to be accused of conspiring with Mr. Valentine, I
think he had better be present.

VALENTINE (rising). I quite agree with you. I think it's most important.

McCOMAS. There can be no objection to that, I think. I have the greatest
hopes of a happy settlement. Good-bye for the present. (He goes out,
meeting the waiter; who holds the door for him to pass through.)

MRS. CLANDON. We expect some visitors at nine, William. Can we have
dinner at seven instead of half-past?

WAITER (at the door). Seven, ma'am? Certainly, ma'am. It will be a
convenience to us this busy evening, ma'am. There will be the band and
the arranging of the fairy lights and one thing or another, ma'am.

DOLLY. The fairy lights!

PHILIP. The band! William: what mean you?

WAITER. The fancy ball, miss--

DOLLY and PHILIP (simultaneously rushing to him). Fancy ball!

WAITER. Oh, yes, sir. Given by the regatta committee for the benefit
of the Life-boat, sir. (To Mrs. Clandon.) We often have them, ma'am:
Chinese lanterns in the garden, ma'am: very bright and pleasant, very
gay and innocent indeed. (To Phil.) Tickets downstairs at the office,
sir, five shillings: ladies half price if accompanied by a gentleman.

PHILIP (seizing his arm to drag him off). To the office, William!

DOLLY (breathlessly, seizing his other arm). Quick, before they're all
sold. (They rush him out of the room between them.)

MRS. CLANDON. What on earth are they going to do? (Going out.) I really
must go and stop this-- (She follows them, speaking as she disappears.
Gloria stares coolly at Valentine, and then deliberately looks at her
watch.)

VALENTINE. I understand. I've stayed too long. I'm going.

GLORIA (with disdainful punctiliousness). I owe you some apology, Mr.
Valentine. I am conscious of having spoken somewhat sharply-- perhaps
rudely--to you.

VALENTINE. Not at all.

GLORIA. My only excuse is that it is very difficult to give
consideration and respect when there is no dignity of character on the
other side to command it.

VALENTINE (prosaically). How is a man to look dignified when he's
infatuated?

GLORIA (effectually unstilted). Don't say those things to me. I forbid
you. They are insults.

VALENTINE. No: they're only follies. I can't help them.

GLORIA. If you were really in love, it would not make you foolish: it
would give you dignity--earnestness--even beauty.

VALENTINE. Do you really think it would make me beautiful? (She turns
her back on him with the coldest contempt.) Ah, you see you're not in
earnest. Love can't give any man new gifts. It can only heighten the
gifts he was born with.

GLORIA (sweeping round at him again). What gifts were you born with,
pray?

VALENTINE. Lightness of heart.

GLORIA. And lightness of head, and lightness of faith, and lightness of
everything that makes a man.

VALENTINE. Yes, the whole world is like a feather dancing in the light
now; and Gloria is the sun. (She rears her head angrily.) I beg your
pardon: I'm off. Back at nine. Good-bye. (He runs off gaily, leaving her
standing in the middle of the room staring after him.)

END OF ACT III




ACT IV


The same room. Nine o'clock. Nobody present. The lamps are lighted; but
the curtains are not drawn. The window stands wide open; and strings of
Chinese lanterns are glowing among the trees outside, with the starry
sky beyond. The band is playing dance-music in the garden, drowning the
sound of the sea.

The waiter enters, shewing in Crampton and McComas. Crampton looks cowed
and anxious. He sits down wearily and timidly on the ottoman.

WAITER. The ladies have gone for a turn through the grounds to see the
fancy dresses, sir. If you will be so good as to take seats, gentlemen,
I shall tell them. (He is about to go into the garden through the window
when McComas stops him.)

McCOMAS. One moment. If another gentleman comes, shew him in without any
delay: we are expecting him.

WAITER. Right, sir. What name, sir?

McCOMAS. Boon. Mr. Boon. He is a stranger to Mrs. Clandon; so he may
give you a card. If so, the name is spelt B.O.H.U.N. You will not
forget.

WAITER (smiling). You may depend on me for that, sir. My own name is
Boon, sir, though I am best known down here as Balmy Walters, sir. By
rights I should spell it with the aitch you, sir; but I think it best
not to take that liberty, sir. There is Norman blood in it, sir; and
Norman blood is not a recommendation to a waiter.

McCOMAS. Well, well: "True hearts are more than coronets, and simple
faith than Norman blood."

WAITER. That depends a good deal on one's station in life, sir. If you
were a waiter, sir, you'd find that simple faith would leave you just
as short as Norman blood. I find it best to spell myself B. double-O.N.,
and to keep my wits pretty sharp about me. But I'm taking up your time,
sir. You'll excuse me, sir: your own fault for being so affable, sir.
I'll tell the ladies you're here, sir. (He goes out into the garden
through the window.)

McCOMAS. Crampton: I can depend on you, can't I?

CRAMPTON. Yes, yes. I'll be quiet. I'll be patient. I'll do my best.

McCOMAS. Remember: I've not given you away. I've told them it was all
their fault.

CRAMPTON. You told me that it was all my fault.

McCOMAS. I told you the truth.

CRAMPTON (plaintively). If they will only be fair to me!

McCOMAS. My dear Crampton, they won't be fair to you: it's not to be
expected from them at their age. If you're going to make impossible
conditions of this kind, we may as well go back home at once.

CRAMPTON. But surely I have a right--

McCOMAS (intolerantly). You won't get your rights. Now, once for all,
Crampton, did your promises of good behavior only mean that you won't
complain if there's nothing to complain of? Because, if so-- (He moves
as if to go.)

CRAMPTON (miserably). No, no: let me alone, can't you? I've been bullied
enough: I've been tormented enough. I tell you I'll do my best. But if
that girl begins to talk to me like that and to look at me like-- (He
breaks off and buries his head in his hands.)

McCOMAS (relenting). There, there: it'll be all right, if you will only
bear and forbear. Come, pull yourself together: there's someone coming.
(Crampton, too dejected to care much, hardly changes his attitude.
Gloria enters from the garden; McComas goes to meet her at the window;
so that he can speak to her without being heard by Crampton.) There he
is, Miss Clandon. Be kind to him. I'll leave you with him for a moment.
(He goes into the garden. Gloria comes in and strolls coolly down the
middle of the room.)

CRAMPTON (looking round in alarm). Where's McComas?

GLORIA (listlessly, but not unsympathetically). Gone out--to leave us
together. Delicacy on his part, I suppose. (She stops beside him and
looks quaintly down at him.) Well, father?

CRAMPTON (a quaint jocosity breaking through his forlornness). Well,
daughter? (They look at one another for a moment, with a melancholy
sense of humor.)

GLORIA. Shake hands. (They shake hands.)

CRAMPTON (holding her hand). My dear: I'm afraid I spoke very improperly
of your mother this afternoon.

GLORIA. Oh, don't apologize. I was very high and mighty myself; but I've
come down since: oh, yes: I've been brought down. (She sits on the floor
beside his chair.)

CRAMPTON. What has happened to you, my child?

GLORIA. Oh, never mind. I was playing the part of my mother's daughter
then; but I'm not: I'm my father's daughter. (Looking at him funnily.)
That's a come down, isn't it?

CRAMPTON (angry). What! (Her odd expression does not alter. He
surrenders.) Well, yes, my dear: I suppose it is, I suppose it is. (She
nods sympathetically.) I'm afraid I'm sometimes a little irritable; but
I know what's right and reasonable all the time, even when I don't act
on it. Can you believe that?

GLORIA. Believe it! Why, that's myself--myself all over. I know what's
right and dignified and strong and noble, just as well as she does; but
oh, the things I do! the things I do! the things I let other people do!!

CRAMPTON (a little grudgingly in spite of himself). As well as she does?
You mean your mother?

GLORIA (quickly). Yes, mother. (She turns to him on her knees and seizes
his hands.) Now listen. No treason to her: no word, no thought against
her. She is our superior--yours and mine--high heavens above us. Is that
agreed?

CRAMPTON. Yes, yes. Just as you please, my dear.

GLORIA (not satisfied, letting go his hands and drawing back from him).
You don't like her?

CRAMPTON. My child: you haven't been married to her. I have. (She raises
herself slowly to her feet, looking at him with growing coldness.) She
did me a great wrong in marrying me without really caring for me. But
after that, the wrong was all on my side, I dare say. (He offers her his
hand again.)

GLORIA (taking it firmly and warningly). Take care. That's a dangerous
subject. My feelings--my miserable, cowardly, womanly feelings--may be
on your side; but my conscience is on hers.

CRAMPTON. I'm very well content with that division, my dear. Thank you.
(Valentine arrives. Gloria immediately becomes deliberately haughty.)

VALENTINE. Excuse me; but it's impossible to find a servant to announce
one: even the never failing William seems to be at the ball. I should
have gone myself; only I haven't five shillings to buy a ticket. How are
you getting on, Crampton? Better, eh?

CRAMPTON. I am myself again, Mr. Valentine, no thanks to you.

VALENTINE. Look at this ungrateful parent of yours, Miss Clandon! I
saved him from an excruciating pang; and he reviles me!

GLORIA (coldly). I am sorry my mother is not here to receive you, Mr.
Valentine. It is not quite nine o'clock; and the gentleman of whom Mr.
McComas spoke, the lawyer, is not yet come.

VALENTINE. Oh, yes, he is. I've met him and talked to him. (With gay
malice.) You'll like him, Miss Clandon: he's the very incarnation of
intellect. You can hear his mind working.

GLORIA (ignoring the jibe). Where is he?

VALENTINE. Bought a false nose and gone into the fancy ball.

CRAMPTON (crustily, looking at his watch). It seems that everybody has
gone to this fancy ball instead of keeping to our appointment here.

VALENTINE. Oh, he'll come all right enough: that was half an hour ago.
I didn't like to borrow five shillings from him and go in with him; so
I joined the mob and looked through the railings until Miss Clandon
disappeared into the hotel through the window.

GLORIA. So it has come to this, that you follow me about in public to
stare at me.

VALENTINE. Yes: somebody ought to chain me up.

Gloria turns her back on him and goes to the fireplace. He takes the
snub very philosophically, and goes to the opposite side of the room.
The waiter appears at the window, ushering in Mrs. Clandon and McComas.

MRS. CLANDON (hurrying in). I am so sorry to have kept you waiting.

A grotesquely majestic stranger, in a domino and false nose, with
goggles, appears at the window.

WAITER (to the stranger). Beg pardon, sir; but this is a private
apartment, sir. If you will allow me, sir, I will shew you to the
American bar and supper rooms, sir. This way, sir.

He goes into the gardens, leading the way under the impression that the
stranger is following him. The majestic one, however, comes straight
into the room to the end of the table, where, with impressive
deliberation, he takes off the false nose and then the domino, rolling
up the nose into the domino and throwing the bundle on the table like a
champion throwing down his glove. He is now seen to be a stout, tall
man between forty and fifty, clean shaven, with a midnight oil pallor
emphasized by stiff black hair, cropped short and oiled, and eyebrows
like early Victorian horsehair upholstery. Physically and spiritually,
a coarsened man: in cunning and logic, a ruthlessly sharpened one. His
bearing as he enters is sufficiently imposing and disquieting; but
when he speaks, his powerful, menacing voice, impressively articulated
speech, strong inexorable manner, and a terrifying power of intensely
critical listening raise the impression produced by him to absolute
tremendousness.

THE STRANGER. My name is Bohun. (General awe.) Have I the honor of
addressing Mrs. Clandon? (Mrs. Clandon bows. Bohun bows.) Miss Clandon?
(Gloria bows. Bohun bows.) Mr. Clandon?

CRAMPTON (insisting on his rightful name as angrily as he dares). My
name is Crampton, sir.

BOHUN. Oh, indeed. (Passing him over without further notice and turning
to Valentine.) Are you Mr. Clandon?

VALENTINE (making it a point of honor not to be impressed by him). Do I
look like it? My name is Valentine. I did the drugging.

BOHUN. Ah, quite so. Then Mr. Clandon has not yet arrived?

WAITER (entering anxiously through the window). Beg pardon, ma'am; but
can you tell me what became of that-- (He recognizes Bohun, and loses
all his self-possession. Bohun waits rigidly for him to pull himself
together. After a pathetic exhibition of confusion, he recovers himself
sufficiently to address Bohun weakly but coherently.) Beg pardon, sir,
I'm sure, sir. Was--was it you, sir?

BOHUN (ruthlessly). It was I.

WAITER (brokenly). Yes, sir. (Unable to restrain his tears.) You in a
false nose, Walter! (He sinks faintly into a chair at the table.) I beg
pardon, ma'am, I'm sure. A little giddiness--

BOHUN (commandingly). You will excuse him, Mrs. Clandon, when I inform
you that he is my father.

WAITER (heartbroken). Oh, no, no, Walter. A waiter for your father on
the top of a false nose! What will they think of you?

MRS. CLANDON (going to the waiter's chair in her kindest manner). I
am delighted to hear it, Mr. Bohun. Your father has been an excellent
friend to us since we came here. (Bohun bows gravely.)

WAITER (shaking his head). Oh, no, ma'am. It's very kind of you--
very ladylike and affable indeed, ma'am; but I should feel at a
great disadvantage off my own proper footing. Never mind my being the
gentleman's father, ma'am: it is only the accident of birth after all,
ma'am. (He gets up feebly.) You'll all excuse me, I'm sure, having
interrupted your business. (He begins to make his way along the table,
supporting himself from chair to chair, with his eye on the door.)

BOHUN. One moment. (The waiter stops, with a sinking heart.) My father
was a witness of what passed to-day, was he not, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON. Yes, most of it, I think.

BOHUN. In that case we shall want him.

WAITER (pleading). I hope it may not be necessary, sir. Busy evening for
me, sir, with that ball: very busy evening indeed, sir.

BOHUN (inexorably). We shall want you.

MRS. CLANDON (politely). Sit down, won't you?

WAITER (earnestly). Oh, if you please, ma'am, I really must draw the
line at sitting down. I couldn't let myself be seen doing such a thing,
ma'am: thank you, I am sure, all the same. (He looks round from face to
face wretchedly, with an expression that would melt a heart of stone.)

GLORIA. Don't let us waste time. William only wants to go on taking care
of us. I should like a cup of coffee.

WAITER (brightening perceptibly). Coffee, miss? (He gives a little gasp
of hope.) Certainly, miss. Thank you, miss: very timely, miss, very
thoughtful and considerate indeed. (To Mrs. Clandon, timidly but
expectantly.) Anything for you, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON Er--oh, yes: it's so hot, I think we might have a jug of
claret cup.

WAITER (beaming). Claret cup, ma'am! Certainly, ma'am.

GLORIA Oh, well I'll have a claret cup instead of coffee. Put some
cucumber in it.

WAITER (delighted). Cucumber, miss! yes, miss. (To Bohun.) Anything
special for you, sir? You don't like cucumber, sir.

BOHUN. If Mrs. Clandon will allow me--syphon--Scotch.

WAITER. Right, sir. (To Crampton.) Irish for you, sir, I think,
sir? (Crampton assents with a grunt. The waiter looks enquiringly at
Valentine.)

VALENTINE. I like the cucumber.

WAITER. Right, sir. (Summing up.) Claret cup, syphon, one Scotch and one
Irish?

MRS. CLANDON. I think that's right.

WAITER (perfectly happy). Right, ma'am. Directly, ma'am. Thank you. (He
ambles off through the window, having sounded the whole gamut of human
happiness, from the bottom to the top, in a little over two minutes.)

McCOMAS. We can begin now, I suppose?

BOHUN. We had better wait until Mrs. Clandon's husband arrives.

CRAMPTON. What d'y' mean? I'm her husband.

BOHUN (instantly pouncing on the inconsistency between this and his
previous statement). You said just now your name was Crampton.

CRAMPTON. So it is.

MRS. CLANDON } (all four { I--

GLORIA } speaking { My--

McCOMAS } simul- { Mrs.--

VALENTINE } taneously). { You--

BOHUN (drowning them in two thunderous words). One moment. (Dead
silence.) Pray allow me. Sit down everybody. (They obey humbly. Gloria
takes the saddle-bag chair on the hearth. Valentine slips around to her
side of the room and sits on the ottoman facing the window, so that
he can look at her. Crampton sits on the ottoman with his back to
Valentine's. Mrs. Clandon, who has all along kept at the opposite side
of the room in order to avoid Crampton as much as possible, sits near
the door, with McComas beside her on her left. Bohun places himself
magisterially in the centre of the group, near the corner of the table
on Mrs. Clandon's side. When they are settled, he fixes Crampton with
his eye, and begins.) In this family, it appears, the husband's name is
Crampton: the wife's Clandon. Thus we have on the very threshold of the
case an element of confusion.

VALENTINE (getting up and speaking across to him with one knee on the
ottoman). But it's perfectly simple.

BOHUN (annihilating him with a vocal thunderbolt). It is. Mrs. Clandon
has adopted another name. That is the obvious explanation which you
feared I could not find out for myself. You mistrust my intelligence,
Mr. Valentine-- (Stopping him as he is about to protest.) No: I don't
want you to answer that: I want you to think over it when you feel your
next impulse to interrupt me.

VALENTINE (dazed). This is simply breaking a butterfly on a wheel. What
does it matter? (He sits down again.)

BOHUN. I will tell you what it matters, sir. It matters that if this
family difference is to be smoothed over as we all hope it may be, Mrs.
Clandon, as a matter of social convenience and decency, will have to
resume her husband's name. (Mrs. Clandon assumes an expression of the
most determined obstinacy.) Or else Mr. Crampton will have to call
himself Mr. Clandon. (Crampton looks indomitably resolved to do nothing
of the sort.) No doubt you think that an easy matter, Mr. Valentine. (He
looks pointedly at Mrs. Clandon, then at Crampton.) I differ from you.
(He throws himself back in his chair, frowning heavily.)

McCOMAS (timidly). I think, Bohun, we had perhaps better dispose of the
important questions first.

BOHUN. McComas: there will be no difficulty about the important
questions. There never is. It is the trifles that will wreck you at the
harbor mouth. (McComas looks as if he considered this a paradox.) You
don't agree with me, eh?

McCOMAS (flatteringly). If I did--

BOHUN (interrupting him). If you did, you would be me, instead of being
what you are.

McCOMAS (fawning on him). Of course, Bohun, your specialty--

BOHUN (again interrupting him). My specialty is being right when other
people are wrong. If you agreed with me I should be of no use here. (He
nods at him to drive the point home; then turns suddenly and forcibly on
Crampton.) Now you, Mr. Crampton: what point in this business have you
most at heart?

CRAMPTON (beginning slowly). I wish to put all considerations of self
aside in this matter--

BOHUN (interrupting him). So do we all, Mr. Crampton. (To Mrs. Clandon.)
Y o u wish to put self aside, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON. Yes: I am not consulting my own feelings in being here.

BOHUN. So do you, Miss Clandon?

GLORIA. Yes.

BOHUN. I thought so. We all do.

VALENTINE. Except me. My aims are selfish.

BOHUN. That's because you think an impression of sincerity will produce
a better effect on Miss Clandon than an impression of disinterestedness.
(Valentine, utterly dismantled and destroyed by this just remark, takes
refuge in a feeble, speechless smile. Bohun, satisfied at having now
effectually crushed all rebellion, throws himself back in his chair,
with an air of being prepared to listen tolerantly to their grievances.)
Now, Mr. Crampton, go on. It's understood that self is put aside. Human
nature always begins by saying that.

CRAMPTON. But I mean it, sir.

BOHUN. Quite so. Now for your point.

CRAMPTON. Every reasonable person will admit that it's an unselfish
one--the children.

BOHUN. Well? What about the children?

CRAMPTON (with emotion). They have--

BOHUN (pouncing forward again). Stop. You're going to tell me about your
feelings, Mr. Crampton. Don't: I sympathize with them; but they're not
my business. Tell us exactly what you want: that's what we have to get
at.

CRAMPTON (uneasily). It's a very difficult question to answer, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN. Come: I'll help you out. What do you object to in the present
circumstances of the children?

CRAMPTON. I object to the way they have been brought up.

BOHUN. How do you propose to alter that now?

CRAMPTON. I think they ought to dress more quietly.

VALENTINE. Nonsense.

BOHUN (instantly flinging himself back in his chair, outraged by the
interruption). When you are done, Mr. Valentine--when you are quite
done.

VALENTINE. What's wrong with Miss Clandon's dress?

CRAMPTON (hotly to Valentine). My opinion is as good as yours.

GLORIA (warningly). Father!

CRAMPTON (subsiding piteously). I didn't mean you, my dear. (Pleading
earnestly to Bohun.) But the two younger ones! you have not seen them,
Mr. Bohun; and indeed I think you would agree with me that there is
something very noticeable, something almost gay and frivolous in their
style of dressing.

MRS. CLANDON (impatiently). Do you suppose I choose their clothes for
them? Really this is childish.

CRAMPTON (furious, rising). Childish! (Mrs. Clandon rises indignantly.)

McCOMAS } (all ris- } Crampton, you promised--

VALENTINE } ing and } Ridiculous. They dress

          }  speaking   }   charmingly.

GLORIA } together). } Pray let us behave reasonably.

Tumult. Suddenly they hear a chime of glasses in the room behind them.
They turn in silent surprise and find that the waiter has just come back
from the bar in the garden, and is jingling his tray warningly as he
comes softly to the table with it.

WAITER (to Crampton, setting a tumbler apart on the table). Irish for
you, sir. (Crampton sits down a little shamefacedly. The waiter sets
another tumbler and a syphon apart, saying to Bohun) Scotch and syphon
for you, sir. (Bohun waves his hand impatiently. The waiter places a
large glass jug in the middle.) And claret cup. (All subside into their
seats. Peace reigns.)

MRS. CLANDON (humbly to Bohun). I am afraid we interrupted you, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN (calmly). You did. (To the waiter, who is going out.) Just wait a
bit.

WAITER. Yes, sir. Certainly, sir. (He takes his stand behind Bohun's
chair.)

MRS. CLANDON (to the waiter). You don't mind our detaining you, I hope.
Mr. Bohun wishes it.

WAITER (now quite at his ease). Oh, no, ma'am, not at all, ma'am. It
is a pleasure to me to watch the working of his trained and powerful
mind--very stimulating, very entertaining and instructive indeed, ma'am.

BOHUN (resuming command of the proceedings). Now, Mr. Crampton: we are
waiting for you. Do you give up your objection to the dressing, or do
you stick to it?

CRAMPTON (pleading). Mr. Bohun: consider my position for a moment. I
haven't got myself alone to consider: there's my sister Sophronia and
my brother-in-law and all their circle. They have a great horror of
anything that is at all--at all--well--

BOHUN. Out with it. Fast? Loud? Gay?

CRAMPTON. Not in any unprincipled sense of course; but--but-- (blurting
it out desperately) those two children would shock them. They're not fit
to mix with their own people. That's what I complain of.

MRS. CLANDON (with suppressed impatience). Mr. Valentine: do you think
there is anything fast or loud about Phil and Dolly?

VALENTINE. Certainly not. It's utter bosh. Nothing can be in better
taste.

CRAMPTON. Oh, yes: of course you say so.

MRS. CLANDON. William: you see a great deal of good English society. Are
my children overdressed?

WAITER (reassuringly). Oh, dear, no, ma'am. (Persuasively.) Oh, no,
sir, not at all. A little pretty and tasty no doubt; but very choice
and classy--very genteel and high toned indeed. Might be the son and
daughter of a Dean, sir, I assure you, sir. You have only to look at
them, sir, to-- (At this moment a harlequin and columbine, dancing to
the music of the band in the garden, which has just reached the coda of
a waltz, whirl one another into the room. The harlequin's dress is
made of lozenges, an inch square, of turquoise blue silk and gold
alternately. His hat is gilt and his mask turned up. The columbine's
petticoats are the epitome of a harvest field, golden orange and poppy
crimson, with a tiny velvet jacket for the poppy stamens. They pass, an
exquisite and dazzling apparition, between McComas and Bohun, and then
back in a circle to the end of the table, where, as the final chord of
the waltz is struck, they make a tableau in the middle of the company,
the harlequin down on his left knee, and the columbine standing on his
right knee, with her arms curved over her head. Unlike their dancing,
which is charmingly graceful, their attitudinizing is hardly a success,
and threatens to end in a catastrophe.)

THE COLUMBINE (screaming). Lift me down, somebody: I'm going to fall.
Papa: lift me down.

CRAMPTON (anxiously running to her and taking her hands). My child!

DOLLY (jumping down with his help). Thanks: so nice of you. (Phil,
putting his hat into his belt, sits on the side of the table and pours
out some claret cup. Crampton returns to his place on the ottoman in
great perplexity.) Oh, what fun! Oh, dear. (She seats herself with a
vault on the front edge of the table, panting.) Oh, claret cup! (She
drinks.)

BOHUN (in powerful tones). This is the younger lady, is it?

DOLLY (slipping down off the table in alarm at his formidable voice and
manner). Yes, sir. Please, who are you?

MRS. CLANDON. This is Mr. Bohun, Dolly, who has very kindly come to help
us this evening.

DOLLY. Oh, then he comes as a boon and a blessing--

PHILIP. Sh!

CRAMPTON. Mr. Bohun--McComas: I appeal to you. Is this right? Would you
blame my sister's family for objecting to this?

DOLLY (flushing ominously). Have you begun again?

CRAMPTON (propitiating her). No, no. It's perhaps natural at your age.

DOLLY (obstinately). Never mind my age. Is it pretty?

CRAMPTON. Yes, dear, yes. (He sits down in token of submission.)

DOLLY (following him insistently). Do you like it?

CRAMPTON. My child: how can you expect me to like it or to approve of
it?

DOLLY (determined not to let him off). How can you think it pretty and
not like it?

McCOMAS (rising, angry and scandalized). Really I must say-- (Bohun,
who has listened to Dolly with the highest approval, is down on him
instantly.)

BOHUN. No: don't interrupt, McComas. The young lady's method is right.
(To Dolly, with tremendous emphasis.) Press your questions, Miss
Clandon: press your questions.

DOLLY (rising). Oh, dear, you are a regular overwhelmer! Do you always
go on like this?

BOHUN (rising). Yes. Don't you try to put me out of countenance, young
lady: you're too young to do it. (He takes McComas's chair from
beside Mrs. Clandon's and sets it beside his own.) Sit down. (Dolly,
fascinated, obeys; and Bohun sits down again. McComas, robbed of
his seat, takes a chair on the other side between the table and the
ottoman.) Now, Mr. Crampton, the facts are before you--both of them. You
think you'd like to have your two youngest children to live with you.
Well, you wouldn't-- (Crampton tries to protest; but Bohun will not
have it on any terms.) No, you wouldn't: you think you would; but I know
better than you. You'd want this young lady here to give up dressing
like a stage columbine in the evening and like a fashionable columbine
in the morning. Well, she won't--never. She thinks she will; but--

DOLLY (interrupting him). No I don't. (Resolutely.) I'll n e v e r give
up dressing prettily. Never. As Gloria said to that man in Madeira,
never, never, never while grass grows or water runs.

VALENTINE (rising in the wildest agitation). What! What! (Beginning to
speak very fast.) When did she say that? Who did she say that to?

BOHUN (throwing himself back with massive, pitying remonstrance). Mr.
Valentine--

VALENTINE (pepperily). Don't you interrupt me, sir: this is something
really serious. I i n s i s t on knowing who Miss Clandon said that to.

DOLLY. Perhaps Phil remembers. Which was it, Phil? number three or
number five?

VALENTINE. Number five!!!

PHILIP. Courage, Valentine. It wasn't number five: it was only a tame
naval lieutenant that was always on hand--the most patient and harmless
of mortals.

GLORIA (coldly). What are we discussing now, pray?

VALENTINE (very red). Excuse me: I am sorry I interrupted. I shall
intrude no further, Mrs. Clandon. (He bows to Mrs. Clandon and marches
away into the garden, boiling with suppressed rage.)

DOLLY. Hmhm!

PHILIP. Ahah!

GLORIA. Please go on, Mr. Bohun.

DOLLY (striking in as Bohun, frowning formidably, collects himself for a
fresh grapple with the case). You're going to bully us, Mr. Bohun.

BOHUN. I--

DOLLY (interrupting him). Oh, yes, you are: you think you're not; but
you are. I know by your eyebrows.

BOHUN (capitulating). Mrs. Clandon: these are clever children-- clear
headed, well brought up children. I make that admission deliberately.
Can you, in return, point out to me any way of inducting them to hold
their tongues?

MRS. CLANDON. Dolly, dearest--!

PHILIP. Our old failing, Dolly. Silence! (Dolly holds her mouth.)

MRS. CLANDON. Now, Mr. Bohun, before they begin again--

WAITER (softer). Be quick, sir: be quick.

DOLLY (beaming at him). Dear William!

PHILIP. Sh!

BOHUN (unexpectedly beginning by hurling a question straight at Dolly).
Have you any intention of getting married?

DOLLY. I! Well, Finch calls me by my Christian name.

McCOMAS. I will not have this. Mr. Bohun: I use the young lady's
Christian name naturally as an old friend of her mother's.

DOLLY. Yes, you call me Dolly as an old friend of my mother's. But what
about Dorothee-ee-a? (McComas rises indignantly.)

CRAMPTON (anxiously, rising to restrain him). Keep your temper, McComas.
Don't let us quarrel. Be patient.

McCOMAS. I will not be patient. You are shewing the most wretched
weakness of character, Crampton. I say this is monstrous.

DOLLY. Mr. Bohun: please bully Finch for us.

BOHUN. I will. McComas: you're making yourself ridiculous. Sit down.

McCOMAS. I--

BOHUN (waving him down imperiously). No: sit down, sit down. (McComas
sits down sulkily; and Crampton, much relieved, follows his example.)

DOLLY (to Bohun, meekly). Thank you.

BOHUN. Now, listen to me, all of you. I give no opinion, McComas, as
to how far you may or may not have committed yourself in the direction
indicated by this young lady. (McComas is about to protest.) No: don't
interrupt me: if she doesn't marry you she will marry somebody else.
That is the solution of the difficulty as to her not bearing her
father's name. The other lady intends to get married.

GLORIA (flushing). Mr. Bohun!

BOHUN. Oh, yes, you do: you don't know it; but you do.

GLORIA (rising). Stop. I warn you, Mr. Bohun, not to answer for my
intentions.

BOHUN (rising). It's no use, Miss Clandon: you can't put me down. I tell
you your name will soon be neither Clandon nor Crampton; and I could
tell you what it will be if I chose. (He goes to the other end of the
table, where he unrolls his domino, and puts the false nose on the
table. When he moves they all rise; and Phil goes to the window. Bohun,
with a gesture, summons the waiter to help him in robing.) Mr. Crampton:
your notion of going to law is all nonsense: your children will be of
age before you could get the point decided. (Allowing the waiter to put
the domino on his shoulders.) You can do nothing but make a friendly
arrangement. If you want your family more than they want you, you'll get
the worse of the arrangement: if they want you more than you want them,
you'll get the better of it. (He shakes the domino into becoming
folds and takes up the false nose. Dolly gazes admiringly at him.) The
strength of their position lies in their being very agreeable people
personally. The strength of your position lies in your income. (He claps
on the false nose, and is again grotesquely transfigured.)

DOLLY (running to him). Oh, now you look quite like a human being.
Mayn't I have just one dance with you? C a n you dance? (Phil, resuming
his part of harlequin, waves his hat as if casting a spell on them.)

BOHUN (thunderously). Yes: you think I can't; but I can. Come along. (He
seizes her and dances off with her through the window in a most powerful
manner, but with studied propriety and grace. The waiter is meanwhile
busy putting the chairs back in their customary places.)

PHILIP. "On with the dance: let joy be unconfined." William!

WAITER. Yes, sir.

PHILIP. Can you procure a couple of dominos and false noses for my
father and Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS. Most certainly not. I protest--

CRAMPTON. No, no. What harm will it do, just for once, McComas? Don't
let us be spoil-sports.

McCOMAS. Crampton: you are not the man I took you for. (Pointedly.)
Bullies are always cowards. (He goes disgustedly towards the window.)

CRAMPTON (following him). Well, never mind. We must indulge them a
little. Can you get us something to wear, waiter?

WAITER. Certainly, sir. (He precedes them to the window, and stands
aside there to let them pass out before him.) This way, sir. Dominos and
noses, sir?

McCOMAS (angrily, on his way out). I shall wear my own nose.

WAITER (suavely). Oh, dear, yes, sir: the false one will fit over it
quite easily, sir: plenty of room, sir, plenty of room. (He goes out
after McComas.)

CRAMPTON (turning at the window to Phil with an attempt at genial
fatherliness). Come along, my boy, come along. (He goes.)

PHILIP (cheerily, following him). Coming, dad, coming. (On the window
threshold, he stops; looking after Crampton; then turns fantastically
with his bat bent into a halo round his head, and says with a lowered
voice to Mrs. Clandon and Gloria) Did you feel the pathos of that? (He
vanishes.)

MRS. CLANDON (left alone with Gloria). Why did Mr. Valentine go away so
suddenly, I wonder?

GLORIA (petulantly). I don't know. Yes, I d o know. Let us go and see
the dancing. (They go towards the window, and are met by Valentine, who
comes in from the garden walking quickly, with his face set and sulky.)

VALENTINE (stiffly). Excuse me. I thought the party had quite broken up.

GLORIA (nagging). Then why did you come back?

VALENTINE. I came back because I am penniless. I can't get out that way
without a five shilling ticket.

MRS. CLANDON. Has anything annoyed you, Mr. Valentine?

GLORIA. Never mind him, mother. This is a fresh insult to me: that is
all.

MRS. CLANDON (hardly able to realize that Gloria is deliberately
provoking an altercation). Gloria!

VALENTINE. Mrs. Clandon: have I said anything insulting? Have I done
anything insulting?

GLORIA. you have implied that my past has been like yours. That is the
worst of insults.

VALENTINE. I imply nothing of the sort. I declare that my past has been
blameless in comparison with yours.

MRS. CLANDON (most indignantly). Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE. Well, what am I to think when I learn that Miss Clandon
has made exactly the same speeches to other men that she has made
to me--when I hear of at least five former lovers, with a tame naval
lieutenant thrown in? Oh, it's too bad.

MRS. CLANDON. But you surely do not believe that these affairs-- mere
jokes of the children's--were serious, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE. Not to you--not to her, perhaps. But I know what the men
felt. (With ludicrously genuine earnestness.) Have you ever thought
of the wrecked lives, the marriages contracted in the recklessness of
despair, the suicides, the--the--the--

GLORIA (interrupting him contemptuously). Mother: this man is a
sentimental idiot. (She sweeps away to the fireplace.)

MRS. CLANDON (shocked). Oh, my d e a r e s t Gloria, Mr. Valentine will
think that rude.

VALENTINE. I am not a sentimental idiot. I am cured of sentiment for
ever. (He sits down in dudgeon.)

MRS. CLANDON. Mr. Valentine: you must excuse us all. Women have to
unlearn the false good manners of their slavery before they acquire the
genuine good manners of their freedom. Don't think Gloria vulgar (Gloria
turns, astonished): she is not really so.

GLORIA. Mother! You apologize for me to h i m!

MRS. CLANDON. My dear: you have some of the faults of youth as well as
its qualities; and Mr. Valentine seems rather too old fashioned in his
ideas about his own sex to like being called an idiot. And now had we
not better go and see what Dolly is doing? (She goes towards the window.
Valentine rises.)

GLORIA. Do you go, mother. I wish to speak to Mr. Valentine alone.

MRS. CLANDON (startled into a remonstrance). My dear! (Recollecting
herself.) I beg your pardon, Gloria. Certainly, if you wish. (She bows
to Valentine and goes out.)

VALENTINE. Oh, if your mother were only a widow! She's worth six of you.

GLORIA. That is the first thing I have heard you say that does you
honor.

VALENTINE. Stuff! Come: say what you want to say and let me go.

GLORIA. I have only this to say. You dragged me down to your level for
a moment this afternoon. Do you think, if that had ever happened before,
that I should not have been on my guard--that I should not have known
what was coming, and known my own miserable weakness?

VALENTINE (scolding at her passionately). Don't talk of it in that way.
What do I care for anything in you but your weakness, as you call it?
You thought yourself very safe, didn't you, behind your advanced ideas!
I amused myself by upsetting t h e m pretty easily.

GLORIA (insolently, feeling that now she can do as she likes with him).
Indeed!

VALENTINE. But why did I do it? Because I was being tempted to awaken
your heart--to stir the depths in you. Why was I tempted? Because Nature
was in deadly earnest with me when I was in jest with her. When the
great moment came, who was awakened? who was stirred? in whom did the
depths break up? In myself--m y s e l f: I was transported: you were
only offended--shocked. You were only an ordinary young lady, too
ordinary to allow tame lieutenants to go as far as I went. That's all.
I shall not trouble you with conventional apologies. Good-bye. (He makes
resolutely for the door.)

GLORIA. Stop. (He hesitates.) Oh, will you understand, if I tell you the
truth, that I am not making an advance to you?

VALENTINE. Pooh! I know what you're going to say. You think you're not
ordinary--that I was right--that you really have those depths in your
nature. It flatters you to believe it. (She recoils.) Well, I grant that
you are not ordinary in some ways: you are a clever girl (Gloria stifles
an exclamation of rage, and takes a threatening step towards him); but
you've not been awakened yet. You didn't care: you don't care. It was
my tragedy, not yours. Good-bye. (He turns to the door. She watches him,
appalled to see him slipping from her grasp. As he turns the handle, he
pauses; then turns again to her, offering his hand.) Let us part kindly.

GLORIA (enormously relieved, and immediately turning her back on him
deliberately.) Good-bye. I trust you will soon recover from the wound.

VALENTINE (brightening up as it flashes on him that he is master of the
situation after all). I shall recover: such wounds heal more than they
harm. After all, I still have my own Gloria.

GLORIA (facing him quickly). What do you mean?

VALENTINE. The Gloria of my imagination.

GLORIA (proudly). Keep your own Gloria--the Gloria of your imagination.
(Her emotion begins to break through her pride.) The real Gloria--the
Gloria who was shocked, offended, horrified--oh, yes, quite truly--who
was driven almost mad with shame by the feeling that all her power over
herself had been broken down at her first real encounter with--with--
(The color rushes over her face again. She covers it with her left hand,
and puts her right on his left arm to support herself.)

VALENTINE. Take care. I'm losing my senses again. (Summoning all her
courage, she takes away her hand from her face and puts it on his right
shoulder, turning him towards her and looking him straight in the eyes.
He begins to protest agitatedly.) Gloria: be sensible: it's no use: I
haven't a penny in the world.

GLORIA. Can't you earn one? Other people do.

VALENTINE (half delighted, half frightened). I never could--you'd
be unhappy-- My dearest love: I should be the merest fortune-hunting
adventurer if-- (Her grip on his arms tightens; and she kisses him.)
Oh, Lord! (Breathless.) Oh, I-- (He gasps.) I don't know anything about
women: twelve years' experience is not enough. (In a gust of jealousy
she throws him away from her; and he reels her back into the chair like
a leaf before the wind, as Dolly dances in, waltzing with the waiter,
followed by Mrs. Clandon and Finch, also waltzing, and Phil pirouetting
by himself.)

DOLLY (sinking on the chair at the writing-table). Oh, I'm out of
breath. How beautifully you waltz, William!

MRS. CLANDON (sinking on the saddlebag seat on the hearth). Oh, how
could you make me do such a silly thing, Finch! I haven't danced since
the soiree at South Place twenty years ago.

GLORIA (peremptorily at Valentine). Get up. (Valentine gets up
abjectly.) Now let us have no false delicacy. Tell my mother that we
have agreed to marry one another. (A silence of stupefaction ensues.
Valentine, dumb with panic, looks at them with an obvious impulse to run
away.)

DOLLY (breaking the silence). Number Six!

PHILIP. Sh!

DOLLY (tumultuously). Oh, my feelings! I want to kiss somebody; and we
bar it in the family. Where's Finch?

McCOMAS (starting violently). No, positively-- (Crampton appears in the
window.)

DOLLY (running to Crampton). Oh, you're just in time. (She kisses him.)
Now (leading him forward) bless them.

GLORIA. No. I will have no such thing, even in jest. When I need a
blessing, I shall ask my mother's.

CRAMPTON (to Gloria, with deep disappointment). Am I to understand that
you have engaged yourself to this young gentleman?

GLORIA (resolutely). Yes. Do you intend to be our friend or--

DOLLY (interposing). --or our father?

CRAMPTON. I should like to be both, my child. But surely--! Mr.
Valentine: I appeal to your sense of honor.

VALENTINE. You're quite right. It's perfect madness. If we go out to
dance together I shall have to borrow five shillings from her for a
ticket. Gloria: don't be rash: you're throwing yourself away. I'd much
better clear straight out of this, and never see any of you again. I
shan't commit suicide: I shan't even be unhappy. It'll be a relief to
me: I--I'm frightened, I'm positively frightened; and that's the plain
truth.

GLORIA (determinedly). You shall not go.

VALENTINE (quailing). No, dearest: of course not. But--oh, will somebody
only talk sense for a moment and bring us all to reason! I can't.
Where's Bohun? Bohun's the man. Phil: go and summon Bohun--

PHILIP. From the vastly deep. I go. (He makes his bat quiver in the air
and darts away through the window.)

WAITER (harmoniously to Valentine). If you will excuse my putting in a
word, sir, do not let a matter of five shillings stand between you and
your happiness, sir. We shall be only too pleased to put the ticket down
to you: and you can settle at your convenience. Very glad to meet you in
any way, very happy and pleased indeed, sir.

PHILIP (re-appearing). He comes. (He waves his bat over the window.
Bohun comes in, taking off his false nose and throwing it on the table
in passing as he comes between Gloria and Valentine.)

VALENTINE. The point is, Mr. Bohun--

McCOMAS (interrupting from the hearthrug). Excuse me, sir: the point
must be put to him by a solicitor. The question is one of an engagement
between these two young people. The lady has some property, and (looking
at Crampton) will probably have a good deal more.

CRAMPTON. Possibly. I hope so.

VALENTINE. And the gentleman hasn't a rap.

BOHUN (nailing Valentine to the point instantly). Then insist on a
settlement. That shocks your delicacy: most sensible precautions do. But
you ask my advice; and I give it to you. Have a settlement.

GLORIA (proudly). He shall have a settlement.

VALENTINE. My good sir, I don't want advice for myself. Give h e r some
advice.

BOHUN. She won't take it. When you're married, she won't take yours
either-- (turning suddenly on Gloria) oh, no, you won't: you think you
will; but you won't. He'll set to work and earn his living-- (turning
suddenly to Valentine) oh, yes, you will: you think you won't; but you
will. She'll make you.

CRAMPTON (only half persuaded). Then, Mr. Bohun, you don't think this
match an unwise one?

BOHUN. Yes, I do: all matches are unwise. It's unwise to be born; it's
unwise to be married; it's unwise to live; and it's unwise to die.

WAITER (insinuating himself between Crampton and Valentine). Then, if
I may respectfully put in a word in, sir, so much the worse for
wisdom! (To Valentine, benignly.) Cheer up, sir, cheer up: every man is
frightened of marriage when it comes to the point; but it often turns
out very comfortable, very enjoyable and happy indeed, sir--from time
to time. I never was master in my own house, sir: my wife was like your
young lady: she was of a commanding and masterful disposition, which my
son has inherited. But if I had my life to live twice over, I'd do it
again, I'd do it again, I assure you. You never can tell, sir: you never
can tell.

PHILIP. Allow me to remark that if Gloria has made up her mind--

DOLLY. The matter's settled and Valentine's done for. And we're missing
all the dances.

VALENTINE (to Gloria, gallantly making the best of it). May I have a
dance--

BOHUN (interposing in his grandest diapason). Excuse me: I claim that
privilege as counsel's fee. May I have the honor--thank you. (He dances
away with Gloria and disappears among the lanterns, leaving Valentine
gasping.)

VALENTINE (recovering his breath). Dolly: may I-- (offering himself as
her partner)?

DOLLY. Nonsense! (Eluding him and running round the table to the
fireplace.) Finch--my Finch! (She pounces on McComas and makes him
dance.)

McCOMAS (protesting). Pray restrain--really--(He is borne off dancing
through the window.)

VALENTINE (making a last effort). Mrs. Clandon: may I--

PHILIP (forestalling him). Come, mother. (He seizes his mother and
whirls her away.)

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Phil, Phil-- (She shares McComas's fate.)

CRAMPTON (following them with senile glee). Ho! ho! He! he! he! (He goes
into the garden chuckling at the fun.)

VALENTINE (collapsing on the ottoman and staring at the waiter). I might
as well be a married man already. (The waiter contemplates the captured
Duellist of Sex with affectionate commiseration, shaking his head
slowly.)

CURTAIN.

========================================
========================================

YOU NEVER CAN TELL

By George Bernard Shaw




ACT I

In a dentist's operating room on a fine August morning in 1896. Not the
usual tiny London den, but the best sitting room of a furnished lodging
in a terrace on the sea front at a fashionable watering place. The
operating chair, with a gas pump and cylinder beside it, is half way
between the centre of the room and one of the corners. If you look into
the room through the window which lights it, you will see the fireplace
in the middle of the wall opposite you, with the door beside it to your
left; an M.R.C.S. diploma in a frame hung on the chimneypiece; an easy
chair covered in black leather on the hearth; a neat stool and bench,
with vice, tools, and a mortar and pestle in the corner to the right.
Near this bench stands a slender machine like a whip provided with a
stand, a pedal, and an exaggerated winch. Recognising this as a dental
drill, you shudder and look away to your left, where you can see another
window, underneath which stands a writing table, with a blotter and a
diary on it, and a chair. Next the writing table, towards the door, is
a leather covered sofa. The opposite wall, close on your right, is
occupied mostly by a bookcase. The operating chair is under your nose,
facing you, with the cabinet of instruments handy to it on your left.
You observe that the professional furniture and apparatus are new,
and that the wall paper, designed, with the taste of an undertaker,
in festoons and urns, the carpet with its symmetrical plans of rich,
cabbagy nosegays, the glass gasalier with lustres; the ornamental gilt
rimmed blue candlesticks on the ends of the mantelshelf, also glass
draped with lustres, and the ormolu clock under a glass-cover in the
middle between them, its uselessness emphasized by a cheap American
clock disrespectfully placed beside it and now indicating 12 o'clock
noon, all combine with the black marble which gives the fireplace the
air of a miniature family vault, to suggest early Victorian commercial
respectability, belief in money, Bible fetichism, fear of hell always at
war with fear of poverty, instinctive horror of the passionate character
of art, love and Roman Catholic religion, and all the first fruits of
plutocracy in the early generations of the industrial revolution.

There is no shadow of this on the two persons who are occupying the room
just now. One of them, a very pretty woman in miniature, her tiny figure
dressed with the daintiest gaiety, is of a later generation, being
hardly eighteen yet. This darling little creature clearly does not
belong to the room, or even to the country; for her complexion, though
very delicate, has been burnt biscuit color by some warmer sun than
England's; and yet there is, for a very subtle observer, a link between
them. For she has a glass of water in her hand, and a rapidly clearing
cloud of Spartan obstinacy on her tiny firm set mouth and quaintly
squared eyebrows. If the least line of conscience could be traced
between those eyebrows, an Evangelical might cherish some faint hope
of finding her a sheep in wolf's clothing--for her frock is recklessly
pretty--but as the cloud vanishes it leaves her frontal sinus as
smoothly free from conviction of sin as a kitten's.

The dentist, contemplating her with the self-satisfaction of a
successful operator, is a young man of thirty or thereabouts. He does
not give the impression of being much of a workman: his professional
manner evidently strikes him as being a joke, and is underlain by a
thoughtless pleasantry which betrays the young gentleman still unsettled
and in search of amusing adventures, behind the newly set-up dentist
in search of patients. He is not without gravity of demeanor; but the
strained nostrils stamp it as the gravity of the humorist. His eyes are
clear, alert, of sceptically moderate size, and yet a little rash; his
forehead is an excellent one, with plenty of room behind it; his nose
and chin cavalierly handsome. On the whole, an attractive, noticeable
beginner, of whose prospects a man of business might form a tolerably
favorable estimate.

THE YOUNG LADY (handing him the glass). Thank you. (In spite of the
biscuit complexion she has not the slightest foreign accent.)

THE DENTIST (putting it down on the ledge of his cabinet of
instruments). That was my first tooth.

THE YOUNG LADY (aghast). Your first! Do you mean to say that you began
practising on me?

THE DENTIST. Every dentist has to begin on somebody.

THE YOUNG LADY. Yes: somebody in a hospital, not people who pay.

THE DENTIST (laughing). Oh, the hospital doesn't count. I only meant my
first tooth in private practice. Why didn't you let me give you gas?

THE YOUNG LADY. Because you said it would be five shillings extra.

THE DENTIST (shocked). Oh, don't say that. It makes me feel as if I had
hurt you for the sake of five shillings.

THE YOUNG LADY (with cool insolence). Well, so you have! (She gets up.)
Why shouldn't you? it's your business to hurt people. (It amuses him to
be treated in this fashion: he chuckles secretly as he proceeds to clean
and replace his instruments. She shakes her dress into order; looks
inquisitively about her; and goes to the window.) You have a good view
of the sea from these rooms! Are they expensive?

THE DENTIST. Yes.

THE YOUNG LADY. You don't own the whole house, do you?

THE DENTIST. No.

THE YOUNG LADY (taking the chair which stands at the writing-table
and looking critically at it as she spins it round on one leg.) Your
furniture isn't quite the latest thing, is it?

THE DENTIST. It's my landlord's.

THE YOUNG LADY. Does he own that nice comfortable Bath chair? (pointing
to the operating chair.)

THE DENTIST. No: I have that on the hire-purchase system.

THE YOUNG LADY (disparagingly). I thought so. (Looking about her again
in search of further conclusions.) I suppose you haven't been here long?

THE DENTIST. Six weeks. Is there anything else you would like to know?

THE YOUNG LADY (the hint quite lost on her). Any family?

THE DENTIST. I am not married.

THE YOUNG LADY. Of course not: anybody can see that. I meant sisters and
mother and that sort of thing.

THE DENTIST. Not on the premises.

THE YOUNG LADY. Hm! If you've been here six weeks, and mine was your
first tooth, the practice can't be very large, can it?

THE DENTIST. Not as yet. (He shuts the cabinet, having tidied up
everything.)

THE YOUNG LADY. Well, good luck! (She takes our her purse.) Five
shillings, you said it would be?

THE DENTIST. Five shillings.

THE YOUNG LADY (producing a crown piece). Do you charge five shillings
for everything?

THE DENTIST. Yes.

THE YOUNG LADY. Why?

THE DENTIST. It's my system. I'm what's called a five shilling dentist.

THE YOUNG LADY. How nice! Well, here! (holding up the crown piece) a
nice new five shilling piece! your first fee! Make a hole in it with the
thing you drill people's teeth with and wear it on your watch-chain.

THE DENTIST. Thank you.

THE PARLOR MAID (appearing at the door). The young lady's brother, sir.

A handsome man in miniature, obviously the young lady's twin, comes
in eagerly. He wears a suit of terra-cotta cashmere, the elegantly cut
frock coat lined in brown silk, and carries in his hand a brown tall
hat and tan gloves to match. He has his sister's delicate biscuit
complexion, and is built on the same small scale; but he is elastic
and strong in muscle, decisive in movement, unexpectedly deeptoned and
trenchant in speech, and with perfect manners and a finished personal
style which might be envied by a man twice his age. Suavity and
self-possession are points of honor with him; and though this, rightly
considered, is only the modern mode of boyish self-consciousness,
its effect is none the less staggering to his elders, and would be
insufferable in a less prepossessing youth. He is promptitude itself,
and has a question ready the moment he enters.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN. Am I on time?

THE YOUNG LADY. No: it's all over.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN. Did you howl?

THE YOUNG LADY. Oh, something awful. Mr. Valentine: this is my brother
Phil. Phil: this is Mr. Valentine, our new dentist. (Valentine and Phil
bow to one another. She proceeds, all in one breath.) He's only been
here six weeks; and he's a bachelor. The house isn't his; and the
furniture is the landlord's; but the professional plant is hired. He
got my tooth out beautifully at the first go; and he and I are great
friends.

PHILIP. Been asking a lot of questions?

THE YOUNG LADY (as if incapable of doing such a thing). Oh, no.

PHILIP. Glad to hear it. (To Valentine.) So good of you not to mind us,
Mr. Valentine. The fact is, we've never been in England before; and our
mother tells us that the people here simply won't stand us. Come and
lunch with us. (Valentine, bewildered by the leaps and bounds with which
their acquaintanceship is proceeding, gasps; but he has no opportunity
of speaking, as the conversation of the twins is swift and continuous.)

THE YOUNG LADY. Oh, do, Mr. Valentine.

PHILIP. At the Marine Hotel--half past one.

THE YOUNG LADY. We shall be able to tell mamma that a respectable
Englishman has promised to lunch with us.

PHILIP. Say no more, Mr. Valentine: you'll come.

VALENTINE. Say no more! I haven't said anything. May I ask whom I have
the pleasure of entertaining? It's really quite impossible for me to
lunch at the Marine Hotel with two perfect strangers.

THE YOUNG LADY (flippantly). Ooooh! what bosh! One patient in six weeks!
What difference does it make to you?

PHILIP (maturely). No, Dolly: my knowledge of human nature confirms
Mr. Valentine's judgment. He is right. Let me introduce Miss Dorothy
Clandon, commonly called Dolly. (Valentine bows to Dolly. She nods to
him.) I'm Philip Clandon. We're from Madeira, but perfectly respectable,
so far.

VALENTINE. Clandon! Are you related to--

DOLLY (unexpectedly crying out in despair). Yes, we are.

VALENTINE (astonished). I beg your pardon?

DOLLY. Oh, we are, we are. It's all over, Phil: they know all about us
in England. (To Valentine.) Oh, you can't think how maddening it is to
be related to a celebrated person, and never be valued anywhere for our
own sakes.

VALENTINE. But excuse me: the gentleman I was thinking of is not
celebrated.

DOLLY (staring at him). Gentleman! (Phil is also puzzled.)

VALENTINE. Yes. I was going to ask whether you were by any chance a
daughter of Mr. Densmore Clandon of Newbury Hall.

DOLLY (vacantly). No.

PHILIP. Well come, Dolly: how do you know you're not?

DOLLY (cheered). Oh, I forgot. Of course. Perhaps I am.

VALENTINE. Don't you know?

PHILIP. Not in the least.

DOLLY. It's a wise child--

PHILIP (cutting her short). Sh! (Valentine starts nervously; for the
sound made by Philip, though but momentary, is like cutting a sheet of
silk in two with a flash of lightning. It is the result of long practice
in checking Dolly's indiscretions.) The fact is, Mr. Valentine, we are
the children of the celebrated Mrs. Lanfrey Clandon, an authoress of
great repute--in Madeira. No household is complete without her works.
We came to England to get away from them. The are called the Twentieth
Century Treatises.

DOLLY. Twentieth Century Cooking.

PHILIP. Twentieth Century Creeds.

DOLLY. Twentieth Century Clothing.

PHILIP. Twentieth Century Conduct.

DOLLY. Twentieth Century Children.

PHILIP. Twentieth Century Parents.

DOLLY. Cloth limp, half a dollar.

PHILIP. Or mounted on linen for hard family use, two dollars. No family
should be without them. Read them, Mr. Valentine: they'll improve your
mind.

DOLLY. But not till we've gone, please.

PHILIP. Quite so: we prefer people with unimproved minds. Our own minds
are in that fresh and unspoiled condition.

VALENTINE (dubiously). Hm!

DOLLY (echoing him inquiringly). Hm? Phil: he prefers people whose minds
are improved.

PHILIP. In that case we shall have to introduce him to the other member
of the family: the Woman of the Twentieth Century; our sister Gloria!

DOLLY (dithyrambically). Nature's masterpiece!

PHILIP. Learning's daughter!

DOLLY. Madeira's pride!

PHILIP. Beauty's paragon!

DOLLY (suddenly descending to prose). Bosh! No complexion.

VALENTINE (desperately). May I have a word?

PHILIP (politely). Excuse us. Go ahead.

DOLLY (very nicely). So sorry.

VALENTINE (attempting to take them paternally). I really must give a
hint to you young people--

DOLLY (breaking out again). Oh, come: I like that. How old are you?

PHILIP. Over thirty.

DOLLY. He's not.

PHILIP (confidently). He is.

DOLLY (emphatically). Twenty-seven.

PHILIP (imperturbably). Thirty-three.

DOLLY. Stuff!

PHILIP (to Valentine). I appeal to you, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE (remonstrating). Well, really--(resigning himself.)
Thirty-one.

PHILIP (to Dolly). You were wrong.

DOLLY. So were you.

PHILIP (suddenly conscientious). We're forgetting our manners, Dolly.

DOLLY (remorseful). Yes, so we are.

PHILIP (apologetic). We interrupted you, Mr. Valentine.

DOLLY. You were going to improve our minds, I think.

VALENTINE. The fact is, your--

PHILIP (anticipating him). Our appearance?

DOLLY. Our manners?

VALENTINE (ad misericordiam). Oh, do let me speak.

DOLLY. The old story. We talk too much.

PHILIP. We do. Shut up, both. (He seats himself on the arm of the
opposing chair.)

DOLLY. Mum! (She sits down in the writing-table chair, and closes her
lips tight with the tips of her fingers.)

VALENTINE. Thank you. (He brings the stool from the bench in the corner;
places it between them; and sits down with a judicial air. They attend
to him with extreme gravity. He addresses himself first to Dolly.)
Now may I ask, to begin with, have you ever been in an English seaside
resort before? (She shakes her head slowly and solemnly. He turns to
Phil, who shakes his head quickly and expressively.) I thought so. Well,
Mr. Clandon, our acquaintance has been short; but it has been voluble;
and I have gathered enough to convince me that you are neither of you
capable of conceiving what life in an English seaside resort is. Believe
me, it's not a question of manners and appearance. In those respects we
enjoy a freedom unknown in Madeira. (Dolly shakes her head
vehemently.) Oh, yes, I assure you. Lord de Cresci's sister bicycles in
knickerbockers; and the rector's wife advocates dress reform and wears
hygienic boots. (Dolly furtively looks at her own shoe: Valentine
catches her in the act, and deftly adds) No, that's not the sort of boot
I mean. (Dolly's shoe vanishes.) We don't bother much about dress and
manners in England, because, as a nation we don't dress well and we've
no manners. But--and now will you excuse my frankness? (They nod.) Thank
you. Well, in a seaside resort there's one thing you must have before
anybody can afford to be seen going about with you; and that's a father,
alive or dead. (He looks at them alternately, with emphasis. They
meet his gaze like martyrs.) Am I to infer that you have omitted that
indispensable part of your social equipment? (They confirm him by
melancholy nods.) Them I'm sorry to say that if you are going to stay
here for any length of time, it will be impossible for me to accept
your kind invitation to lunch. (He rises with an air of finality, and
replaces the stool by the bench.)

PHILIP (rising with grave politeness). Come, Dolly. (He gives her his
arm.)

DOLLY. Good morning. (They go together to the door with perfect
dignity.)

VALENTINE (overwhelmed with remorse). Oh, stop, stop. (They halt and
turn, arm in arm.) You make me feel a perfect beast.

DOLLY. That's your conscience: not us.

VALENTINE (energetically, throwing off all pretence of a professional
manner). My conscience! My conscience has been my ruin. Listen to me.
Twice before I have set up as a respectable medical practitioner in
various parts of England. On both occasions I acted conscientiously, and
told my patients the brute truth instead of what they wanted to be told.
Result, ruin. Now I've set up as a dentist, a five shilling dentist; and
I've done with conscience forever. This is my last chance. I spent my
last sovereign on moving in; and I haven't paid a shilling of rent yet.
I'm eating and drinking on credit; my landlord is as rich as a Jew and
as hard as nails; and I've made five shillings in six weeks. If I
swerve by a hair's breadth from the straight line of the most rigid
respectability, I'm done for. Under such a circumstance, is it fair to
ask me to lunch with you when you don't know your own father?

DOLLY. After all, our grandfather is a canon of Lincoln Cathedral.

VALENTINE (like a castaway mariner who sees a sail on the horizon).
What! Have you a grandfather?

DOLLY. Only one.

VALENTINE. My dear, good young friends, why on earth didn't you tell me
that before? A cannon of Lincoln! That makes it all right, of course.
Just excuse me while I change my coat. (He reaches the door in a bound
and vanishes. Dolly and Phil stare after him, and then stare at one
another. Missing their audience, they droop and become commonplace at
once.)

PHILIP (throwing away Dolly's arm and coming ill-humoredly towards
the operating chair). That wretched bankrupt ivory snatcher makes a
compliment of allowing us to stand him a lunch--probably the first
square meal he has had for months. (He gives the chair a kick, as if it
were Valentine.)

DOLLY. It's too beastly. I won't stand it any longer, Phil. Here in
England everybody asks whether you have a father the very first thing.

PHILIP. I won't stand it either. Mamma must tell us who he was.

DOLLY. Or who he is. He may be alive.

PHILIP. I hope not. No man alive shall father me.

DOLLY. He might have a lot of money, though.

PHILIP. I doubt it. My knowledge of human nature leads me to believe
that if he had a lot of money he wouldn't have got rid of his
affectionate family so easily. Anyhow, let's look at the bright side of
things. Depend on it, he's dead. (He goes to the hearth and stands with
his back to the fireplace, spreading himself. The parlor maid appears.
The twins, under observation, instantly shine out again with their
former brilliancy.)

THE PARLOR MAID. Two ladies for you, miss. Your mother and sister, miss,
I think.

Mrs. Clandon and Gloria come in. Mrs. Clandon is between forty and
fifty, with a slight tendency to soft, sedentary fat, and a fair
remainder of good looks, none the worse preserved because she has
evidently followed the old tribal matronly fashion of making no
pretension in that direction after her marriage, and might almost be
suspected of wearing a cap at home. She carries herself artificially
well, as women were taught to do as a part of good manners by dancing
masters and reclining boards before these were superseded by the modern
artistic cult of beauty and health. Her hair, a flaxen hazel fading into
white, is crimped, and parted in the middle with the ends plaited and
made into a knot, from which observant people of a certain age infer
that Mrs. Clandon had sufficient individuality and good taste to stand
out resolutely against the now forgotten chignon in her girlhood. In
short, she is distinctly old fashioned for her age in dress and manners.
But she belongs to the forefront of her own period (say 1860-80) in a
jealously assertive attitude of character and intellect, and in being
a woman of cultivated interests rather than passionately developed
personal affections. Her voice and ways are entirely kindly and humane;
and she lends herself conscientiously to the occasional demonstrations
of fondness by which her children mark their esteem for her; but
displays of personal sentiment secretly embarrass her: passion in her
is humanitarian rather than human: she feels strongly about social
questions and principles, not about persons. Only, one observes that
this reasonableness and intense personal privacy, which leaves her
relations with Gloria and Phil much as they might be between her and the
children of any other woman, breaks down in the case of Dolly. Though
almost every word she addresses to her is necessarily in the nature of a
remonstrance for some breach of decorum, the tenderness in her voice is
unmistakable; and it is not surprising that years of such remonstrance
have left Dolly hopelessly spoiled.

Gloria, who is hardly past twenty, is a much more formidable person than
her mother. She is the incarnation of haughty highmindedness, raging
with the impatience of an impetuous, dominative character paralyzed by
the impotence of her youth, and unwillingly disciplined by the constant
danger of ridicule from her lighter-handed juniors. Unlike her mother,
she is all passion; and the conflict of her passion with her obstinate
pride and intense fastidiousness results in a freezing coldness of
manner. In an ugly woman all this would be repulsive; but Gloria is
an attractive woman. Her deep chestnut hair, olive brown skin, long
eyelashes, shaded grey eyes that often flash like stars, delicately
turned full lips, and compact and supple, but muscularly plump figure
appeal with disdainful frankness to the senses and imagination. A very
dangerous girl, one would say, if the moral passions were not also
marked, and even nobly marked, in a fine brow. Her tailor-made
skirt-and-jacket dress of saffron brown cloth, seems conventional when
her back is turned; but it displays in front a blouse of sea-green silk
which upsets its conventionality with one stroke, and sets her apart as
effectually as the twins from the ordinary run of fashionable seaside
humanity.

Mrs. Clandon comes a little way into the room, looking round to see
who is present. Gloria, who studiously avoids encouraging the twins by
betraying any interest in them, wanders to the window and looks out with
her thoughts far away. The parlor maid, instead of withdrawing, shuts
the door and waits at it.

MRS. CLANDON. Well, children? How is the toothache, Dolly?

DOLLY. Cured, thank Heaven. I've had it out. (She sits down on the step
of the operating chair. Mrs. Clandon takes the writing-table chair.)

PHILIP (striking in gravely from the hearth). And the dentist, a
first-rate professional man of the highest standing, is coming to lunch
with us.

MRS. CLANDON (looking round apprehensively at the servant). Phil!

THE PARLOR MAID. Beg pardon, ma'am. I'm waiting for Mr. Valentine. I
have a message for him.

DOLLY. Who from?

MRS. CLANDON (shocked). Dolly! (Dolly catches her lips with her finger
tips, suppressing a little splutter of mirth.)

THE PARLOR MAID. Only the landlord, ma'am.

Valentine, in a blue serge suit, with a straw hat in his hand, comes
back in high spirits, out of breath with the haste he has made. Gloria
turns from the window and studies him with freezing attention.

PHILIP. Let me introduce you, Mr. Valentine. My mother, Mrs. Lanfrey
Clandon. (Mrs. Clandon bows. Valentine bows, self-possessed and quite
equal to the occasion.) My sister Gloria. (Gloria bows with cold dignity
and sits down on the sofa. Valentine falls in love at first sight and
is miserably confused. He fingers his hat nervously, and makes her a
sneaking bow.)

MRS. CLANDON. I understand that we are to have the pleasure of seeing
you at luncheon to-day, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE. Thank you--er--if you don't mind--I mean if you will be so
kind--(to the parlor maid testily) What is it?

THE PARLOR MAID. The landlord, sir, wishes to speak to you before you go
out.

VALENTINE. Oh, tell him I have four patients here. (The Clandons look
surprised, except Phil, who is imperturbable.) If he wouldn't mind
waiting just two minutes, I--I'll slip down and see him for a moment.
(Throwing himself confidentially on her sense of the position.) Say I'm
busy, but that I want to see him.

THE PARLOR MAID (reassuringly). Yes, sir. (She goes.)

MRS. CLANDON (on the point of rising). We are detaining you, I am
afraid.

VALENTINE. Not at all, not at all. Your presence here will be the
greatest help to me. The fact is, I owe six week's rent; and I've had
no patients until to-day. My interview with my landlord will be
considerably smoothed by the apparent boom in my business.

DOLLY (vexed). Oh, how tiresome of you to let it all out! And we've
just been pretending that you were a respectable professional man in a
first-rate position.

MRS. CLANDON (horrified). Oh, Dolly, Dolly! My dearest, how can you be
so rude? (To Valentine.) Will you excuse these barbarian children of
mine, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE. Thank you, I'm used to them. Would it be too much to ask you
to wait five minutes while I get rid of my landlord downstairs?

DOLLY. Don't be long. We're hungry.

MRS. CLANDON (again remonstrating). Dolly, dear!

VALENTINE (to Dolly). All right. (To Mrs. Clandon.) Thank you: I shan't
be long. (He steals a look at Gloria as he turns to go. She is looking
gravely at him. He falls into confusion.) I--er--er--yes--thank you
(he succeeds at last in blundering himself out of the room; but the
exhibition is a pitiful one).

PHILIP. Did you observe? (Pointing to Gloria.) Love at first sight. You
can add his scalp to your collection, Gloria.

MRS. CLANDON. Sh--sh, pray, Phil. He may have heard you.

PHILIP. Not he. (Bracing himself for a scene.) And now look here, mamma.
(He takes the stool from the bench; and seats himself majestically in
the middle of the room, taking a leaf out of Valentine's book. Dolly,
feeling that her position on the step of the operating chair is unworthy
of the dignity of the occasion, rises, looking important and determined;
crosses to the window; and stands with her back to the end of the
writing-table, her hands behind her and on the table. Mrs. Clandon looks
at them, wondering what is coming. Gloria becomes attentive. Philip
straightens his back; places his knuckles symmetrically on his knees;
and opens his case.) Dolly and I have been talking over things a good
deal lately; and I don't think, judging from my knowledge of human
nature--we don't think that you (speaking very staccato, with the words
detached) quite appreciate the fact--

DOLLY (seating herself on the end of the table with a spring). That
we've grown up.

MRS. CLANDON. Indeed? In what way have I given you any reason to
complain?

PHILIP. Well, there are certain matters upon which we are beginning to
feel that you might take us a little more into your confidence.

MRS. CLANDON (rising, with all the placidity of her age suddenly broken
up; and a curious hard excitement, dignified but dogged, ladylike
but implacable--the manner of the Old Guard of the Women's Rights
movement--coming upon her). Phil: take care. Remember what I have
always taught you. There are two sorts of family life, Phil; and
your experience of human nature only extends, so far, to one of them.
(Rhetorically.) The sort you know is based on mutual respect,
on recognition of the right of every member of the household to
independence and privacy (her emphasis on "privacy" is intense) in their
personal concerns. And because you have always enjoyed that, it seems
such a matter of course to you that you don't value it. But (with biting
acrimony) there is another sort of family life: a life in which husbands
open their wives' letters, and call on them to account for every
farthing of their expenditure and every moment of their time; in which
women do the same to their children; in which no room is private and
no hour sacred; in which duty, obedience, affection, home, morality
and religion are detestable tyrannies, and life is a vulgar round of
punishments and lies, coercion and rebellion, jealousy, suspicion,
recrimination--Oh! I cannot describe it to you: fortunately for you, you
know nothing about it. (She sits down, panting. Gloria has listened to
her with flashing eyes, sharing all her indignation.)

DOLLY (inaccessible to rhetoric). See Twentieth Century Parents, chapter
on Liberty, passim.

MRS. CLANDON (touching her shoulder affectionately, soothed even by a
gibe from her). My dear Dolly: if you only knew how glad I am that it is
nothing but a joke to you, though it is such bitter earnest to me. (More
resolutely, turning to Philip.) Phil, I never ask you questions about
your private concerns. You are not going to question me, are you?

PHILIP. I think it due to ourselves to say that the question we wanted
to ask is as much our business as yours.

DOLLY. Besides, it can't be good to keep a lot of questions bottled up
inside you. You did it, mamma; but see how awfully it's broken out again
in me.

MRS. CLANDON. I see you want to ask your question. Ask it.

DOLLY AND PHILIP (beginning simultaneously). Who-- (They stop.)

PHILIP. Now look here, Dolly: am I going to conduct this business or are
you?

DOLLY. You.

PHILIP. Then hold your mouth. (Dolly does so literally.) The question is
a simple one. When the ivory snatcher--

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Phil!

PHILIP. Dentist is an ugly word. The man of ivory and gold asked us
whether we were the children of Mr. Densmore Clandon of Newbury Hall. In
pursuance of the precepts in your treatise on Twentieth Century Conduct,
and your repeated personal exhortations to us to curtail the number of
unnecessary lies we tell, we replied truthfully the we didn't know.

DOLLY. Neither did we.

PHILIP. Sh! The result was that the gum architect made considerable
difficulties about accepting our invitation to lunch, although I doubt
if he has had anything but tea and bread and butter for a fortnight
past. Now my knowledge of human nature leads me to believe that we had a
father, and that you probably know who he was.

MRS. CLANDON (her agitation returning). Stop, Phil. Your father is
nothing to you, nor to me (vehemently). That is enough. (The twins are
silenced, but not satisfied. Their faces fall. But Gloria, who has been
following the altercation attentively, suddenly intervenes.)

GLORIA (advancing). Mother: we have a right to know.

MRS. CLANDON (rising and facing her). Gloria! "We!" Who is "we"?

GLORIA (steadfastly). We three. (Her tone is unmistakable: she is
pitting her strength against her mother for the first time. The twins
instantly go over to the enemy.)

MRS. CLANDON (wounded). In your mouth "we" used to mean you and I,
Gloria.

PHILIP (rising decisively and putting away the stool). We're hurting
you: let's drop it. We didn't think you'd mind. I don't want to know.

DOLLY (coming off the table). I'm sure I don't. Oh, don't look like
that, mamma. (She looks angrily at Gloria.)

MRS. CLANDON (touching her eyes hastily with her handkerchief and
sitting down again). Thank you, my dear. Thanks, Phil.

GLORIA (inexorably). We have a right to know, mother.

MRS. CLANDON (indignantly). Ah! You insist.

GLORIA. Do you intend that we shall never know?

DOLLY. Oh, Gloria, don't. It's barbarous.

GLORIA (with quiet scorn). What is the use of being weak? You see
what has happened with this gentleman here, mother. The same thing has
happened to me.

MRS. CLANDON } (all { What do you mean?

DOLLY } together). { Oh, tell us.

PHILIP } { What happened to you?

GLORIA. Oh, nothing of any consequence. (She turns away from them and
goes up to the easy chair at the fireplace, where she sits down, almost
with her back to them. As they wait expectantly, she adds, over her
shoulder, with studied indifference.) On board the steamer the first
officer did me the honor to propose to me.

DOLLY. No, it was to me.

MRS. CLANDON. The first officer! Are you serious, Gloria? What did you
say to him? (correcting herself) Excuse me: I have no right to ask that.

GLORIA. The answer is pretty obvious. A woman who does not know who her
father was cannot accept such an offer.

MRS. CLANDON. Surely you did not want to accept it?

GLORIA (turning a little and raising her voice). No; but suppose I had
wanted to!

PHILIP. Did that difficulty strike you, Dolly?

DOLLY. No, I accepted him.

GLORIA } (all crying { Accepted him!

MRS. CLANDON } out { Dolly!

PHILIP } together) { Oh, I say!

DOLLY (naively). He did look such a fool!

MRS. CLANDON. But why did you do such a thing, Dolly?

DOLLY. For fun, I suppose. He had to measure my finger for a ring. You'd
have done the same thing yourself.

MRS. CLANDON. No, Dolly, I would not. As a matter of fact the first
officer did propose to me; and I told him to keep that sort of thing for
women were young enough to be amused by it. He appears to have acted on
my advice. (She rises and goes to the hearth.) Gloria: I am sorry you
think me weak; but I cannot tell you what you want. You are all too
young.

PHILIP. This is rather a startling departure from Twentieth Century
principles.

DOLLY (quoting). "Answer all your children's questions, and answer them
truthfully, as soon as they are old enough to ask them." See Twentieth
Century Motherhood--

PHILIP. Page one--

DOLLY. Chapter one--

PHILIP. Sentence one.

MRS. CLANDON. My dears: I did not say that you were too young to know.
I said you were too young to be taken into my confidence. You are very
bright children, all of you; but I am glad for your sakes that you are
still very inexperienced and consequently very unsympathetic. There are
some experiences of mine that I cannot bear to speak of except to those
who have gone through what I have gone through. I hope you will never
be qualified for such confidences. But I will take care that you shall
learn all you want to know. Will that satisfy you?

PHILIP. Another grievance, Dolly.

DOLLY. We're not sympathetic.

GLORIA (leaning forward in her chair and looking earnestly up at her
mother). Mother: I did not mean to be unsympathetic.

MRS. CLANDON (affectionately). Of course not, dear. Do you think I don't
understand?

GLORIA (rising). But, mother--

MRS. CLANDON (drawing back a little). Yes?

GLORIA (obstinately). It is nonsense to tell us that our father is
nothing to us.

MRS. CLANDON (provoked to sudden resolution). Do you remember your
father?

GLORIA (meditatively, as if the recollection were a tender one). I am
not quite sure. I think so.

MRS. CLANDON (grimly). You are not sure?

GLORIA. No.

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet force). Gloria: if I had ever struck you--
(Gloria recoils: Philip and Dolly are disagreeably shocked; all
three start at her, revolted as she continues)--struck you purposely,
deliberately, with the intention of hurting you, with a whip bought for
the purpose! Would you remember that, do you think? (Gloria utters an
exclamation of indignant repulsion.) That would have been your last
recollection of your father, Gloria, if I had not taken you away from
him. I have kept him out of your life: keep him now out of mine by never
mentioning him to me again. (Gloria, with a shudder, covers her face
with her hands, until, hearing someone at the door, she turns away and
pretends to occupy herself looking at the names of the books in the
bookcase. Mrs. Clandon sits down on the sofa. Valentine returns.).

VALENTINE. I hope I've not kept you waiting. That landlord of mine is
really an extraordinary old character.

DOLLY (eagerly). Oh, tell us. How long has he given you to pay?

MRS. CLANDON (distracted by her child's bad manners). Dolly, Dolly,
Dolly dear! You must not ask questions.

DOLLY (demurely). So sorry. You'll tell us, won't you, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE. He doesn't want his rent at all. He's broken his tooth on
a Brazil nut; and he wants me to look at it and to lunch with him
afterwards.

DOLLY. Then have him up and pull his tooth out at once; and we'll bring
him to lunch, too. Tell the maid to fetch him along. (She runs to the
bell and rings it vigorously. Then, with a sudden doubt she turns to
Valentine and adds) I suppose he's respectable--really respectable.

VALENTINE. Perfectly. Not like me.

DOLLY. Honest Injun? (Mrs. Clandon gasps faintly; but her powers of
remonstrance are exhausted.)

VALENTINE. Honest Injun!

DOLLY. Then off with you and bring him up.

VALENTINE (looking dubiously at Mrs. Clandon). I daresay he'd be
delighted if--er--?

MRS. CLANDON (rising and looking at her watch). I shall be happy to see
your friend at lunch, if you can persuade him to come; but I can't wait
to see him now: I have an appointment at the hotel at a quarter to one
with an old friend whom I have not seen since I left England eighteen
years ago. Will you excuse me?

VALENTINE. Certainly, Mrs. Clandon.

GLORIA. Shall I come?

MRS. CLANDON. No, dear. I want to be alone. (She goes out, evidently
still a good deal troubled. Valentine opens the door for her and follows
her out.)

PHILIP (significantly--to Dolly). Hmhm!

DOLLY (significantly to Philip). Ahah! (The parlor maid answers the
bell.)

DOLLY. Show the old gentleman up.

THE PARLOR MAID (puzzled). Madam?

DOLLY. The old gentleman with the toothache.

PHILIP. The landlord.

THE PARLOR MAID. Mr. Crampton, Sir?

PHILIP. Is his name Crampton?

DOLLY (to Philip). Sounds rheumaticky, doesn't it?

PHILIP. Chalkstones, probably.

DOLLY (over her shoulder, to the parlor maid). Show Mr. Crampstones up.
(Goes R. to writing-table chair).

THE PARLOR MAID (correcting her). Mr. Crampton, miss. (She goes.)

DOLLY (repeating it to herself like a lesson). Crampton, Crampton,
Crampton, Crampton, Crampton. (She sits down studiously at the
writing-table.) I must get that name right, or Heaven knows what I shall
call him.

GLORIA. Phil: can you believe such a horrible thing as that about our
father--what mother said just now?

PHILIP. Oh, there are lots of people of that kind. Old Chalice used to
thrash his wife and daughters with a cartwhip.

DOLLY (contemptuously). Yes, a Portuguese!

PHILIP. When you come to men who are brutes, there is much in common
between the Portuguese and the English variety, Doll. Trust my knowledge
of human nature. (He resumes his position on the hearthrug with an
elderly and responsible air.)

GLORIA (with angered remorse). I don't think we shall ever play again at
our old game of guessing what our father was to be like. Dolly: are you
sorry for your father--the father with lots of money?

DOLLY. Oh, come! What about your father--the lonely old man with the
tender aching heart? He's pretty well burst up, I think.

PHILIP. There can be no doubt that the governor is an exploded
superstition. (Valentine is heard talking to somebody outside the door.)
But hark: he comes.

GLORIA (nervously). Who?

DOLLY. Chalkstones.

PHILIP. Sh! Attention. (They put on their best manners. Philip adds in
a lower voice to Gloria) If he's good enough for the lunch, I'll nod to
Dolly; and if she nods to you, invite him straight away.

(Valentine comes back with his landlord. Mr. Fergus Crampton is a man of
about sixty, tall, hard and stringy, with an atrociously obstinate, ill
tempered, grasping mouth, and a querulously dogmatic voice. Withal he
is highly nervous and sensitive, judging by his thin transparent skin
marked with multitudinous lines, and his slender fingers. His consequent
capacity for suffering acutely from all the dislike that his temper and
obstinacy can bring upon him is proved by his wistful, wounded eyes,
by a plaintive note in his voice, a painful want of confidence in his
welcome, and a constant but indifferently successful effort to correct
his natural incivility of manner and proneness to take offence. By his
keen brows and forehead he is clearly a shrewd man; and there is no
sign of straitened means or commercial diffidence about him: he is
well dressed, and would be classed at a guess as a prosperous master
manufacturer in a business inherited from an old family in the
aristocracy of trade. His navy blue coat is not of the usual fashionable
pattern. It is not exactly a pilot's coat; but it is cut that way,
double breasted, and with stout buttons and broad lapels, a coat for
a shipyard rather than a counting house. He has taken a fancy to
Valentine, who cares nothing for his crossness of grain and treats
him with a sort of disrespectful humanity, for which he is secretly
grateful.)

VALENTINE. May I introduce--this is Mr. Crampton--Miss Dorothy Clandon,
Mr. Philip Clandon, Miss Clandon. (Crampton stands nervously bowing.
They all bow.) Sit down, Mr. Crampton.

DOLLY (pointing to the operating chair). That is the most comfortable
chair, Mr. Ch--crampton.

CRAMPTON. Thank you; but won't this young lady--(indicating Gloria, who
is close to the chair)?

GLORIA. Thank you, Mr. Crampton: we are just going.

VALENTINE (bustling him across to the chair with good-humored
peremptoriness). Sit down, sit down. You're tired.

CRAMPTON. Well, perhaps as I am considerably the oldest person present,
I-- (He finishes the sentence by sitting down a little rheumatically in
the operating chair. Meanwhile, Philip, having studied him critically
during his passage across the room, nods to Dolly; and Dolly nods to
Gloria.)

GLORIA. Mr. Crampton: we understand that we are preventing Mr. Valentine
from lunching with you by taking him away ourselves. My mother would be
very glad, indeed, if you would come too.

CRAMPTON (gratefully, after looking at her earnestly for a moment).
Thank you. I will come with pleasure.

GLORIA } (politely { Thank you very much--er--

DOLLY } murmuring).{ So glad--er--

PHILIP } { Delighted, I'm sure--er--

(The conversation drops. Gloria and Dolly look at one another; then at
Valentine and Philip. Valentine and Philip, unequal to the occasion,
look away from them at one another, and are instantly so disconcerted by
catching one another's eye, that they look back again and catch the eyes
of Gloria and Dolly. Thus, catching one another all round, they all look
at nothing and are quite at a loss. Crampton looks about him, waiting
for them to begin. The silence becomes unbearable.)

DOLLY (suddenly, to keep things going). How old are you, Mr. Crampton?

GLORIA (hastily). I am afraid we must be going, Mr. Valentine. It is
understood, then, that we meet at half past one. (She makes for the
door. Philip goes with her. Valentine retreats to the bell.)

VALENTINE. Half past one. (He rings the bell.) Many thanks. (He follows
Gloria and Philip to the door, and goes out with them.)

DOLLY (who has meanwhile stolen across to Crampton). Make him give you
gas. It's five shillings extra: but it's worth it.

CRAMPTON (amused). Very well. (Looking more earnestly at her.) So you
want to know my age, do you? I'm fifty-seven.

DOLLY (with conviction). You look it.

CRAMPTON (grimly). I dare say I do.

DOLLY. What are you looking at me so hard for? Anything wrong? (She
feels whether her hat is right.)

CRAMPTON. You're like somebody.

DOLLY. Who?

CRAMPTON. Well, you have a curious look of my mother.

DOLLY (incredulously). Your mother!!! Quite sure you don't mean your
daughter?

CRAMPTON (suddenly blackening with hate). Yes: I'm quite sure I don't
mean my daughter.

DOLLY (sympathetically). Tooth bad?

CRAMPTON. No, no: nothing. A twinge of memory, Miss Clandon, not of
toothache.

DOLLY. Have it out. "Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow:" with gas,
five shillings extra.

CRAMPTON (vindictively). No, not a sorrow. An injury that was done me
once: that's all. I don't forget injuries; and I don't want to forget
them. (His features settle into an implacable frown.)

(re-enter Philip: to look for Dolly. He comes down behind her
unobserved.)

DOLLY (looking critically at Crampton's expression). I don't think we
shall like you when you are brooding over your sorrows.

PHILIP (who has entered the room unobserved, and stolen behind her).
My sister means well, Mr. Crampton: but she is indiscreet. Now Dolly,
outside! (He takes her towards the door.)

DOLLY (in a perfectly audible undertone). He says he's only fifty-seven;
and he thinks me the image of his mother; and he hates his daughter;
and-- (She is interrupted by the return of Valentine.)

VALENTINE. Miss Clandon has gone on.

PHILIP. Don't forget half past one.

DOLLY. Mind you leave Mr. Crampton with enough teeth to eat with. (They
go out. Valentine comes down to his cabinet, and opens it.)

CRAMPTON. That's a spoiled child, Mr. Valentine. That's one of your
modern products. When I was her age, I had many a good hiding fresh in
my memory to teach me manners.

VALENTINE (taking up his dental mirror and probe from the shelf in front
of the cabinet). What did you think of her sister?

CRAMPTON. You liked her better, eh?

VALENTINE (rhapsodically). She struck me as being-- (He checks himself,
and adds, prosaically) However, that's not business. (He places himself
behind Crampton's right shoulder and assumes his professional tone.)
Open, please. (Crampton opens his mouth. Valentine puts the mirror in,
and examines his teeth.) Hm! You have broken that one. What a pity to
spoil such a splendid set of teeth! Why do you crack nuts with them? (He
withdraws the mirror, and comes forward to converse with Crampton.)

CRAMPTON. I've always cracked nuts with them: what else are they for?
(Dogmatically.) The proper way to keep teeth good is to give them plenty
of use on bones and nuts, and wash them every day with soap-- plain
yellow soap.

VALENTINE. Soap! Why soap?

CRAMPTON. I began using it as a boy because I was made to; and I've used
it ever since. And I never had toothache in my life.

VALENTINE. Don't you find it rather nasty?

CRAMPTON. I found that most things that were good for me were nasty. But
I was taught to put up with them, and made to put up with them. I'm used
to it now: in fact, I like the taste when the soap is really good.

VALENTINE (making a wry face in spite of himself). You seem to have been
very carefully educated, Mr. Crampton.

CRAMPTON (grimly). I wasn't spoiled, at all events.

VALENTINE (smiling a little to himself). Are you quite sure?

CRAMPTON. What d'y' mean?

VALENTINE. Well, your teeth are good, I admit. But I've seen just as
good in very self-indulgent mouths. (He goes to the ledge of cabinet and
changes the probe for another one.)

CRAMPTON. It's not the effect on the teeth: it's the effect on the
character.

VALENTINE (placably). Oh, the character, I see. (He recommences
operations.) A little wider, please. Hm! That one will have to come out:
it's past saving. (He withdraws the probe and again comes to the side of
the chair to converse.) Don't be alarmed: you shan't feel anything. I'll
give you gas.

CRAMPTON. Rubbish, man: I want none of your gas. Out with it. People
were taught to bear necessary pain in my day.

VALENTINE. Oh, if you like being hurt, all right. I'll hurt you as much
as you like, without any extra charge for the beneficial effect on your
character.

CRAMPTON (rising and glaring at him). Young man: you owe me six weeks'
rent.

VALENTINE. I do.

CRAMPTON. Can you pay me?

VALENTINE. No.

CRAMPTON (satisfied with his advantage). I thought not. How soon d'y'
think you'll be able to pay me if you have no better manners than to
make game of your patients? (He sits down again.)

VALENTINE. My good sir: my patients haven't all formed their characters
on kitchen soap.

CRAMPTON (suddenly gripping him by the arm as he turns away again to the
cabinet). So much the worse for them. I tell you you don't understand my
character. If I could spare all my teeth, I'd make you pull them all
out one after another to shew you what a properly hardened man can go
through with when he's made up his mind to do it. (He nods at him to
enforce the effect of this declaration, and releases him.)

VALENTINE (his careless pleasantry quite unruffled). And you want to be
more hardened, do you?

CRAMPTON. Yes.

VALENTINE (strolling away to the bell). Well, you're quite hard enough
for me already--as a landlord. (Crampton receives this with a growl of
grim humor. Valentine rings the bell, and remarks in a cheerful, casual
way, whilst waiting for it to be answered.) Why did you never get
married, Mr. Crampton? A wife and children would have taken some of the
hardness out of you.

CRAMPTON (with unexpected ferocity). What the devil is that to you? (The
parlor maid appears at the door.)

VALENTINE (politely). Some warm water, please. (She retires: and
Valentine comes back to the cabinet, not at all put out by Crampton's
rudeness, and carries on the conversation whilst he selects a forceps
and places it ready to his hand with a gag and a drinking glass.) You
were asking me what the devil that was to me. Well, I have an idea of
getting married myself.

CRAMPTON (with grumbling irony). Naturally, sir, naturally. When a young
man has come to his last farthing, and is within twenty-four hours of
having his furniture distrained upon by his landlord, he marries. I've
noticed that before. Well, marry; and be miserable.

VALENTINE. Oh, come, what do you know about it?

CRAMPTON. I'm not a bachelor.

VALENTINE. Then there is a Mrs. Crampton?

CRAMPTON (wincing with a pang of resentment). Yes--damn her!

VALENTINE (unperturbed). Hm! A father, too, perhaps, as well as a
husband, Mr. Crampton?

CRAMPTON. Three children.

VALENTINE (politely). Damn them?--eh?

CRAMPTON (jealously). No, sir: the children are as much mine as hers.
(The parlor maid brings in a jug of hot water.)

VALENTINE. Thank you. (He takes the jug from her, and brings it to the
cabinet, continuing in the same idle strain) I really should like to
know your family, Mr. Crampton. (The parlor maid goes out: and he pours
some hot water into the drinking glass.)

CRAMPTON. Sorry I can't introduce you, sir. I'm happy to say that I
don't know where they are, and don't care, so long as they keep out of
my way. (Valentine, with a hitch of his eyebrows and shoulders, drops
the forceps with a clink into the glass of hot water.) You needn't warm
that thing to use on me. I'm not afraid of the cold steel. (Valentine
stoops to arrange the gas pump and cylinder beside the chair.) What's
that heavy thing?

VALENTINE. Oh, never mind. Something to put my foot on, to get the
necessary purchase for a good pull. (Crampton looks alarmed in spite of
himself. Valentine stands upright and places the glass with the forceps
in it ready to his hand, chatting on with provoking indifference.) And
so you advise me not to get married, Mr. Crampton? (He stoops to fit the
handle on the apparatus by which the chair is raised and lowered.)

CRAMPTON (irritably). I advise you to get my tooth out and have done
reminding me of my wife. Come along, man. (He grips the arms of the
chair and braces himself.)

VALENTINE (pausing, with his hand on the lever, to look up at him and
say). What do you bet that I don't get that tooth out without your
feeling it?

CRAMPTON. Your six week's rent, young man. Don't you gammon me.

VALENTINE (jumping at the bet and winding him aloft vigorously). Done!
Are you ready? (Crampton, who has lost his grip of the chair in his
alarm at its sudden ascent, folds his arms: sits stiffly upright: and
prepares for the worst. Valentine lets down the back of the chair to an
obtuse angle.)

CRAMPTON (clutching at the arms of the chair as he falls back). Take
care man. I'm quite helpless in this po---

VALENTINE (deftly stopping him with the gag, and snatching up the
mouthpiece of the gas machine). You'll be more helpless presently. (He
presses the mouthpiece over Crampton's mouth and nose, leaning over
his chest so as to hold his head and shoulders well down on the chair.
Crampton makes an inarticulate sound in the mouthpiece and tries to
lay hands on Valentine, whom he supposes to be in front of him. After
a moment his arms wave aimlessly, then subside and drop. He is quite
insensible. Valentine, with an exclamation of somewhat preoccupied
triumph, throws aside the mouthpiece quickly: picks up the forceps
adroitly from the glass: and--the curtain falls.)

END OF ACT I.




ACT II


On the terrace at the Marine Hotel. It is a square flagged platform,
with a parapet of heavy oil jar pilasters supporting a broad stone
coping on the outer edge, which stands up over the sea like a cliff.
The head waiter of the establishment, busy laying napkins on a luncheon
table with his back to the sea, has the hotel on his right, and on his
left, in the corner nearest the sea, the flight of steps leading down to
the beach.

When he looks down the terrace in front of him he sees a little to his
left a solitary guest, a middle-aged gentleman sitting on a chair of
iron laths at a little iron table with a bowl of lump sugar and three
wasps on it, reading the Standard, with his umbrella up to defend him
from the sun, which, in August and at less than an hour after noon, is
toasting his protended insteps. Just opposite him, at the hotel side of
the terrace, there is a garden seat of the ordinary esplanade pattern.
Access to the hotel for visitors is by an entrance in the middle of
its facade, reached by a couple of steps on a broad square of raised
pavement. Nearer the parapet there lurks a way to the kitchen, masked by
a little trellis porch. The table at which the waiter is occupied is a
long one, set across the terrace with covers and chairs for five, two at
each side and one at the end next the hotel. Against the parapet another
table is prepared as a buffet to serve from.

The waiter is a remarkable person in his way. A silky old man,
white-haired and delicate looking, but so cheerful and contented that
in his encouraging presence ambition stands rebuked as vulgarity, and
imagination as treason to the abounding sufficiency and interest of
the actual. He has a certain expression peculiar to men who have been
extraordinarily successful in their calling, and who, whilst aware of
the vanity of success, are untouched by envy.

The gentleman at the iron table is not dressed for the seaside. He wears
his London frock coat and gloves; and his tall silk hat is on the table
beside the sugar bowl. The excellent condition and quality of these
garments, the gold-rimmed folding spectacles through which he is reading
the Standard, and the Times at his elbow overlaying the local paper,
all testify to his respectability. He is about fifty, clean shaven, and
close-cropped, with the corners of his mouth turned down purposely, as
if he suspected them of wanting to turn up, and was determined not to
let them have their way. He has large expansive ears, cod colored eyes,
and a brow kept resolutely wide open, as if, again, he had resolved in
his youth to be truthful, magnanimous, and incorruptible, but had never
succeeded in making that habit of mind automatic and unconscious. Still,
he is by no means to be laughed at. There is no sign of stupidity or
infirmity of will about him: on the contrary, he would pass anywhere
at sight as a man of more than average professional capacity and
responsibility. Just at present he is enjoying the weather and the sea
too much to be out of patience; but he has exhausted all the news in his
papers and is at present reduced to the advertisements, which are not
sufficiently succulent to induce him to persevere with them.


THE GENTLEMAN (yawning and giving up the paper as a bad job). Waiter!

WAITER. Sir? (coming down C.)

THE GENTLEMAN. Are you quite sure Mrs. Clandon is coming back before
lunch?

WAITER. Quite sure, sir. She expects you at a quarter to one, sir. (The
gentleman, soothed at once by the waiter's voice, looks at him with a
lazy smile. It is a quiet voice, with a gentle melody in it that gives
sympathetic interest to his most commonplace remark; and he speaks with
the sweetest propriety, neither dropping his aitches nor misplacing
them, nor committing any other vulgarism. He looks at his watch as he
continues) Not that yet, sir, is it? 12:43, sir. Only two minutes more
to wait, sir. Nice morning, sir?

THE GENTLEMAN. Yes: very fresh after London.

WAITER. Yes, sir: so all our visitors say, sir. Very nice family, Mrs.
Clandon's, sir.

THE GENTLEMAN. You like them, do you?

WAITER. Yes, sir. They have a free way with them that is very taking,
sir, very taking indeed, sir: especially the young lady and gentleman.

THE GENTLEMAN. Miss Dorothea and Mr. Philip, I suppose.

WAITER. Yes, sir. The young lady, in giving an order, or the like
of that, will say, "Remember, William, we came to this hotel on
your account, having heard what a perfect waiter you are." The young
gentleman will tell me that I remind him strongly of his father (the
gentleman starts at this) and that he expects me to act by him as such.
(Soothing, sunny cadence.) Oh, very pleasant, sir, very affable and
pleasant indeed!

THE GENTLEMAN. You like his father! (He laughs at the notion.)

WAITER. Oh, we must not take what they say too seriously, sir. Of
course, sir, if it were true, the young lady would have seen the
resemblance, too, sir.

THE GENTLEMAN. Did she?

WAITER. No, sir. She thought me like the bust of Shakespear in Stratford
Church, sir. That is why she calls me William, sir. My real name is
Walter, sir. (He turns to go back to the table, and sees Mrs. Clandon
coming up to the terrace from the beach by the steps.) Here is Mrs.
Clandon, sir. (To Mrs. Clandon, in an unobtrusively confidential tone)
Gentleman for you, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. We shall have two more gentlemen at lunch, William.

WAITER. Right, ma'am. Thank you, ma'am. (He withdraws into the hotel.
Mrs. Clandon comes forward looking round for her visitor, but passes
over the gentleman without any sign of recognition.)

THE GENTLEMAN (peering at her quaintly from under the umbrella). Don't
you know me?

MRS. CLANDON (incredulously, looking hard at him) Are you Finch McComas?

McCOMAS. Can't you guess? (He shuts the umbrella; puts it aside; and
jocularly plants himself with his hands on his hips to be inspected.)

MRS. CLANDON. I believe you are. (She gives him her hand. The shake that
ensues is that of old friends after a long separation.) Where's your
beard?

McCOMAS (with humorous solemnity). Would you employ a solicitor with a
beard?

MRS. CLANDON (pointing to the silk hat on the table). Is that your hat?

McCOMAS. Would you employ a solicitor with a sombrero?

MRS. CLANDON. I have thought of you all these eighteen years with the
beard and the sombrero. (She sits down on the garden seat. McComas takes
his chair again.) Do you go to the meetings of the Dialectical Society
still?

McCOMAS (gravely). I do not frequent meetings now.

MRS. CLANDON. Finch: I see what has happened. You have become
respectable.

McCOMAS. Haven't you?

MRS. CLANDON. Not a bit.

McCOMAS. You hold to your old opinions still?

MRS. CLANDON. As firmly as ever.

McCOMAS. Bless me! And you are still ready to make speeches in public,
in spite of your sex (Mrs. Clandon nods); to insist on a married
woman's right to her own separate property (she nods again); to champion
Darwin's view of the origin of species and John Stuart Mill's essay on
Liberty (nod); to read Huxley, Tyndall and George Eliot (three nods);
and to demand University degrees, the opening of the professions, and
the parliamentary franchise for women as well as men?

MRS. CLANDON (resolutely). Yes: I have not gone back one inch; and I
have educated Gloria to take up my work where I left it. That is what
has brought me back to England: I felt that I had no right to bury her
alive in Madeira--my St. Helena, Finch. I suppose she will be howled at
as I was; but she is prepared for that.

McCOMAS. Howled at! My dear good lady: there is nothing in any of those
views now-a-days to prevent her from marrying a bishop. You reproached
me just now for having become respectable. You were wrong: I hold to
our old opinions as strongly as ever. I don't go to church; and I don't
pretend I do. I call myself what I am: a Philosophic Radical, standing
for liberty and the rights of the individual, as I learnt to do from
my master Herbert Spencer. Am I howled at? No: I'm indulged as an old
fogey. I'm out of everything, because I've refused to bow the knee to
Socialism.

MRS. CLANDON (shocked). Socialism.

McCOMAS. Yes, Socialism. That's what Miss Gloria will be up to her ears
in before the end of the month if you let her loose here.

MRS. CLANDON (emphatically). But I can prove to her that Socialism is a
fallacy.

McCOMAS (touchingly). It is by proving that, Mrs. Clandon, that I have
lost all my young disciples. Be careful what you do: let her go her own
way. (With some bitterness.) We're old-fashioned: the world thinks it
has left us behind. There is only one place in all England where your
opinions would still pass as advanced.

MRS. CLANDON (scornfully unconvinced). The Church, perhaps?

McCOMAS. No, the theatre. And now to business! Why have you made me come
down here?

MRS. CLANDON. Well, partly because I wanted to see you--

McCOMAS (with good-humored irony). Thanks.

MRS. CLANDON. --and partly because I want you to explain everything
to the children. They know nothing; and now that we have come back
to England, it is impossible to leave them in ignorance any longer.
(Agitated.) Finch: I cannot bring myself to tell them. I-- (She is
interrupted by the twins and Gloria. Dolly comes tearing up the steps,
racing Philip, who combines a terrific speed with unhurried propriety of
bearing which, however, costs him the race, as Dolly reaches her mother
first and almost upsets the garden seat by the precipitancy of her
arrival.)

DOLLY (breathless). It's all right, mamma. The dentist is coming; and
he's bringing his old man.

MRS. CLANDON. Dolly, dear: don't you see Mr. McComas? (Mr. McComas
rises, smilingly.)

DOLLY (her face falling with the most disparagingly obvious
disappointment). This! Where are the flowing locks?

PHILIP (seconding her warmly). Where the beard?--the cloak?--the poetic
exterior?

DOLLY. Oh, Mr. McComas, you've gone and spoiled yourself. Why didn't you
wait till we'd seen you?

McCOMAS (taken aback, but rallying his humor to meet the emergency).
Because eighteen years is too long for a solicitor to go without having
his hair cut.

GLORIA (at the other side of McComas). How do you do, Mr. McComas? (He
turns; and she takes his hand and presses it, with a frank straight look
into his eyes.) We are glad to meet you at last.

McCOMAS. Miss Gloria, I presume? (Gloria smiles assent, and releases his
hand after a final pressure. She then retires behind the garden seat,
leaning over the back beside Mrs. Clandon.) And this young gentleman?

PHILIP. I was christened in a comparatively prosaic mood. My name is--

DOLLY (completing his sentence for him declamatorily). "Norval. On the
Grampian hills"--

PHILIP (declaiming gravely). "My father feeds his flock, a frugal
swain"--

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Dear, dear children: don't be silly.
Everything is so new to them here, Finch, that they are in the wildest
spirits. They think every Englishman they meet is a joke.

DOLLY. Well, so he is: it's not our fault.

PHILIP. My knowledge of human nature is fairly extensive, Mr. McComas;
but I find it impossible to take the inhabitants of this island
seriously.

McCOMAS. I presume, sir, you are Master Philip (offering his hand)?

PHILIP (taking McComas's hand and looking solemnly at him). I was Master
Philip--was so for many years; just as you were once Master Finch. (He
gives his hand a single shake and drops it; then turns away, exclaiming
meditatively) How strange it is to look back on our boyhood! (McComas
stares after him, not at all pleased.)

DOLLY (to Mrs. Clandon). Has Finch had a drink?

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Dearest: Mr. McComas will lunch with us.

DOLLY. Have you ordered for seven? Don't forget the old gentleman.

MRS. CLANDON. I have not forgotten him, dear. What is his name?

DOLLY. Chalkstones. He'll be here at half past one. (To McComas.) Are we
like what you expected?

MRS. CLANDON (changing her tone to a more earnest one). Dolly: Mr.
McComas has something more serious than that to tell you. Children: I
have asked my old friend to answer the question you asked this morning.
He is your father's friend as well as mine: and he will tell you the
story more fairly than I could. (Turning her head from them to Gloria.)
Gloria: are you satisfied?

GLORIA (gravely attentive). Mr. McComas is very kind.

McCOMAS (nervously). Not at all, my dear young lady: not at all. At the
same time, this is rather sudden. I was hardly prepared--er--

DOLLY (suspiciously). Oh, we don't want anything prepared.

PHILIP (exhorting him). Tell us the truth.

DOLLY (emphatically). Bald headed.

McCOMAS (nettled). I hope you intend to take what I have to say
seriously.

PHILIP (with profound mock gravity). I hope it will deserve it, Mr.
McComas. My knowledge of human nature teaches me not to expect too much.

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Phil--

PHILIP. Yes, mother, all right. I beg your pardon, Mr. McComas: don't
mind us.

DOLLY (in conciliation). We mean well.

PHILIP. Shut up, both.

(Dolly holds her lips. McComas takes a chair from the luncheon table;
places it between the little table and the garden seat with Dolly on his
right and Philip on his left; and settles himself in it with the air
of a man about to begin a long communication. The Clandons match him
expectantly.)

McCOMAS. Ahem! Your father--

DOLLY (interrupting). How old is he?

PHILIP. Sh!

MRS. CLANDON (softly). Dear Dolly: don't let us interrupt Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS (emphatically). Thank you, Mrs. Clandon. Thank you. (To Dolly.)
Your father is fifty-seven.

DOLLY (with a bound, startled and excited). Fifty-seven! Where does he
live?

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Dolly, Dolly!

McCOMAS (stopping her). Let me answer that, Mrs. Clandon. The answer
will surprise you considerably. He lives in this town. (Mrs.
Clandon rises. She and Gloria look at one another in the greatest
consternation.)

DOLLY (with conviction). I knew it! Phil: Chalkstones is our father.

McCOMAS. Chalkstones!

DOLLY. Oh, Crampstones, or whatever it is. He said I was like his
mother. I knew he must mean his daughter.

PHILIP (very seriously). Mr. McComas: I desire to consider your feelings
in every possible way: but I warn you that if you stretch the long arm
of coincidence to the length of telling me that Mr. Crampton of this
town is my father, I shall decline to entertain the information for a
moment.

McCOMAS. And pray why?

PHILIP. Because I have seen the gentleman; and he is entirely unfit
to be my father, or Dolly's father, or Gloria's father, or my mother's
husband.

McCOMAS. Oh, indeed! Well, sir, let me tell you that whether you like it
or not, he is your father, and your sister' father, and Mrs. Clandon's
husband. Now! What have you to say to that!

DOLLY (whimpering). You needn't be so cross. Crampton isn't your father.

PHILIP. Mr. McComas: your conduct is heartless. Here you find a family
enjoying the unspeakable peace and freedom of being orphans. We have
never seen the face of a relative--never known a claim except the claim
of freely chosen friendship. And now you wish to thrust into the most
intimate relationship with us a man whom we don't know--

DOLLY (vehemently). An awful old man! (reproachfully) And you began as
if you had quite a nice father for us.

McCOMAS (angrily). How do you know that he is not nice? And what right
have you to choose your own father? (raising his voice.) Let me tell
you, Miss Clandon, that you are too young to--

DOLLY (interrupting him suddenly and eagerly). Stop, I forgot! Has he
any money?

McCOMAS. He has a great deal of money.

DOLLY (delighted). Oh, what did I always say, Phil?

PHILIP. Dolly: we have perhaps been condemning the old man too hastily.
Proceed, Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS. I shall not proceed, sir. I am too hurt, too shocked, to
proceed.

MRS. CLANDON (urgently). Finch: do you realize what is happening? Do you
understand that my children have invited that man to lunch, and that he
will be here in a few moments?

McCOMAS (completely upset). What! do you mean--am I to understand--is
it--

PHILIP (impressively). Steady, Finch. Think it out slowly and carefully.
He's coming--coming to lunch.

GLORIA. Which of us is to tell him the truth? Have you thought of that?

MRS. CLANDON. Finch: you must tell him.

DOLLY Oh, Finch is no good at telling things. Look at the mess he has
made of telling us.

McCOMAS. I have not been allowed to speak. I protest against this.

DOLLY (taking his arm coaxingly). Dear Finch: don't be cross.

MRS. CLANDON. Gloria: let us go in. He may arrive at any moment.

GLORIA (proudly). Do not stir, mother. I shall not stir. We must not run
away.

MRS. CLANDON (delicately rebuking her). My dear: we cannot sit down to
lunch just as we are. We shall come back again. We must have no bravado.
(Gloria winces, and goes into the hotel without a word.) Come, Dolly.
(As she goes into the hotel door, the waiter comes out with plates,
etc., for two additional covers on a tray.)

WAITER. Gentlemen come yet, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON. Two more to come yet, thank you. They will be here,
immediately. (She goes into the hotel. The waiter takes his tray to the
service table.)

PHILIP. I have an idea. Mr. McComas: this communication should be made,
should it not, by a man of infinite tact?

McCOMAS. It will require tact, certainly.

PHILIP Good! Dolly: whose tact were you noticing only this morning?

DOLLY (seizing the idea with rapture). Oh, yes, I declare! William!

PHILIP. The very man! (Calling) William!

WAITER. Coming, sir.

McCOMAS (horrified). The waiter! Stop, stop! I will not permit this. I--

WAITER (presenting himself between Philip and McComas). Yes, sir.
(McComas's complexion fades into stone grey; and all movement and
expression desert his eyes. He sits down stupefied.)

PHILIP. William: you remember my request to you to regard me as your
son?

WAITER (with respectful indulgence). Yes, sir. Anything you please, sir.

PHILIP. William: at the very outset of your career as my father, a rival
has appeared on the scene.

WAITER. Your real father, sir? Well, that was to be expected, sooner or
later, sir, wasn't it? (Turning with a happy smile to McComas.) Is it
you, sir?

McCOMAS (renerved by indignation). Certainly not. My children know how
to behave themselves.

PHILIP. No, William: this gentleman was very nearly my father: he wooed
my mother, but wooed her in vain.

McCOMAS (outraged). Well, of all the--

PHILIP. Sh! Consequently, he is only our solicitor. Do you know one
Crampton, of this town?

WAITER. Cock-eyed Crampton, sir, of the Crooked Billet, is it?

PHILIP. I don't know. Finch: does he keep a public house?

McCOMAS (rising scandalized). No, no, no. Your father, sir, is a
well-known yacht builder, an eminent man here.

WAITER (impressed). Oh, beg pardon, sir, I'm sure. A son of Mr.
Crampton's! Dear me!

PHILIP. Mr. Crampton is coming to lunch with us.

WAITER (puzzled). Yes, sir. (Diplomatically.) Don't usually lunch with
his family, perhaps, sir?

PHILIP (impressively). William: he does not know that we are his family.
He has not seen us for eighteen years. He won't know us. (To emphasize
the communication he seats himself on the iron table with a spring, and
looks at the waiter with his lips compressed and his legs swinging.)

DOLLY. We want you to break the news to him, William.

WAITER. But I should think he'd guess when he sees your mother, miss.
(Philip's legs become motionless at this elucidation. He contemplates
the waiter raptly.)

DOLLY (dazzled). I never thought of that.

PHILIP. Nor I. (Coming off the table and turning reproachfully on
McComas.) Nor you.

DOLLY. And you a solicitor!

PHILIP. Finch: Your professional incompetence is appalling. William:
your sagacity puts us all to shame.

DOLLY You really are like Shakespear, William.

WAITER. Not at all, sir. Don't mention it, miss. Most happy, I'm
sure, sir. (Goes back modestly to the luncheon table and lays the two
additional covers, one at the end next the steps, and the other so as to
make a third on the side furthest from the balustrade.)

PHILIP (abruptly). Finch: come and wash your hands. (Seizes his arm and
leads him toward the hotel.)

McCOMAS. I am thoroughly vexed and hurt, Mr. Clandon--

PHILIP (interrupting him). You will get used to us. Come, Dolly.
(McComas shakes him off and marches into the hotel. Philip follows with
unruffled composure.)

DOLLY (turning for a moment on the steps as she follows them). Keep your
wits about you, William. There will be fire-works.

WAITER. Right, miss. You may depend on me, miss. (She goes into the
hotel.)

(Valentine comes lightly up the steps from the beach, followed doggedly
by Crampton. Valentine carries a walking stick. Crampton, either
because he is old and chilly, or with some idea of extenuating the
unfashionableness of his reefer jacket, wears a light overcoat. He stops
at the chair left by McComas in the middle of the terrace, and steadies
himself for a moment by placing his hand on the back of it.)

CRAMPTON. Those steps make me giddy. (He passes his hand over his
forehead.) I have not got over that infernal gas yet.

(He goes to the iron chair, so that he can lean his elbows on the little
table to prop his head as he sits. He soon recovers, and begins to
unbutton his overcoat. Meanwhile Valentine interviews the waiter.)

VALENTINE. Waiter!

WAITER (coming forward between them). Yes, sir.

VALENTINE. Mrs. Lanfrey Clandon.

WAITER (with a sweet smile of welcome). Yes, sir. We're expecting you,
sir. That is your table, sir. Mrs. Clandon will be down presently, sir.
The young lady and young gentleman were just talking about your friend,
sir.

VALENTINE. Indeed!

WAITER (smoothly melodious). Yes, sire. Great flow of spirits, sir. A
vein of pleasantry, as you might say, sir. (Quickly, to Crampton, who
has risen to get the overcoat off.) Beg pardon, sir, but if you'll allow
me (helping him to get the overcoat off and taking it from him). Thank
you, sir. (Crampton sits down again; and the waiter resumes the broken
melody.) The young gentleman's latest is that you're his father, sir.

CRAMPTON. What!

WAITER. Only his joke, sir, his favourite joke. Yesterday, I was to be
his father. To-day, as soon as he knew you were coming, sir, he tried to
put it up on me that you were his father, his long lost father--not seen
you for eighteen years, he said.

CRAMPTON (startled). Eighteen years!

WAITER. Yes, sir. (With gentle archness.) But I was up to his tricks,
sir. I saw the idea coming into his head as he stood there, thinking
what new joke he'd have with me. Yes, sir: that's the sort he is: very
pleasant, ve--ry off hand and affable indeed, sir. (Again changing his
tempo to say to Valentine, who is putting his stick down against the
corner of the garden seat) If you'll allow me, sir? (Taking Valentine's
stick.) Thank you, sir. (Valentine strolls up to the luncheon table and
looks at the menu. The waiter turns to Crampton and resumes his lay.)
Even the solicitor took up the joke, although he was in a manner of
speaking in my confidence about the young gentleman, sir. Yes, sir, I
assure you, sir. You would never imagine what respectable professional
gentlemen from London will do on an outing, when the sea air takes them,
sir.

CRAMPTON. Oh, there's a solicitor with them, is there?

WAITER. The family solicitor, sir--yes, sir. Name of McComas, sir. (He
goes towards hotel entrance with coat and stick, happily unconscious of
the bomblike effect the name has produced on Crampton.)

CRAMPTON (rising in angry alarm). McComas! (Calls to Valentine.)
Valentine! (Again, fiercely.) Valentine!! (Valentine turns.) This is a
plant, a conspiracy. This is my family--my children--my infernal wife.

VALENTINE (coolly). On, indeed! Interesting meeting! (He resumes his
study of the menu.)

CRAMPTON. Meeting! Not for me. Let me out of this. (Calling to the
waiter.) Give me that coat.

WAITER. Yes, sir. (He comes back, puts Valentine's stick carefully down
against the luncheon table; and delicately shakes the coat out and holds
it for Crampton to put on.) I seem to have done the young gentleman an
injustice, sir, haven't I, sir.

CRAMPTON. Rrrh! (He stops on the point of putting his arms into the
sleeves, and turns to Valentine with sudden suspicion.) Valentine: you
are in this. You made this plot. You--

VALENTINE (decisively). Bosh! (He throws the menu down and goes round
the table to look out unconcernedly over the parapet.)

CRAMPTON (angrily). What d'ye-- (McComas, followed by Philip and Dolly,
comes out. He vacillates for a moment on seeing Crampton.)

WAITER (softly--interrupting Crampton). Steady, sir. Here they come,
sir. (He takes up the stick and makes for the hotel, throwing the coat
across his arm. McComas turns the corners of his mouth resolutely down
and crosses to Crampton, who draws back and glares, with his hands
behind him. McComas, with his brow opener than ever, confronts him in
the majesty of a spotless conscience.)

WAITER (aside, as he passes Philip on his way out). I've broke it to
him, sir.

PHILIP. Invaluable William! (He passes on to the table.)

DOLLY (aside to the waiter). How did he take it?

WAITER (aside to her). Startled at first, miss; but resigned--very
resigned, indeed, miss. (He takes the stick and coat into the hotel.)

McCOMAS (having stared Crampton out of countenance). So here you are,
Mr. Crampton.

CRAMPTON. Yes, here--caught in a trap--a mean trap. Are those my
children?

PHILIP (with deadly politeness). Is this our father, Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS. Yes--er-- (He loses countenance himself and stops.)

DOLLY (conventionally). Pleased to meet you again. (She wanders
idly round the table, exchanging a smile and a word of greeting with
Valentine on the way.)

PHILIP. Allow me to discharge my first duty as host by ordering your
wine. (He takes the wine list from the table. His polite attention, and
Dolly's unconcerned indifference, leave Crampton on the footing of
the casual acquaintance picked up that morning at the dentist's. The
consciousness of it goes through the father with so keen a pang that
he trembles all over; his brow becomes wet; and he stares dumbly at
his son, who, just conscious enough of his own callousness to intensely
enjoy the humor and adroitness of it, proceeds pleasantly.) Finch: some
crusted old port for you, as a respectable family solicitor, eh?

McCOMAS (firmly). Apollinaris only. I prefer to take nothing heating.
(He walks away to the side of the terrace, like a man putting temptation
behind him.)

PHILIP. Valentine--?

VALENTINE. Would Lager be considered vulgar?

PHILIP. Probably. We'll order some. Dolly takes it. (Turning to Crampton
with cheerful politeness.) And now, Mr. Crampton, what can we do for
you?

CRAMPTON. What d'ye mean, boy?

PHILIP. Boy! (Very solemnly.) Whose fault is it that I am a boy?

(Crampton snatches the wine list rudely from him and irresolutely
pretends to read it. Philip abandons it to him with perfect politeness.)

DOLLY (looking over Crampton's right shoulder). The whisky's on the last
page but one.

CRAMPTON. Let me alone, child.

DOLLY. Child! No, no: you may call me Dolly if you like; but you mustn't
call me child. (She slips her arm through Philip's; and the two stand
looking at Crampton as if he were some eccentric stranger.)

CRAMPTON (mopping his brow in rage and agony, and yet relieved even by
their playing with him). McComas: we are--ha!--going to have a pleasant
meal.

McCOMAS (pusillanimously). There is no reason why it should not be
pleasant. (He looks abjectly gloomy.)

PHILIP. Finch's face is a feast in itself. (Mrs. Clandon and Gloria come
from the hotel. Mrs. Clandon advances with courageous self-possession
and marked dignity of manner. She stops at the foot of the steps to
address Valentine, who is in her path. Gloria also stops, looking at
Crampton with a certain repulsion.)

MRS. CLANDON. Glad to see you again, Mr. Valentine. (He smiles. She
passes on and confronts Crampton, intending to address him with perfect
composure; but his aspect shakes her. She stops suddenly and says
anxiously, with a touch of remorse.) Fergus: you are greatly changed.

CRAMPTON (grimly). I daresay. A man does change in eighteen years.

MRS. CLANDON (troubled). I--I did not mean that. I hope your health is
good.

CRAMPTON. Thank you. No: it's not my health. It's my happiness: that's
the change you meant, I think. (Breaking out suddenly.) Look at her,
McComas! Look at her; and look at me! (He utters a half laugh, half
sob.)

PHILIP. Sh! (Pointing to the hotel entrance, where the waiter has just
appeared.) Order before William!

DOLLY (touching Crampton's arm warningly with her finger). Ahem! (The
waiter goes to the service table and beckons to the kitchen entrance,
whence issue a young waiter with soup plates, and a cook, in white apron
and cap, with the soup tureen. The young waiter remains and serves: the
cook goes out, and reappears from time to time bringing in the courses.
He carves, but does not serve. The waiter comes to the end of the
luncheon table next the steps.)

MRS. CLANDON (as they all assemble about the table). I think you have
all met one another already to-day. Oh, no, excuse me. (Introducing) Mr.
Valentine: Mr. McComas. (She goes to the end of the table nearest the
hotel.) Fergus: will you take the head of the table, please.

CRAMPTON. Ha! (Bitterly.) The head of the table!

WAITER (holding the chair for him with inoffensive encouragement). This
end, sir. (Crampton submits, and takes his seat.) Thank you, sir.

MRS. CLANDON. Mr. Valentine: will you take that side (indicating the
side nearest the parapet) with Gloria? (Valentine and Gloria take their
places, Gloria next Crampton and Valentine next Mrs. Clandon.) Finch:
I must put you on this side, between Dolly and Phil. You must protect
yourself as best you can. (The three take the remaining side of the
table, Dolly next her mother, Phil next his father, and McComas between
them. Soup is served.)

WAITER (to Crampton). Thick or clear, sir?

CRAMPTON (to Mrs. Clandon). Does nobody ask a blessing in this
household?

PHILIP (interposing smartly). Let us first settle what we are about to
receive. William!

WAITER. Yes, sir. (He glides swiftly round the table to Phil's left
elbow. On his way he whispers to the young waiter) Thick.

PHILIP. Two small Lagers for the children as usual, William; and one
large for this gentleman (indicating Valentine). Large Apollinaris for
Mr. McComas.

WAITER. Yes, sir.

DOLLY. Have a six of Irish in it, Finch?

McCOMAS (scandalized). No--no, thank you.

PHILIP. Number 413 for my mother and Miss Gloria as before; and--
(turning enquiringly to Crampton) Eh?

CRAMPTON (scowling and about to reply offensively). I--

WAITER (striking in mellifluously). All right, sir. We know what Mr.
Crampton likes here, sir. (He goes into the hotel.)

PHILIP (looking gravely at his father). You frequent bars. Bad habit!
(The cook, accompanied by a waiter with a supply of hot plates, brings
in the fish from the kitchen to the service table, and begins slicing
it.)

CRAMPTON. You have learnt your lesson from your mother, I see.

MRS. CLANDON. Phil: will you please remember that your jokes are apt to
irritate people who are not accustomed to us, and that your father is
our guest to-day.

CRAMPTON (bitterly). Yes, a guest at the head of my own table. (The soup
plates are removed.)

DOLLY (sympathetically). Yes: it's embarrassing, isn't it? It's just as
bad for us, you know.

PHILIP. Sh! Dolly: we are both wanting in tact. (To Crampton.) We mean
well, Mr. Crampton; but we are not yet strong in the filial line.
(The waiter returns from the hotel with the drinks.) William: come and
restore good feeling.

WAITER (cheerfully). Yes, sir. Certainly, sir. Small Lager for you, sir.
(To Crampton.) Seltzer and Irish, sir. (To McComas.) Apollinaris, sir.
(To Dolly.) Small Lager, miss. (To Mrs. Clandon, pouring out wine.) 413,
madam. (To Valentine.) Large Lager for you, sir. (To Gloria.) 413, miss.

DOLLY (drinking). To the family!

PHILIP. (drinking). Hearth and Home! (Fish is served.)

McCOMAS (with an obviously forced attempt at cheerful domesticity). We
are getting on very nicely after all.

DOLLY (critically). After all! After all what, Finch?

CRAMPTON (sarcastically). He means that you are getting on very nicely
in spite of the presence of your father. Do I take your point rightly,
Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS (disconcerted). No, no. I only said "after all" to round off the
sentence. I--er--er--er---

WAITER (tactfully). Turbot, sir?

McCOMAS (intensely grateful for the interruption). Thank you, waiter:
thank you.

WAITER (sotto voce). Don't mention it, sir. (He returns to the service
table.)

CRAMPTON (to Phil). Have you thought of choosing a profession yet?

PHILIP. I am keeping my mind open on that subject. William!

WAITER. Yes, sir.

PHILIP. How long do you think it would take me to learn to be a really
smart waiter?

WAITER. Can't be learnt, sir. It's in the character, sir.
(Confidentially to Valentine, who is looking about for something.) Bread
for the lady, sir? yes, sir. (He serves bread to Gloria, and resumes at
his former pitch.) Very few are born to it, sir.

PHILIP. You don't happen to have such a thing as a son, yourself, have
you?

WAITER. Yes, sir: oh, yes, sir. (To Gloria, again dropping his voice.)
A little more fish, miss? you won't care for the joint in the middle of
the day.

GLORIA. No, thank you. (The fish plates are removed.)

DOLLY. Is your son a waiter, too, William?

WAITER (serving Gloria with fowl). Oh, no, miss, he's too impetuous.
He's at the Bar.

McCOMAS (patronizingly). A potman, eh?

WAITER (with a touch of melancholy, as if recalling a disappointment
softened by time). No, sir: the other bar--your profession, sir. A Q.C.,
sir.

McCOMAS (embarrassed). I'm sure I beg your pardon.

WAITER. Not at all, sir. Very natural mistake, I'm sure, sir. I've often
wished he was a potman, sir. Would have been off my hands ever so much
sooner, sir. (Aside to Valentine, who is again in difficulties.) Salt at
your elbow, sir. (Resuming.) Yes, sir: had to support him until he was
thirty-seven, sir. But doing well now, sir: very satisfactory indeed,
sir. Nothing less than fifty guineas, sir.

McCOMAS. Democracy, Crampton!--modern democracy!

WAITER (calmly). No, sir, not democracy: only education, sir.
Scholarships, sir. Cambridge Local, sir. Sidney Sussex College, sir.
(Dolly plucks his sleeve and whispers as he bends down.) Stone ginger,
miss? Right, miss. (To McComas.) Very good thing for him, sir: he never
had any turn for real work, sir. (He goes into the hotel, leaving the
company somewhat overwhelmed by his son's eminence.)

VALENTINE. Which of us dare give that man an order again!

DOLLY. I hope he won't mind my sending him for ginger-beer.

CRAMPTON (doggedly). While he's a waiter it's his business to wait. If
you had treated him as a waiter ought to be treated, he'd have held his
tongue.

DOLLY. What a loss that would have been! Perhaps he'll give us an
introduction to his son and get us into London society. (The waiter
reappears with the ginger-beer.)

CRAMPTON (growling contemptuously). London society! London society!!
You're not fit for any society, child.

DOLLY (losing her temper). Now look here, Mr. Crampton. If you think--

WAITER (softly, at her elbow). Stone ginger, miss.

DOLLY (taken aback, recovers her good humor after a long breath and says
sweetly). Thank you, dear William. You were just in time. (She drinks.)

McCOMAS (making a fresh effort to lead the conversation into
dispassionate regions). If I may be allowed to change the subject, Miss
Clandon, what is the established religion in Madeira?

GLORIA. I suppose the Portuguese religion. I never inquired.

DOLLY. The servants come in Lent and kneel down before you and confess
all the things they've done: and you have to pretend to forgive them. Do
they do that in England, William?

WAITER. Not usually, miss. They may in some parts: but it has not come
under my notice, miss. (Catching Mrs. Clandon's eye as the young waiter
offers her the salad bowl.) You like it without dressing, ma'am: yes,
ma'am, I have some for you. (To his young colleague, motioning him to
serve Gloria.) This side, Jo. (He takes a special portion of salad from
the service table and puts it beside Mrs. Clandon's plate. In doing so
he observes that Dolly is making a wry face.) Only a bit of watercress,
miss, got in by mistake. (He takes her salad away.) Thank you, miss.
(To the young waiter, admonishing him to serve Dolly afresh.) Jo.
(Resuming.) Mostly members of the Church of England, miss.

DOLLY. Members of the Church of England! What's the subscription?

CRAMPTON (rising violently amid general consternation). You see how my
children have been brought up, McComas. You see it; you hear it. I call
all of you to witness-- (He becomes inarticulate, and is about to strike
his fist recklessly on the table when the waiter considerately takes
away his plate.)

MRS. CLANDON (firmly). Sit down, Fergus. There is no occasion at all
for this outburst. You must remember that Dolly is just like a foreigner
here. Pray sit down.

CRAMPTON (subsiding unwillingly). I doubt whether I ought to sit here
and countenance all this. I doubt it.

WAITER. Cheese, sir; or would you like a cold sweet?

CRAMPTON (take aback). What? Oh!--cheese, cheese.

DOLLY. Bring a box of cigarettes, William.

WAITER. All ready, miss. (He takes a box of cigarettes from the service
table and places them before Dolly, who selects one and prepares to
smoke. He then returns to his table for a box of vestas.)

CRAMPTON (staring aghast at Dolly). Does she smoke?

DOLLY (out of patience). Really, Mr. Crampton, I'm afraid I'm spoiling
your lunch. I'll go and have my cigarette on the beach. (She leaves
the table with petulant suddenness and goes down the steps. The waiter
attempts to give her the matches; but she is gone before he can reach
her.)

CRAMPTON (furiously). Margaret: call that girl back. Call her back, I
say.

McCOMAS (trying to make peace). Come, Crampton: never mind. She's her
father's daughter: that's all.

MRS. CLANDON (with deep resentment). I hope not, Finch. (She rises: they
all rise a little.) Mr. Valentine: will you excuse me: I am afraid Dolly
is hurt and put out by what has passed. I must go to her.

CRAMPTON. To take her part against me, you mean.

MRS. CLANDON (ignoring him). Gloria: will you take my place whilst I am
away, dear. (She crosses to the steps. Crampton's eyes follow her with
bitter hatred. The rest watch her in embarrassed silence, feeling the
incident to be a very painful one.)

WAITER (intercepting her at the top of the steps and offering her a box
of vestas). Young lady forgot the matches, ma'am. If you would be so
good, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON (surprised into grateful politeness by the witchery of his
sweet and cheerful tones). Thank you very much. (She takes the matches
and goes down to the beach. The waiter shepherds his assistant along
with him into the hotel by the kitchen entrance, leaving the luncheon
party to themselves.)

CRAMPTON (throwing himself back in his chair). There's a mother for you,
McComas! There's a mother for you!

GLORIA (steadfastly). Yes: a good mother.

CRAMPTON. And a bad father? That's what you mean, eh?

VALENTINE (rising indignantly and addressing Gloria). Miss Clandon: I--

CRAMPTON (turning on him). That girl's name is Crampton, Mr. Valentine,
not Clandon. Do you wish to join them in insulting me?

VALENTINE (ignoring him). I'm overwhelmed, Miss Clandon. It's all my
fault: I brought him here: I'm responsible for him. And I'm ashamed of
him.

CRAMPTON. What d'y' mean?

GLORIA (rising coldly). No harm has been done, Mr. Valentine. We have
all been a little childish, I am afraid. Our party has been a failure:
let us break it up and have done with it. (She puts her chair aside
and turns to the steps, adding, with slighting composure, as she passes
Crampton.) Good-bye, father.

(She descends the steps with cold, disgusted indifference. They all look
after her, and so do not notice the return of the waiter from the hotel,
laden with Crampton's coat, Valentine's stick, a couple of shawls and
parasols, a white canvas umbrella, and some camp stools.)

CRAMPTON (to himself, staring after Gloria with a ghastly expression).
Father! Father!! (He strikes his fist violently on the table.) Now--

WAITER (offering the coat). This is yours, sir, I think, sir. (Crampton
glares at him; then snatches it rudely and comes down the terrace
towards the garden seat, struggling with the coat in his angry efforts
to put it on. McComas rises and goes to his assistance; then takes
his hat and umbrella from the little iron table, and turns towards the
steps. Meanwhile the waiter, after thanking Crampton with unruffled
sweetness for taking the coat, offers some of his burden to Phil.) The
ladies' sunshades, sir. Nasty glare off the sea to-day, sir: very trying
to the complexion, sir. I shall carry down the camp stools myself, sir.

PHILIP. You are old, Father William; but you are the most considerate of
men. No: keep the sunshades and give me the camp stools (taking them).

WAITER (with flattering gratitude). Thank you, sir.

PHILIP. Finch: share with me (giving him a couple). Come along. (They go
down the steps together.)

VALENTINE (to the waiter). Leave me something to bring down--one of
these. (Offering to take a sunshade.)

WAITER (discreetly). That's the younger lady's, sir. (Valentine lets
it go.) Thank you, sir. If you'll allow me, sir, I think you had better
have this. (He puts down the sunshades on Crampton's chair, and
produces from the tail pocket of his dress coat, a book with a lady's
handkerchief between the leaves, marking the page.) The eldest young
lady is reading it at present. (Valentine takes it eagerly.) Thank you,
sir. Schopenhauer, sir, you see. (He takes up the sunshades again.) Very
interesting author, sir: especially on the subject of ladies, sir. (He
goes down the steps. Valentine, about to follow him, recollects Crampton
and changes his mind.)

VALENTINE (coming rather excitedly to Crampton). Now look here,
Crampton: are you at all ashamed of yourself?

CRAMPTON (pugnaciously). Ashamed of myself! What for?

VALENTINE. For behaving like a bear. What will your daughter think of me
for having brought you here?

CRAMPTON. I was not thinking of what my daughter was thinking of you.

VALENTINE. No, you were thinking of yourself. You're a perfect maniac.

CRAMPTON (heartrent). She told you what I am--a father--a father robbed
of his children. What are the hearts of this generation like? Am I to
come here after all these years--to see what my children are for
the first time! to hear their voices!--and carry it all off like a
fashionable visitor; drop in to lunch; be Mr. Crampton--M i s t e
r Crampton! What right have they to talk to me like that? I'm their
father: do they deny that? I'm a man, with the feelings of our common
humanity: have I no rights, no claims? In all these years who have I
had round me? Servants, clerks, business acquaintances. I've had respect
from them--aye, kindness. Would one of them have spoken to me as that
girl spoke?--would one of them have laughed at me as that boy was
laughing at me all the time? (Frantically.) My own children! M i s t e r
Crampton! My--

VALENTINE. Come, come: they're only children. The only one of them
that's worth anything called you father.

CRAMPTON (wildly). Yes: "good-bye, father." Oh, yes: she got at my
feelings--with a stab!

VALENTINE (taking this in very bad part). Now look here, Crampton: you
just let her alone: she's treated you very well. I had a much worse time
of it at lunch than you.

CRAMPTON. You!

VALENTINE (with growing impetuosity). Yes: I. I sat next to her; and
I never said a single thing to her the whole time--couldn't think of a
blessed word. And not a word did she say to me.

CRAMPTON. Well?

VALENTINE. Well? Well??? (Tackling him very seriously and talking
faster and faster.) Crampton: do you know what's been the matter with me
to-day? You don't suppose, do you, that I'm in the habit of playing such
tricks on my patients as I played on you?

CRAMPTON. I hope not.

VALENTINE. The explanation is that I'm stark mad, or rather that I've
never been in my real senses before. I'm capable of anything: I've grown
up at last: I'm a Man; and it's your daughter that's made a man of me.

CRAMPTON (incredulously). Are you in love with my daughter?

VALENTINE (his words now coming in a perfect torrent). Love! Nonsense:
it's something far above and beyond that. It's life, it's faith, it's
strength, certainty, paradise--

CRAMPTON (interrupting him with acrid contempt). Rubbish, man! What have
you to keep a wife on? You can't marry her.

VALENTINE. Who wants to marry her? I'll kiss her hands; I'll kneel at
her feet; I'll live for her; I'll die for her; and that'll be enough for
me. Look at her book! See! (He kisses the handkerchief.) If you offered
me all your money for this excuse for going down to the beach and
speaking to her again, I'd only laugh at you. (He rushes buoyantly off
to the steps, where he bounces right into the arms of the waiter, who
is coming up form the beach. The two save themselves from falling by
clutching one another tightly round the waist and whirling one another
around.)

WAITER (delicately). Steady, sir, steady.

VALENTINE (shocked at his own violence). I beg your pardon.

WAITER. Not at all, sir, not at all. Very natural, sir, I'm sure, sir,
at your age. The lady has sent me for her book, sir. Might I take the
liberty of asking you to let her have it at once, sir?

VALENTINE. With pleasure. And if you will allow me to present you with a
professional man's earnings for six weeks-- (offering him Dolly's crown
piece.)

WAITER (as if the sum were beyond his utmost expectations). Thank you,
sir: much obliged. (Valentine dashes down the steps.) Very high-spirited
young gentleman, sir: very manly and straight set up.

CRAMPTON (in grumbling disparagement). And making his fortune in a
hurry, no doubt. I know what his six weeks' earnings come to. (He
crosses the terrace to the iron table, and sits down.)

WAITER (philosophically). Well, sir, you never can tell. That's a
principle in life with me, sir, if you'll excuse my having such a thing,
sir. (Delicately sinking the philosopher in the waiter for a moment.)
Perhaps you haven't noticed that you hadn't touched that seltzer and
Irish, sir, when the party broke up. (He takes the tumbler from the
luncheon table, and sets if before Crampton.) Yes, sir, you never can
tell. There was my son, sir! who ever thought that he would rise to wear
a silk gown, sir? And yet to-day, sir, nothing less than fifty guineas,
sir. What a lesson, sir!

CRAMPTON. Well, I hope he is grateful to you, and recognizes what he
owes you.

WAITER. We get on together very well, very well indeed, sir, considering
the difference in our stations. (With another of his irresistible
transitions.) A small lump of sugar, sir, will take the flatness out of
the seltzer without noticeably sweetening the drink, sir. Allow me,
sir. (He drops a lump of sugar into the tumbler.) But as I say to him,
where's the difference after all? If I must put on a dress coat to show
what I am, sir, he must put on a wig and gown to show what he is. If
my income is mostly tips, and there's a pretence that I don't get them,
why, his income is mostly fees, sir; and I understand there's a pretence
that he don't get them! If he likes society, and his profession brings
him into contact with all ranks, so does mine, too, sir. If it's a
little against a barrister to have a waiter for his father, sir, it's
a little against a waiter to have a barrister for a son: many people
consider it a great liberty, sir, I assure you, sir. Can I get you
anything else, sir?

CRAMPTON. No, thank you. (With bitter humility.) I suppose that's no
objection to my sitting here for a while: I can't disturb the party on
the beach here.

WAITER (with emotion). Very kind of you, sir, to put it as if it was not
a compliment and an honour to us, Mr. Crampton, very kind indeed. The
more you are at home here, sir, the better for us.

CRAMPTON (in poignant irony). Home!

WAITER (reflectively). Well, yes, sir: that's a way of looking at it,
too, sir. I have always said that the great advantage of a hotel is that
it's a refuge from home life, sir.

CRAMPTON. I missed that advantage to-day, I think.

WAITER. You did, sir, you did. Dear me! It's the unexpected that always
happens, isn't it? (Shaking his head.) You never can tell, sir: you
never can tell. (He goes into the hotel.)

CRAMPTON (his eyes shining hardly as he props his drawn, miserable face
on his hands). Home! Home!! (He drops his arms on the table and bows his
head on them, but presently hears someone approaching and hastily sits
bolt upright. It is Gloria, who has come up the steps alone, with her
sunshade and her book in her hands. He looks defiantly at her, with
the brutal obstinacy of his mouth and the wistfulness of his eyes
contradicting each other pathetically. She comes to the corner of the
garden seat and stands with her back to it, leaning against the end of
it, and looking down at him as if wondering at his weakness: too curious
about him to be cold, but supremely indifferent to their kinship.) Well?

GLORIA. I want to speak with you for a moment.

CRAMPTON (looking steadily at her). Indeed? That's surprising. You meet
your father after eighteen years; and you actually want to speak to
him for a moment! That's touching: isn't it? (He rests his head on his
hands, and looks down and away from her, in gloomy reflection.)

GLORIA. All that is what seems to me so nonsensical, so uncalled for.
What do you expect us to feel for you--to do for you? What is it you
want? Why are you less civil to us than other people are? You are
evidently not very fond of us--why should you be? But surely we can meet
without quarrelling.

CRAMPTON (a dreadful grey shade passing over his face). Do you realize
that I am your father?

GLORIA. Perfectly.

CRAMPTON. Do you know what is due to me as your father?

GLORIA. For instance---?

CRAMPTON (rising as if to combat a monster). For instance! For
instance!! For instance, duty, affection, respect, obedience--

GLORIA (quitting her careless leaning attitude and confronting him
promptly and proudly). I obey nothing but my sense of what is right.
I respect nothing that is not noble. That is my duty. (She adds, less
firmly) As to affection, it is not within my control. I am not sure
that I quite know what affection means. (She turns away with an evident
distaste for that part of the subject, and goes to the luncheon table
for a comfortable chair, putting down her book and sunshade.)

CRAMPTON (following her with his eyes). Do you really mean what you are
saying?

GLORIA (turning on him quickly and severely). Excuse me: that is an
uncivil question. I am speaking seriously to you; and I expect you to
take me seriously. (She takes one of the luncheon chairs; turns it away
from the table; and sits down a little wearily, saying) Can you not
discuss this matter coolly and rationally?

CRAMPTON. Coolly and rationally! No, I can't. Do you understand that? I
can't.

GLORIA (emphatically). No. That I c a n n o t understand. I have no
sympathy with--

CRAMPTON (shrinking nervously). Stop! Don't say anything more yet; you
don't know what you're doing. Do you want to drive me mad? (She frowns,
finding such petulance intolerable. He adds hastily) No: I'm not angry:
indeed I'm not. Wait, wait: give me a little time to think. (He
stands for a moment, screwing and clinching his brows and hands in his
perplexity; then takes the end chair from the luncheon table and
sits down beside her, saying, with a touching effort to be gentle and
patient) Now, I think I have it. At least I'll try.

GLORIA (firmly). You see! Everything comes right if we only think it
resolutely out.

CRAMPTON (in sudden dread). No: don't think. I want you to feel: that's
the only thing that can help us. Listen! Do you--but first--I forgot.
What's your name? I mean you pet name. They can't very well call you
Sophronia.

GLORIA (with astonished disgust). Sophronia! My name is Gloria. I am
always called by it.

CRAMPTON (his temper rising again). Your name is Sophronia, girl: you
were called after your aunt Sophronia, my sister: she gave you your
first Bible with your name written in it.

GLORIA. Then my mother gave me a new name.

CRAMPTON (angrily). She had no right to do it. I will not allow this.

GLORIA. You had no right to give me your sister's name. I don't know
her.

CRAMPTON. You're talking nonsense. There are bounds to what I will put
up with. I will not have it. Do you hear that?

GLORIA (rising warningly). Are you resolved to quarrel?

CRAMPTON (terrified, pleading). No, no: sit down. Sit down, won't you?
(She looks at him, keeping him in suspense. He forces himself to utter
the obnoxious name.) Gloria. (She marks her satisfaction with a slight
tightening of the lips, and sits down.) There! You see I only want to
shew you that I am your father, my--my dear child. (The endearment is
so plaintively inept that she smiles in spite of herself, and resigns
herself to indulge him a little.) Listen now. What I want to ask you is
this. Don't you remember me at all? You were only a tiny child when you
were taken away from me; but you took plenty of notice of things. Can't
you remember someone whom you loved, or (shyly) at least liked in a
childish way? Come! someone who let you stay in his study and look at
his toy boats, as you thought them? (He looks anxiously into her face
for some response, and continues less hopefully and more urgently)
Someone who let you do as you liked there and never said a word to you
except to tell you that you must sit still and not speak? Someone who
was something that no one else was to you--who was your father.

GLORIA (unmoved). If you describe things to me, no doubt I shall
presently imagine that I remember them. But I really remember nothing.

CRAMPTON (wistfully). Has your mother never told you anything about me?

GLORIA. She has never mentioned your name to me. (He groans
involuntarily. She looks at him rather contemptuously and continues)
Except once; and then she did remind me of something I had forgotten.

CRAMPTON (looking up hopefully). What was that?

GLORIA (mercilessly). The whip you bought to beat me with.

CRAMPTON (gnashing his teeth). Oh! To bring that up against me! To turn
from me! When you need never have known. (Under a grinding, agonized
breath.) Curse her!

GLORIA (springing up). You wretch! (With intense emphasis.) You wretch!!
You dare curse my mother!

CRAMPTON. Stop; or you'll be sorry afterwards. I'm your father.

GLORIA. How I hate the name! How I love the name of mother! You had
better go.

CRAMPTON. I--I'm choking. You want to kill me. Some--I-- (His voice
stifles: he is almost in a fit.)

GLORIA (going up to the balustrade with cool, quick resourcefulness, and
calling over to the beach). Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE (answering from below). Yes.

GLORIA. Come here a moment, please. Mr. Crampton wants you. (She returns
to the table and pours out a glass of water.)

CRAMPTON (recovering his speech). No: let me alone. I don't want him.
I'm all right, I tell you. I need neither his help nor yours. (He rises
and pulls himself together.) As you say, I had better go. (He puts on
his hat.) Is that your last word?

GLORIA. I hope so. (He looks stubbornly at her for a moment; nods
grimly, as if he agreed to that; and goes into the hotel. She looks at
him with equal steadiness until he disappears, when she makes a gesture
of relief, and turns to speak to Valentine, who comes running up the
steps.)

VALENTINE (panting). What's the matter? (Looking round.) Where's
Crampton?

GLORIA. Gone. (Valentine's face lights up with sudden joy, dread,
and mischief. He has just realized that he is alone with Gloria. She
continues indifferently) I thought he was ill; but he recovered himself.
He wouldn't wait for you. I am sorry. (She goes for her book and
parasol.)

VALENTINE. So much the better. He gets on my nerves after a while.
(Pretending to forget himself.) How could that man have so beautiful a
daughter!

GLORIA (taken aback for a moment; then answering him with polite but
intentional contempt). That seems to be an attempt at what is called a
pretty speech. Let me say at once, Mr. Valentine, that pretty speeches
make very sickly conversation. Pray let us be friends, if we are to be
friends, in a sensible and wholesome way. I have no intention of getting
married; and unless you are content to accept that state of things, we
had much better not cultivate each other's acquaintance.

VALENTINE (cautiously). I see. May I ask just this one question? Is
your objection an objection to marriage as an institution, or merely an
objection to marrying me personally?

GLORIA. I do not know you well enough, Mr. Valentine, to have any
opinion on the subject of your personal merits. (She turns away from him
with infinite indifference, and sits down with her book on the garden
seat.) I do not think the conditions of marriage at present are such as
any self-respecting woman can accept.

VALENTINE (instantly changing his tone for one of cordial sincerity, as
if he frankly accepted her terms and was delighted and reassured by her
principles). Oh, then that's a point of sympathy between us already. I
quite agree with you: the conditions are most unfair. (He takes off his
hat and throws it gaily on the iron table.) No: what I want is to get
rid of all that nonsense. (He sits down beside her, so naturally that
she does not think of objecting, and proceeds, with enthusiasm) Don't
you think it a horrible thing that a man and a woman can hardly know one
another without being supposed to have designs of that kind? As if there
were no other interests--no other subjects of conversation--as if women
were capable of nothing better!

GLORIA (interested). Ah, now you are beginning to talk humanly and
sensibly, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE (with a gleam in his eye at the success of his hunter's
guile). Of course!--two intelligent people like us. Isn't it pleasant,
in this stupid, convention-ridden world, to meet with someone on the
same plane--someone with an unprejudiced, enlightened mind?

GLORIA (earnestly). I hope to meet many such people in England.

VALENTINE (dubiously). Hm! There are a good many people here-- nearly
forty millions. They're not all consumptive members of the highly
educated classes like the people in Madeira.

GLORIA (now full of her subject). Oh, everybody is stupid and prejudiced
in Madeira--weak, sentimental creatures! I hate weakness; and I hate
sentiment.

VALENTINE. That's what makes you so inspiring.

GLORIA (with a slight laugh). Am I inspiring?

VALENTINE Yes. Strength's infectious.

GLORIA. Weakness is, I know.

VALENTINE (with conviction). Y o u're strong. Do you know that you
changed the world for me this morning? I was in the dumps, thinking of
my unpaid rent, frightened about the future. When you came in, I was
dazzled. (Her brow clouds a little. He goes on quickly.) That was silly,
of course; but really and truly something happened to me. Explain it
how you will, my blood got-- (he hesitates, trying to think of a
sufficiently unimpassioned word) --oxygenated: my muscles braced; my
mind cleared; my courage rose. That's odd, isn't it? considering that I
am not at all a sentimental man.

GLORIA (uneasily, rising). Let us go back to the beach.

VALENTINE (darkly--looking up at her). What! you feel it, too?

GLORIA. Feel what?

VALENTINE. Dread.

GLORIA. Dread!

VALENTINE. As if something were going to happen. It came over me
suddenly just before you proposed that we should run away to the others.

GLORIA (amazed). That's strange--very strange! I had the same
presentiment.

VALENTINE. How extraordinary! (Rising.) Well: shall we run away?

GLORIA. Run away! Oh, no: that would be childish. (She sits down
again. He resumes his seat beside her, and watches her with a gravely
sympathetic air. She is thoughtful and a little troubled as she adds) I
wonder what is the scientific explanation of those fancies that cross us
occasionally!

VALENTINE. Ah, I wonder! It's a curiously helpless sensation: isn't it?

GLORIA (rebelling against the word). Helpless?

VALENTINE. Yes. As if Nature, after allowing us to belong to ourselves
and do what we judged right and reasonable for all these years, were
suddenly lifting her great hand to take us--her two little children--by
the scruff's of our little necks, and use us, in spite of ourselves, for
her own purposes, in her own way.

GLORIA. Isn't that rather fanciful?

VALENTINE (with a new and startling transition to a tone of utter
recklessness). I don't know. I don't care. (Bursting out reproachfully.)
Oh, Miss Clandon, Miss Clandon: how could you?

GLORIA. What have I done?

VALENTINE. Thrown this enchantment on me. I'm honestly trying to be
sensible--scientific--everything that you wish me to be. But--but-- oh,
don't you see what you have set to work in my imagination?

GLORIA (with indignant, scornful sternness). I hope you are not going to
be so foolish--so vulgar--as to say love.

VALENTINE (with ironical haste to disclaim such a weakness). No, no, no.
Not love: we know better than that. Let's call it chemistry. You can't
deny that there is such a thing as chemical action, chemical affinity,
chemical combination--the most irresistible of all natural forces. Well,
you're attracting me irresistibly--chemically.

GLORIA (contemptuously). Nonsense!

VALENTINE. Of course it's nonsense, you stupid girl. (Gloria recoils
in outraged surprise.) Yes, stupid girl: t h a t's a scientific fact,
anyhow. You're a prig--a feminine prig: that's what you are. (Rising.)
Now I suppose you've done with me for ever. (He goes to the iron table
and takes up his hat.)

GLORIA (with elaborate calm, sitting up like a High-school-mistress
posing to be photographed). That shows how very little you understand my
real character. I am not in the least offended. (He pauses and puts his
hat down again.) I am always willing to be told of my own defects, Mr.
Valentine, by my friends, even when they are as absurdly mistaken about
me as you are. I have many faults--very serious faults--of character and
temper; but if there is one thing that I am not, it is what you call a
prig. (She closes her lips trimly and looks steadily and challengingly
at him as she sits more collectedly than ever.)

VALENTINE (returning to the end of the garden seat to confront her more
emphatically). Oh, yes, you are. My reason tells me so: my knowledge
tells me so: my experience tells me so.

GLORIA. Excuse my reminding you that your reason and your knowledge and
your experience are not infallible. At least I hope not.

VALENTINE. I must believe them. Unless you wish me to believe my eyes,
my heart, my instincts, my imagination, which are all telling me the
most monstrous lies about you.

GLORIA (the collectedness beginning to relax). Lies!

VALENTINE (obstinately). Yes, lies. (He sits down again beside her.) Do
you expect me to believe that you are the most beautiful woman in the
world?

GLORIA. That is ridiculous, and rather personal.

VALENTINE. Of course it's ridiculous. Well, that's what my eyes tell
me. (Gloria makes a movement of contemptuous protest.) No: I'm not
flattering. I tell you I don't believe it. (She is ashamed to find that
this does not quite please her either.) Do you think that if you were
to turn away in disgust from my weakness, I should sit down here and cry
like a child?

GLORIA (beginning to find that she must speak shortly and pointedly to
keep her voice steady). Why should you, pray?

VALENTINE (with a stir of feeling beginning to agitate his voice).
Of course not: I'm not such an idiot. And yet my heart tells me I
should--my fool of a heart. But I'll argue with my heart and bring it to
reason. If I loved you a thousand times, I'll force myself to look the
truth steadily in the face. After all, it's easy to be sensible: the
facts are the facts. What's this place? it's not heaven: it's the Marine
Hotel. What's the time? it's not eternity: it's about half past one in
the afternoon. What am I? a dentist--a five shilling dentist!

GLORIA. And I am a feminine prig.

VALENTINE. (passionately). No, no: I can't face that: I must have one
illusion left--the illusion about you. I love you. (He turns towards her
as if the impulse to touch her were ungovernable: she rises and stands
on her guard wrathfully. He springs up impatiently and retreats a step.)
Oh, what a fool I am!--an idiot! You don't understand: I might as well
talk to the stones on the beach. (He turns away, discouraged.)

GLORIA (reassured by his withdrawal, and a little remorseful). I am
sorry. I do not mean to be unsympathetic, Mr. Valentine; but what can I
say?

VALENTINE (returning to her with all his recklessness of manner replaced
by an engaging and chivalrous respect). You can say nothing, Miss
Clandon. I beg your pardon: it was my own fault, or rather my own bad
luck. You see, it all depended on your naturally liking me. (She is
about to speak: he stops her deprecatingly.) Oh, I know you mustn't tell
me whether you like me or not; but--

GLORIA (her principles up in arms at once). Must not! Why not? I am a
free woman: why should I not tell you?

VALENTINE (pleading in terror, and retreating). Don't. I'm afraid to
hear.

GLORIA (no longer scornful). You need not be afraid. I think you are
sentimental, and a little foolish; but I like you.

VALENTINE (dropping into the iron chair as if crushed). Then it's all
over. (He becomes the picture of despair.)

GLORIA (puzzled, approaching him). But why?

VALENTINE. Because liking is not enough. Now that I think down into it
seriously, I don't know whether I like you or not.

GLORIA (looking down at him with wondering concern). I'm sorry.

VALENTINE (in an agony of restrained passion). Oh, don't pity me. Your
voice is tearing my heart to pieces. Let me alone, Gloria. You go down
into the very depths of me, troubling and stirring me--I can't struggle
with it--I can't tell you--

GLORIA (breaking down suddenly). Oh, stop telling me what you feel: I
can't bear it.

VALENTINE (springing up triumphantly, the agonized voice now solid,
ringing, and jubilant). Ah, it's come at last--my moment of courage. (He
seizes her hands: she looks at him in terror.) Our moment of courage!
(He draws her to him; kisses her with impetuous strength; and laughs
boyishly.) Now you've done it, Gloria. It's all over: we're in love with
one another. (She can only gasp at him.) But what a dragon you were! And
how hideously afraid I was!

PHILIP'S VOICE (calling from the beach). Valentine!

DOLLY'S VOICE. Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE. Good-bye. Forgive me. (He rapidly kisses her hands, and runs
away to the steps, where he meets Mrs. Clandon, ascending. Gloria, quite
lost, can only start after him.)

MRS. CLANDON. The children want you, Mr. Valentine. (She looks anxiously
around.) Is he gone?

VALENTINE (puzzled). He? (Recollecting.) Oh, Crampton. Gone this long
time, Mrs. Clandon. (He runs off buoyantly down the steps.)

GLORIA (sinking upon the seat). Mother!

MRS. CLANDON (hurrying to her in alarm). What is it, dear?

GLORIA (with heartfelt, appealing reproach). Why didn't you educate me
properly?

MRS. CLANDON (amazed). My child: I did my best.

GLORIA. Oh, you taught me nothing--nothing.

MRS. CLANDON. What is the matter with you?

GLORIA (with the most intense expression). Only shame--shame-- shame.
(Blushing unendurably, she covers her face with her hands and turns away
from her mother.)

END OF ACT II.




ACT III


The Clandon's sitting room in the hotel. An expensive apartment on the
ground floor, with a French window leading to the gardens. In the centre
of the room is a substantial table, surrounded by chairs, and draped
with a maroon cloth on which opulently bound hotel and railway guides
are displayed. A visitor entering through the window and coming down to
this central table would have the fireplace on his left, and a writing
table against the wall on his right, next the door, which is further
down. He would, if his taste lay that way, admire the wall decoration
of Lincrusta Walton in plum color and bronze lacquer, with dado and
cornice; the ormolu consoles in the corners; the vases on pillar
pedestals of veined marble with bases of polished black wood, one on
each side of the window; the ornamental cabinet next the vase on the
side nearest the fireplace, its centre compartment closed by an inlaid
door, and its corners rounded off with curved panes of glass protecting
shelves of cheap blue and white pottery; the bamboo tea table, with
folding shelves, in the corresponding space on the other side of
the window; the pictures of ocean steamers and Landseer's dogs; the
saddlebag ottoman in line with the door but on the other side of the
room; the two comfortable seats of the same pattern on the hearthrug;
and finally, on turning round and looking up, the massive brass
pole above the window, sustaining a pair of maroon rep curtains with
decorated borders of staid green. Altogether, a room well arranged
to flatter the occupant's sense of importance, and reconcile him to a
charge of a pound a day for its use.

Mrs. Clandon sits at the writing table, correcting proofs. Gloria is
standing at the window, looking out in a tormented revery.

The clock on the mantelpiece strikes five with a sickly clink, the bell
being unable to bear up against the black marble cenotaph in which it is
immured.

MRS. CLANDON. Five! I don't think we need wait any longer for the
children. The are sure to get tea somewhere.

GLORIA (wearily). Shall I ring?

MRS. CLANDON. Do, my dear. (Gloria goes to the hearth and rings.) I have
finished these proofs at last, thank goodness!

GLORIA (strolling listlessly across the room and coming behind her
mother's chair). What proofs?

MRS. CLANDON The new edition of Twentieth Century Women.

GLORIA (with a bitter smile). There's a chapter missing.

MRS. CLANDON (beginning to hunt among her proofs). Is there? Surely not.

GLORIA. I mean an unwritten one. Perhaps I shall write it for you--when
I know the end of it. (She goes back to the window.)

MRS. CLANDON. Gloria! More enigmas!

GLORIA. Oh, no. The same enigma.

MRS. CLANDON (puzzled and rather troubled; after watching her for a
moment). My dear.

GLORIA (returning). Yes.

MRS. CLANDON. You know I never ask questions.

GLORIA (kneeling beside her chair). I know, I know. (She suddenly throws
her arms about her mother and embraces her almost passionately.)

MRS. CLANDON. (gently, smiling but embarrassed). My dear: you are
getting quite sentimental.

GLORIA (recoiling). Ah, no, no. Oh, don't say that. Oh! (She rises and
turns away with a gesture as if tearing herself.)

MRS. CLANDON (mildly). My dear: what is the matter? What-- (The waiter
enters with the tea tray.)

WAITER (balmily). This was what you rang for, ma'am, I hope?

MRS. CLANDON. Thank you, yes. (She turns her chair away from the writing
table, and sits down again. Gloria crosses to the hearth and sits
crouching there with her face averted.)

WAITER (placing the tray temporarily on the centre table). I thought so,
ma'am. Curious how the nerves seem to give out in the afternoon without
a cup of tea. (He fetches the tea table and places it in front of Mrs.
Cladon, conversing meanwhile.) the young lady and gentleman have just
come back, ma'am: they have been out in a boat, ma'am. Very pleasant on
a fine afternoon like this--very pleasant and invigorating indeed. (He
takes the tray from the centre table and puts it on the tea table.)
Mr. McComas will not come to tea, ma'am: he has gone to call upon Mr.
Crampton. (He takes a couple of chairs and sets one at each end of the
tea table.)

GLORIA (looking round with an impulse of terror). And the other
gentleman?

WAITER (reassuringly, as he unconsciously drops for a moment into
the measure of "I've been roaming," which he sang as a boy.) Oh, he's
coming, miss, he's coming. He has been rowing the boat, miss, and has
just run down the road to the chemist's for something to put on the
blisters. But he will be here directly, miss--directly. (Gloria, in
ungovernable apprehension, rises and hurries towards the door.)

MRS. CLANDON. (half rising). Glo-- (Gloria goes out. Mrs. Clandon looks
perplexedly at the waiter, whose composure is unruffled.)

WAITER (cheerfully). Anything more, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON. Nothing, thank you.

WAITER. Thank you, ma'am. (As he withdraws, Phil and Dolly, in the
highest spirits, come tearing in. He holds the door open for them; then
goes out and closes it.)

DOLLY (ravenously). Oh, give me some tea. (Mrs. Clandon pours out a cup
for her.) We've been out in a boat. Valentine will be here presently.

PHILIP. He is unaccustomed to navigation. Where's Gloria?

MRS. CLANDON (anxiously, as she pours out his tea). Phil: there is
something the matter with Gloria. Has anything happened? (Phil and Dolly
look at one another and stifle a laugh.) What is it?

PHILIP (sitting down on her left). Romeo--

DOLLY (sitting down on her right). --and Juliet.

PHILIP (taking his cup of tea from Mrs. Clandon). Yes, my dear mother:
the old, old story. Dolly: don't take all the milk. (He deftly takes the
jug from her.) Yes: in the spring--

DOLLY. --a young man's fancy--

PHILIP. --lightly turns to--thank you (to Mrs. Clandon, who has passed
the biscuits) --thoughts of love. It also occurs in the autumn. The
young man in this case is--

DOLLY. Valentine.

PHILIP. And his fancy has turned to Gloria to the extent of--

DOLLY. --kissing her--

PHILIP. --on the terrace--

DOLLY (correcting him). --on the lips, before everybody.

MRS. CLANDON (incredulously). Phil! Dolly! Are you joking? (They shake
their heads.) Did she allow it?

PHILIP. We waited to see him struck to earth by the lightning of her
scorn;--

DOLLY. --but he wasn't.

PHILIP. She appeared to like it.

DOLLY. As far as we could judge. (Stopping Phil, who is about to pour
out another cup.) No: you've sworn off two cups.

MRS. CLANDON (much troubled). Children: you must not be here when Mr.
Valentine comes. I must speak very seriously to him about this.

PHILIP. To ask him his intentions? What a violation of Twentieth Century
principles!

DOLLY. Quite right, mamma: bring him to book. Make the most of the
nineteenth century while it lasts.

PHILIP. Sh! Here he is. (Valentine comes in.)

VALENTINE Very sorry to be late for tea, Mrs. Clandon. (She takes up the
tea-pot.) No, thank you: I never take any. No doubt Miss Dolly and Phil
have explained what happened to me.

PHILIP (momentously rising). Yes, Valentine: we have explained.

DOLLY (significantly, also rising). We have explained very thoroughly.

PHILIP. It was our duty. (Very seriously.) Come, Dolly. (He offers Dolly
his arm, which she takes. They look sadly at him, and go out gravely,
arm in arm. Valentine stares after them, puzzled; then looks at Mrs.
Clandon for an explanation.)

MRS. CLANDON (rising and leaving the tea table). Will you sit down,
Mr. Valentine. I want to speak to you a little, if you will allow me.
(Valentine sits down slowly on the ottoman, his conscience presaging
a bad quarter of an hour. Mrs. Clandon takes Phil's chair, and seats
herself deliberately at a convenient distance from him.) I must begin by
throwing myself somewhat at your consideration. I am going to speak of a
subject of which I know very little--perhaps nothing. I mean love.

VALENTINE. Love!

MRS. CLANDON. Yes, love. Oh, you need not look so alarmed as that, Mr.
Valentine: I am not in love with you.

VALENTINE (overwhelmed). Oh, really, Mrs.-- (Recovering himself.) I
should be only too proud if you were.

MRS. CLANDON. Thank you, Mr. Valentine. But I am too old to begin.

VALENTINE. Begin! Have you never--?

MRS. CLANDON. Never. My case is a very common one, Mr. Valentine. I
married before I was old enough to know what I was doing. As you have
seen for yourself, the result was a bitter disappointment for both my
husband and myself. So you see, though I am a married woman, I have
never been in love; I have never had a love affair; and to be quite
frank with you, Mr. Valentine, what I have seen of the love affairs of
other people has not led me to regret that deficiency in my experience.
(Valentine, looking very glum, glances sceptically at her, and says
nothing. Her color rises a little; and she adds, with restrained anger)
You do not believe me?

VALENTINE (confused at having his thought read). Oh, why not? Why not?

MRS. CLANDON. Let me tell you, Mr. Valentine, that a life devoted to
the Cause of Humanity has enthusiasms and passions to offer which far
transcend the selfish personal infatuations and sentimentalities
of romance. Those are not your enthusiasms and passions, I take it?
(Valentine, quite aware that she despises him for it, answers in the
negative with a melancholy shake of the head.) I thought not. Well, I am
equally at a disadvantage in discussing those so-called affairs of the
heart in which you appear to be an expert.

VALENTINE (restlessly). What are you driving at, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON. I think you know.

VALENTINE. Gloria?

MRS. CLANDON. Yes. Gloria.

VALENTINE (surrendering). Well, yes: I'm in love with Gloria.
(Interposing as she is about to speak.) I know what you're going to say:
I've no money.

MRS. CLANDON. I care very little about money, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE. Then you're very different to all the other mothers who have
interviewed me.

MRS. CLANDON. Ah, now we are coming to it, Mr. Valentine. You are an old
hand at this. (He opens his mouth to protest: she cuts him short with
some indignation.) Oh, do you think, little as I understand these
matters, that I have not common sense enough to know that a man
who could make as much way in one interview with such a woman as my
daughter, can hardly be a novice!

VALENTINE. I assure you--

MRS. CLANDON (stopping him). I am not blaming you, Mr. Valentine. It is
Gloria's business to take care of herself; and you have a right to amuse
yourself as you please. But--

VALENTINE (protesting). Amuse myself! Oh, Mrs. Clandon!

MRS. CLANDON (relentlessly). On your honor, Mr. Valentine, are you in
earnest?

VALENTINE (desperately). On my honor I am in earnest. (She looks
searchingly at him. His sense of humor gets the better of him; and he
adds quaintly) Only, I always have been in earnest; and yet--here I am,
you see!

MRS. CLANDON. This is just what I suspected. (Severely.) Mr. Valentine:
you are one of those men who play with women's affections.

VALENTINE. Well, why not, if the Cause of Humanity is the only thing
worth being serious about? However, I understand. (Rising and taking his
hat with formal politeness.) You wish me to discontinue my visits.

MRS. CLANDON. No: I am sensible enough to be well aware that Gloria's
best chance of escape from you now is to become better acquainted with
you.

VALENTINE (unaffectedly alarmed). Oh, don't say that, Mrs. Clandon. You
don't think that, do you?

MRS. CLANDON. I have great faith, Mr. Valentine, in the sound training
Gloria's mind has had since she was a child.

VALENTINE (amazingly relieved). O-oh! Oh, that's all right. (He sits
down again and throws his hat flippantly aside with the air of a man who
has no longer anything to fear.)

MRS. CLANDON (indignant at his assurance). What do you mean?

VALENTINE (turning confidentially to her). Come: shall I teach you
something, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON (stiffly). I am always willing to learn.

VALENTINE. Have you ever studied the subject of
gunnery--artillery--cannons and war-ships and so on?

MRS. CLANDON. Has gunnery anything to do with Gloria?

VALENTINE. A great deal--by way of illustration. During this whole
century, my dear Mrs. Clandon, the progress of artillery has been a duel
between the maker of cannons and the maker of armor plates to keep the
cannon balls out. You build a ship proof against the best gun known:
somebody makes a better gun and sinks your ship. You build a heavier
ship, proof against that gun: somebody makes a heavier gun and sinks you
again. And so on. Well, the duel of sex is just like that.

MRS. CLANDON. The duel of sex!

VALENTINE. Yes: you've heard of the duel of sex, haven't you? Oh, I
forgot: you've been in Madeira: the expression has come up since your
time. Need I explain it?

MRS. CLANDON (contemptuously). No.

VALENTINE. Of course not. Now what happens in the duel of sex? The old
fashioned mother received an old fashioned education to protect her
against the wiles of man. Well, you know the result: the old fashioned
man got round her. The old fashioned woman resolved to protect her
daughter more effectually--to find some armor too strong for the old
fashioned man. So she gave her daughter a scientific education--your
plan. That was a corker for the old fashioned man: he said it wasn't
fair--unwomanly and all the rest of it. But that didn't do him any good.
So he had to give up his old fashioned plan of attack--you know--going
down on his knees and swearing to love, honor and obey, and so on.

MRS. CLANDON. Excuse me: that was what the woman swore.

VALENTINE. Was it? Ah, perhaps you're right--yes: of course it was.
Well, what did the man do? Just what the artillery man does-- went one
better than the woman--educated himself scientifically and beat her at
that game just as he had beaten her at the old game. I learnt how to
circumvent the Women's Rights woman before I was twenty- three: it's all
been found out long ago. You see, my methods are thoroughly modern.

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet disgust). No doubt.

VALENTINE. But for that very reason there's one sort of girl against
whom they are of no use.

MRS. CLANDON. Pray which sort?

VALENTINE. The thoroughly old fashioned girl. If you had brought up
Gloria in the old way, it would have taken me eighteen months to get
to the point I got to this afternoon in eighteen minutes. Yes, Mrs.
Clandon: the Higher Education of Women delivered Gloria into my hands;
and it was you who taught her to believe in the Higher Education of
Women.

MRS. CLANDON (rising). Mr. Valentine: you are very clever.

VALENTINE (rising also). Oh, Mrs. Clandon!

MRS. CLANDON And you have taught me n o t h i n g. Good-bye.

VALENTINE (horrified). Good-bye! Oh, mayn't I see her before I go?

MRS. CLANDON. I am afraid she will not return until you have gone Mr.
Valentine. She left the room expressly to avoid you.

VALENTINE (thoughtfully). That's a good sign. Good-bye. (He bows and
makes for the door, apparently well satisfied.)

MRS. CLANDON (alarmed). Why do you think it a good sign?

VALENTINE (turning near the door). Because I am mortally afraid of her;
and it looks as if she were mortally afraid of me. (He turns to go and
finds himself face to face with Gloria, who has just entered. She looks
steadfastly at him. He stares helplessly at her; then round at Mrs.
Clandon; then at Gloria again, completely at a loss.)

GLORIA (white, and controlling herself with difficulty). Mother: is what
Dolly told me true?

MRS. CLANDON. What did she tell you, dear?

GLORIA. That you have been speaking about me to this gentleman.

VALENTINE (murmuring). This gentleman! Oh!

MRS. CLANDON (sharply). Mr. Valentine: can you hold your tongue for a
moment? (He looks piteously at them; then, with a despairing shrug, goes
back to the ottoman and throws his hat on it.)

GLORIA (confronting her mother, with deep reproach). Mother: what right
had you to do it?

MRS. CLANDON. I don't think I have said anything I have no right to say,
Gloria.

VALENTINE (confirming her officiously). Nothing. Nothing whatever.
(Gloria looks at him with unspeakable indignation.) I beg your pardon.
(He sits down ignominiously on the ottoman.)

GLORIA. I cannot believe that any one has any right even to think about
things that concern me only. (She turns away from them to conceal a
painful struggle with her emotion.)

MRS. CLANDON. My dear, if I have wounded your pride--

GLORIA (turning on them for a moment). My p r i d e! My pride!! Oh, it's
gone: I have learnt now that I have no strength to be proud of. (Turning
away again.) But if a woman cannot protect herself, no one can protect
her. No one has any right to try--not even her mother. I know I have
lost your confidence, just as I have lost this man's respect;-- (She
stops to master a sob.)

VALENTINE (under his breath). This man! (Murmuring again.) Oh!

MRS. CLANDON (in an undertone). Pray be silent, sir.

GLORIA (continuing). --but I have at least the right to be left alone in
my disgrace. I am one of those weak creatures born to be mastered by the
first man whose eye is caught by them; and I must fulfill my destiny,
I suppose. At least spare me the humiliation of trying to save me. (She
sits down, with her handkerchief to her eyes, at the farther end of the
table.)

VALENTINE (jumping up). Look here--

MRS. CLANDON. Mr. Va--

VALENTINE (recklessly). No: I will speak: I've been silent for nearly
thirty seconds. (He goes up to Gloria.) Miss Clandon--

GLORIA (bitterly). Oh, not Miss Clandon: you have found that it is quite
safe to call me Gloria.

VALENTINE. No, I won't: you'll throw it in my teeth afterwards and
accuse me of disrespect. I say it's a heartbreaking falsehood that I
don't respect you. It's true that I didn't respect your old pride: why
should I? It was nothing but cowardice. I didn't respect your intellect:
I've a better one myself: it's a masculine specialty. But when the
depths stirred!--when my moment came!--when you made me brave!--ah,
then, then, t h e n!

GLORIA. Then you respected me, I suppose.

VALENTINE. No, I didn't: I adored you. (She rises quickly and turns her
back on him.) And you can never take that moment away from me. So now I
don't care what happens. (He comes down the room addressing a cheerful
explanation to nobody in particular.) I'm perfectly aware that I'm
talking nonsense. I can't help it. (To Mrs. Clandon.) I love Gloria; and
there's an end of it.

MRS. CLANDON (emphatically). Mr. Valentine: you are a most dangerous
man. Gloria: come here. (Gloria, wondering a little at the command,
obeys, and stands, with drooping head, on her mother's right hand,
Valentine being on the opposite side. Mrs. Clandon then begins, with
intense scorn.) Ask this man whom you have inspired and made brave, how
many women have inspired him before (Gloria looks up suddenly with a
flash of jealous anger and amazement); how many times he has laid the
trap in which he has caught you; how often he has baited it with the
same speeches; how much practice it has taken to make him perfect in his
chosen part in life as the Duellist of Sex.

VALENTINE. This isn't fair. You're abusing my confidence, Mrs. Clandon.

MRS. CLANDON. Ask him, Gloria.

GLORIA (in a flush of rage, going over to him with her fists clenched).
Is that true?

VALENTINE. Don't be angry--

GLORIA (interrupting him implacably). Is it true? Did you ever say that
before? Did you ever feel that before--for another woman?

VALENTINE (bluntly). Yes. (Gloria raises her clenched hands.)

MRS. CLANDON (horrified, springing to her side and catching her uplifted
arm). Gloria!! My dear! You're forgetting yourself. (Gloria, with a deep
expiration, slowly relaxes her threatening attitude.)

VALENTINE. Remember: a man's power of love and admiration is like any
other of his powers: he has to throw it away many times before he learns
what is really worthy of it.

MRS. CLANDON. Another of the old speeches, Gloria. Take care.

VALENTINE (remonstrating). Oh!

GLORIA (to Mrs. Clandon, with contemptuous self-possession). Do you
think I need to be warned now? (To Valentine.) You have tried to make me
love you.

VALENTINE. I have.

GLORIA. Well, you have succeeded in making me hate you-- passionately.

VALENTINE (philosophically). It's surprising how little difference
there is between the two. (Gloria turns indignantly away from him. He
continues, to Mrs. Clandon) I know men whose wives love them; and they
go on exactly like that.

MRS. CLANDON. Excuse me, Mr. Valentine; but had you not better go?

GLORIA. You need not send him away on my account, mother. He is nothing
to me now; and he will amuse Dolly and Phil. (She sits down with
slighting indifference, at the end of the table nearest the window.)

VALENTINE (gaily). Of course: that's the sensible way of looking at it.
Come, Mrs. Clandon: you can't quarrel with a mere butterfly like me.

MRS. CLANDON. I very greatly mistrust you, Mr. Valentine. But I do
not like to think that your unfortunate levity of disposition is mere
shamelessness and worthlessness;--

GLORIA (to herself, but aloud). It is shameless; and it is worthless.

MRS. CLANDON. --so perhaps we had better send for Phil and Dolly and
allow you to end your visit in the ordinary way.

VALENTINE (as if she had paid him the highest compliment). You overwhelm
me, Mrs. Clandon. Thank you. (The waiter enters.)

WAITER. Mr. McComas, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. Oh, certainly. Bring him in.

WAITER. He wishes to see you in the reception-room, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. Why not here?

WAITER. Well, if you will excuse my mentioning it, ma'am, I think Mr.
McComas feels that he would get fairer play if he could speak to you
away from the younger members of your family, ma'am.

MRS. CLANDON. Tell him they are not here.

WAITER. They are within sight of the door, ma'am; and very watchful, for
some reason or other.

MRS. CLANDON (going). Oh, very well: I'll go to him.

WAITER (holding the door open for her). Thank you, ma'am. (She goes out.
He comes back into the room, and meets the eye of Valentine, who wants
him to go.) All right, sir. Only the tea-things, sir. (Taking the tray.)
Excuse me, sir. Thank you sir. (He goes out.)

VALENTINE (to Gloria). Look here. You will forgive me, sooner or later.
Forgive me now.

GLORIA (rising to level the declaration more intensely at him). Never!
While grass grows or water runs, never, never, never!!!

VALENTINE (unabashed). Well, I don't care. I can't be unhappy about
anything. I shall never be unhappy again, never, never, never, while
grass grows or water runs. The thought of you will always make me wild
with joy. (Some quick taunt is on her lips: he interposes swiftly.) No:
I never said that before: that's new.

GLORIA. It will not be new when you say it to the next woman.

VALENTINE. Oh, don't, Gloria, don't. (He kneels at her feet.)

GLORIA. Get up. Get up! How dare you? (Phil and Dolly, racing, as usual,
for first place, burst into the room. They check themselves on seeing
what is passing. Valentine springs up.)

PHILIP (discreetly). I beg your pardon. Come, Dolly. (He turns to go.)

GLORIA (annoyed). Mother will be back in a moment, Phil. (Severely.)
Please wait here for her. (She turns away to the window, where she
stands looking out with her back to them.)

PHILIP (significantly). Oh, indeed. Hmhm!

DOLLY. Ahah!

PHILIP. You seem in excellent spirits, Valentine.

VALENTINE. I am. (Comes between them.) Now look here. You both know
what's going on, don't you? (Gloria turns quickly, as if anticipating
some fresh outrage.)

DOLLY. Perfectly.

VALENTINE. Well, it's all over. I've been refused--scorned. I'm only
here on sufferance. You understand: it's all over. Your sister is in no
sense entertaining my addresses, or condescending to interest herself
in me in any way. (Gloria, satisfied, turns back contemptuously to the
window.) Is that clear?

DOLLY. Serve you right. You were in too great a hurry.

PHILIP (patting him on the shoulder). Never mind: you'd never have been
able to call your soul your own if she'd married you. You can now begin
a new chapter in your life.

DOLLY. Chapter seventeen or thereabouts, I should imagine.

VALENTINE (much put out by this pleasantry). No: don't say things like
that. That's just the sort of thoughtless remark that makes a lot of
mischief.

DOLLY. Oh, indeed. Hmhm!

PHILIP. Ahah! (He goes to the hearth and plants himself there in his
best head-of-the-family attitude.)

McComas, looking very serious, comes in quickly with Mrs. Clandon, whose
first anxiety is about Gloria. She looks round to see where she is, and
is going to join her at the window when Gloria comes down to meet her
with a marked air of trust and affection. Finally, Mrs. Clandon takes
her former seat, and Gloria posts herself behind it. McComas, on his way
to the ottoman, is hailed by Dolly.

DOLLY. What cheer, Finch?

McCOMAS (sternly). Very serious news from your father, Miss Clandon.
Very serious news indeed. (He crosses to the ottoman, and sits down.
Dolly, looking deeply impressed, follows him and sits beside him on his
right.)

VALENTINE. Perhaps I had better go.

McCOMAS. By no means, Mr. Valentine. You are deeply concerned in this.
(Valentine takes a chair from the table and sits astride of it, leaning
over the back, near the ottoman.) Mrs. Clandon: your husband demands the
custody of his two younger children, who are not of age. (Mrs. Clandon,
in quick alarm, looks instinctively to see if Dolly is safe.)

DOLLY (touched). Oh, how nice of him! He likes us, mamma.

McCOMAS. I am sorry to have to disabuse you of any such idea, Miss
Dorothea.

DOLLY (cooing ecstatically). Dorothee-ee-ee-a! (Nestling against his
shoulder, quite overcome.) Oh, Finch!

McCOMAS (nervously, moving away). No, no, no, no!

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). D e a r e s t Dolly! (To McComas.) The
deed of separation gives me the custody of the children.

McCOMAS. It also contains a covenant that you are not to approach or
molest him in any way.

MRS. CLANDON. Well, have I done so?

McCOMAS. Whether the behavior of your younger children amounts to legal
molestation is a question on which it may be necessary to take counsel's
opinion. At all events, Mr. Crampton not only claims to have been
molested; but he believes that he was brought here by a plot in which
Mr. Valentine acted as your agent.

VALENTINE. What's that? Eh?

McCOMAS. He alleges that you drugged him, Mr. Valentine.

VALENTINE. So I did. (They are astonished.)

McCOMAS. But what did you do that for?

DOLLY. Five shillings extra.

McCOMAS (to Dolly, short-temperedly). I must really ask you, Miss
Clandon, not to interrupt this very serious conversation with irrelevant
interjections. (Vehemently.) I insist on having earnest matters
earnestly and reverently discussed. (This outburst produces an
apologetic silence, and puts McComas himself out of countenance. He
coughs, and starts afresh, addressing himself to Gloria.) Miss Clandon:
it is my duty to tell you that your father has also persuaded himself
that Mr. Valentine wishes to marry you--

VALENTINE (interposing adroitly). I do.

McCOMAS (offended). In that case, sir, you must not be surprised to find
yourself regarded by the young lady's father as a fortune hunter.

VALENTINE. So I am. Do you expect my wife to live on what I earn?
ten-pence a week!

McCOMAS (revolted). I have nothing more to say, sir. I shall return and
tell Mr. Crampton that this family is no place for a father. (He makes
for the door.)

MRS. CLANDON (with quiet authority). Finch! (He halts.) If Mr. Valentine
cannot be serious, you can. Sit down. (McComas, after a brief struggle
between his dignity and his friendship, succumbs, seating himself this
time midway between Dolly and Mrs. Clandon.) You know that all this is
a made up case--that Fergus does not believe in it any more than you do.
Now give me your real advice--your sincere, friendly advice: you know
I have always trusted your judgment. I promise you the children will be
quiet.

McCOMAS (resigning himself). Well, well! What I want to say is this. In
the old arrangement with your husband, Mrs. Clandon, you had him at a
terrible disadvantage.

MRS. CLANDON. How so, pray?

McCOMAS. Well, you were an advanced woman, accustomed to defy public
opinion, and with no regard for what the world might say of you.

MRS. CLANDON (proud of it). Yes: that is true. (Gloria, behind the
chair, stoops and kisses her mother's hair, a demonstration which
disconcerts her extremely.)

McCOMAS. On the other hand, Mrs. Clandon, your husband had a great
horror of anything getting into the papers. There was his business to be
considered, as well as the prejudices of an old-fashioned family.

MRS. CLANDON. Not to mention his own prejudices.

McCOMAS. Now no doubt he behaved badly, Mrs. Clandon--

MRS. CLANDON (scornfully). No doubt.

McCOMAS. But was it altogether his fault?

MRS. CLANDON. Was it mine?

McCOMAS (hastily). No. Of course not.

GLORIA (observing him attentively). You do not mean that, Mr. McComas.

McCOMAS. My dear young lady, you pick me up very sharply. But let me
just put this to you. When a man makes an unsuitable marriage (nobody's
fault, you know, but purely accidental incompatibility of tastes); when
he is deprived by that misfortune of the domestic sympathy which, I take
it, is what a man marries for; when in short, his wife is rather worse
than no wife at all (through no fault of his own, of course), is it to
be wondered at if he makes matters worse at first by blaming her,
and even, in his desperation, by occasionally drinking himself into a
violent condition or seeking sympathy elsewhere?

MRS. CLANDON. I did not blame him: I simply rescued myself and the
children from him.

McCOMAS. Yes: but you made hard terms, Mrs. Clandon. You had him at
your mercy: you brought him to his knees when you threatened to make
the matter public by applying to the Courts for a judicial separation.
Suppose he had had that power over you, and used it to take your
children away from you and bring them up in ignorance of your very
name, how would you feel? what would you do? Well, won't you make some
allowance for his feelings?--in common humanity.

MRS. CLANDON. I never discovered his feelings. I discovered his temper,
and his-- (she shivers) the rest of his common humanity.

McCOMAS (wistfully). Women can be very hard, Mrs. Clandon.

VALENTINE. That's true.

GLORIA (angrily). Be silent. (He subsides.)

McCOMAS (rallying all his forces). Let me make one last appeal. Mrs.
Clandon: believe me, there are men who have a good deal of feeling, and
kind feeling, too, which they are not able to express. What you miss
in Crampton is that mere veneer of civilization, the art of shewing
worthless attentions and paying insincere compliments in a kindly,
charming way. If you lived in London, where the whole system is one of
false good-fellowship, and you may know a man for twenty years without
finding out that he hates you like poison, you would soon have your eyes
opened. There we do unkind things in a kind way: we say bitter things in
a sweet voice: we always give our friends chloroform when we tear them
to pieces. But think of the other side of it! Think of the people who
do kind things in an unkind way--people whose touch hurts, whose voices
jar, whose tempers play them false, who wound and worry the people they
love in the very act of trying to conciliate them, and yet who need
affection as much as the rest of us. Crampton has an abominable temper,
I admit. He has no manners, no tact, no grace. He'll never be able
to gain anyone's affection unless they will take his desire for it on
trust. Is he to have none--not even pity--from his own flesh and blood?

DOLLY (quite melted). Oh, how beautiful, Finch! How nice of you!

PHILIP (with conviction). Finch: this is eloquence--positive eloquence.

DOLLY. Oh, mamma, let us give him another chance. Let us have him to
dinner.

MRS. CLANDON (unmoved). No, Dolly: I hardly got any lunch. My dear
Finch: there is not the least use in talking to me about Fergus. You
have never been married to him: I have.

McCOMAS (to Gloria). Miss Clandon: I have hitherto refrained from
appealing to you, because, if what Mr. Crampton told me to be true, you
have been more merciless even than your mother.

GLORIA (defiantly). You appeal from her strength to my weakness!

McCOMAS. Not your weakness, Miss Clandon. I appeal from her intellect to
your heart.

GLORIA. I have learnt to mistrust my heart. (With an angry glance at
Valentine.) I would tear my heart and throw it away if I could. My
answer to you is my mother's answer. (She goes to Mrs. Clandon, and
stands with her arm about her; but Mrs. Clandon, unable to endure this
sort of demonstrativeness, disengages herself as soon as she can without
hurting Gloria's feelings.)

McCOMAS (defeated). Well, I am very sorry--very sorry. I have done my
best. (He rises and prepares to go, deeply dissatisfied.)

MRS. CLANDON. But what did you expect, Finch? What do you want us to do?

McCOMAS. The first step for both you and Crampton is to obtain counsel's
opinion as to whether he is bound by the deed of separation or not. Now
why not obtain this opinion at once, and have a friendly meeting
(her face hardens)--or shall we say a neutral meeting?--to settle the
difficulty--here--in this hotel--to-night? What do you say?

MRS. CLANDON. But where is the counsel's opinion to come from?

McCOMAS. It has dropped down on us out of the clouds. On my way back
here from Crampton's I met a most eminent Q.C., a man whom I briefed in
the case that made his name for him. He has come down here from Saturday
to Monday for the sea air, and to visit a relative of his who lives
here. He has been good enough to say that if I can arrange a meeting
of the parties he will come and help us with his opinion. Now do let us
seize this chance of a quiet friendly family adjustment. Let me bring my
friend here and try to persuade Crampton to come, too. Come: consent.

MRS. CLANDON (rather ominously, after a moment's consideration). Finch:
I don't want counsel's opinion, because I intend to be guided by my own
opinion. I don't want to meet Fergus again, because I don't like him,
and don't believe the meeting will do any good. However (rising), you
have persuaded the children that he is not quite hopeless. Do as you
please.

McCOMAS (taking her hand and shaking it). Thank you, Mrs. Clandon. Will
nine o'clock suit you?

MRS. CLANDON. Perfectly. Phil: will you ring, please. (Phil rings the
bell.) But if I am to be accused of conspiring with Mr. Valentine, I
think he had better be present.

VALENTINE (rising). I quite agree with you. I think it's most important.

McCOMAS. There can be no objection to that, I think. I have the greatest
hopes of a happy settlement. Good-bye for the present. (He goes out,
meeting the waiter; who holds the door for him to pass through.)

MRS. CLANDON. We expect some visitors at nine, William. Can we have
dinner at seven instead of half-past?

WAITER (at the door). Seven, ma'am? Certainly, ma'am. It will be a
convenience to us this busy evening, ma'am. There will be the band and
the arranging of the fairy lights and one thing or another, ma'am.

DOLLY. The fairy lights!

PHILIP. The band! William: what mean you?

WAITER. The fancy ball, miss--

DOLLY and PHILIP (simultaneously rushing to him). Fancy ball!

WAITER. Oh, yes, sir. Given by the regatta committee for the benefit
of the Life-boat, sir. (To Mrs. Clandon.) We often have them, ma'am:
Chinese lanterns in the garden, ma'am: very bright and pleasant, very
gay and innocent indeed. (To Phil.) Tickets downstairs at the office,
sir, five shillings: ladies half price if accompanied by a gentleman.

PHILIP (seizing his arm to drag him off). To the office, William!

DOLLY (breathlessly, seizing his other arm). Quick, before they're all
sold. (They rush him out of the room between them.)

MRS. CLANDON. What on earth are they going to do? (Going out.) I really
must go and stop this-- (She follows them, speaking as she disappears.
Gloria stares coolly at Valentine, and then deliberately looks at her
watch.)

VALENTINE. I understand. I've stayed too long. I'm going.

GLORIA (with disdainful punctiliousness). I owe you some apology, Mr.
Valentine. I am conscious of having spoken somewhat sharply-- perhaps
rudely--to you.

VALENTINE. Not at all.

GLORIA. My only excuse is that it is very difficult to give
consideration and respect when there is no dignity of character on the
other side to command it.

VALENTINE (prosaically). How is a man to look dignified when he's
infatuated?

GLORIA (effectually unstilted). Don't say those things to me. I forbid
you. They are insults.

VALENTINE. No: they're only follies. I can't help them.

GLORIA. If you were really in love, it would not make you foolish: it
would give you dignity--earnestness--even beauty.

VALENTINE. Do you really think it would make me beautiful? (She turns
her back on him with the coldest contempt.) Ah, you see you're not in
earnest. Love can't give any man new gifts. It can only heighten the
gifts he was born with.

GLORIA (sweeping round at him again). What gifts were you born with,
pray?

VALENTINE. Lightness of heart.

GLORIA. And lightness of head, and lightness of faith, and lightness of
everything that makes a man.

VALENTINE. Yes, the whole world is like a feather dancing in the light
now; and Gloria is the sun. (She rears her head angrily.) I beg your
pardon: I'm off. Back at nine. Good-bye. (He runs off gaily, leaving her
standing in the middle of the room staring after him.)

END OF ACT III




ACT IV


The same room. Nine o'clock. Nobody present. The lamps are lighted; but
the curtains are not drawn. The window stands wide open; and strings of
Chinese lanterns are glowing among the trees outside, with the starry
sky beyond. The band is playing dance-music in the garden, drowning the
sound of the sea.

The waiter enters, shewing in Crampton and McComas. Crampton looks cowed
and anxious. He sits down wearily and timidly on the ottoman.

WAITER. The ladies have gone for a turn through the grounds to see the
fancy dresses, sir. If you will be so good as to take seats, gentlemen,
I shall tell them. (He is about to go into the garden through the window
when McComas stops him.)

McCOMAS. One moment. If another gentleman comes, shew him in without any
delay: we are expecting him.

WAITER. Right, sir. What name, sir?

McCOMAS. Boon. Mr. Boon. He is a stranger to Mrs. Clandon; so he may
give you a card. If so, the name is spelt B.O.H.U.N. You will not
forget.

WAITER (smiling). You may depend on me for that, sir. My own name is
Boon, sir, though I am best known down here as Balmy Walters, sir. By
rights I should spell it with the aitch you, sir; but I think it best
not to take that liberty, sir. There is Norman blood in it, sir; and
Norman blood is not a recommendation to a waiter.

McCOMAS. Well, well: "True hearts are more than coronets, and simple
faith than Norman blood."

WAITER. That depends a good deal on one's station in life, sir. If you
were a waiter, sir, you'd find that simple faith would leave you just
as short as Norman blood. I find it best to spell myself B. double-O.N.,
and to keep my wits pretty sharp about me. But I'm taking up your time,
sir. You'll excuse me, sir: your own fault for being so affable, sir.
I'll tell the ladies you're here, sir. (He goes out into the garden
through the window.)

McCOMAS. Crampton: I can depend on you, can't I?

CRAMPTON. Yes, yes. I'll be quiet. I'll be patient. I'll do my best.

McCOMAS. Remember: I've not given you away. I've told them it was all
their fault.

CRAMPTON. You told me that it was all my fault.

McCOMAS. I told you the truth.

CRAMPTON (plaintively). If they will only be fair to me!

McCOMAS. My dear Crampton, they won't be fair to you: it's not to be
expected from them at their age. If you're going to make impossible
conditions of this kind, we may as well go back home at once.

CRAMPTON. But surely I have a right--

McCOMAS (intolerantly). You won't get your rights. Now, once for all,
Crampton, did your promises of good behavior only mean that you won't
complain if there's nothing to complain of? Because, if so-- (He moves
as if to go.)

CRAMPTON (miserably). No, no: let me alone, can't you? I've been bullied
enough: I've been tormented enough. I tell you I'll do my best. But if
that girl begins to talk to me like that and to look at me like-- (He
breaks off and buries his head in his hands.)

McCOMAS (relenting). There, there: it'll be all right, if you will only
bear and forbear. Come, pull yourself together: there's someone coming.
(Crampton, too dejected to care much, hardly changes his attitude.
Gloria enters from the garden; McComas goes to meet her at the window;
so that he can speak to her without being heard by Crampton.) There he
is, Miss Clandon. Be kind to him. I'll leave you with him for a moment.
(He goes into the garden. Gloria comes in and strolls coolly down the
middle of the room.)

CRAMPTON (looking round in alarm). Where's McComas?

GLORIA (listlessly, but not unsympathetically). Gone out--to leave us
together. Delicacy on his part, I suppose. (She stops beside him and
looks quaintly down at him.) Well, father?

CRAMPTON (a quaint jocosity breaking through his forlornness). Well,
daughter? (They look at one another for a moment, with a melancholy
sense of humor.)

GLORIA. Shake hands. (They shake hands.)

CRAMPTON (holding her hand). My dear: I'm afraid I spoke very improperly
of your mother this afternoon.

GLORIA. Oh, don't apologize. I was very high and mighty myself; but I've
come down since: oh, yes: I've been brought down. (She sits on the floor
beside his chair.)

CRAMPTON. What has happened to you, my child?

GLORIA. Oh, never mind. I was playing the part of my mother's daughter
then; but I'm not: I'm my father's daughter. (Looking at him funnily.)
That's a come down, isn't it?

CRAMPTON (angry). What! (Her odd expression does not alter. He
surrenders.) Well, yes, my dear: I suppose it is, I suppose it is. (She
nods sympathetically.) I'm afraid I'm sometimes a little irritable; but
I know what's right and reasonable all the time, even when I don't act
on it. Can you believe that?

GLORIA. Believe it! Why, that's myself--myself all over. I know what's
right and dignified and strong and noble, just as well as she does; but
oh, the things I do! the things I do! the things I let other people do!!

CRAMPTON (a little grudgingly in spite of himself). As well as she does?
You mean your mother?

GLORIA (quickly). Yes, mother. (She turns to him on her knees and seizes
his hands.) Now listen. No treason to her: no word, no thought against
her. She is our superior--yours and mine--high heavens above us. Is that
agreed?

CRAMPTON. Yes, yes. Just as you please, my dear.

GLORIA (not satisfied, letting go his hands and drawing back from him).
You don't like her?

CRAMPTON. My child: you haven't been married to her. I have. (She raises
herself slowly to her feet, looking at him with growing coldness.) She
did me a great wrong in marrying me without really caring for me. But
after that, the wrong was all on my side, I dare say. (He offers her his
hand again.)

GLORIA (taking it firmly and warningly). Take care. That's a dangerous
subject. My feelings--my miserable, cowardly, womanly feelings--may be
on your side; but my conscience is on hers.

CRAMPTON. I'm very well content with that division, my dear. Thank you.
(Valentine arrives. Gloria immediately becomes deliberately haughty.)

VALENTINE. Excuse me; but it's impossible to find a servant to announce
one: even the never failing William seems to be at the ball. I should
have gone myself; only I haven't five shillings to buy a ticket. How are
you getting on, Crampton? Better, eh?

CRAMPTON. I am myself again, Mr. Valentine, no thanks to you.

VALENTINE. Look at this ungrateful parent of yours, Miss Clandon! I
saved him from an excruciating pang; and he reviles me!

GLORIA (coldly). I am sorry my mother is not here to receive you, Mr.
Valentine. It is not quite nine o'clock; and the gentleman of whom Mr.
McComas spoke, the lawyer, is not yet come.

VALENTINE. Oh, yes, he is. I've met him and talked to him. (With gay
malice.) You'll like him, Miss Clandon: he's the very incarnation of
intellect. You can hear his mind working.

GLORIA (ignoring the jibe). Where is he?

VALENTINE. Bought a false nose and gone into the fancy ball.

CRAMPTON (crustily, looking at his watch). It seems that everybody has
gone to this fancy ball instead of keeping to our appointment here.

VALENTINE. Oh, he'll come all right enough: that was half an hour ago.
I didn't like to borrow five shillings from him and go in with him; so
I joined the mob and looked through the railings until Miss Clandon
disappeared into the hotel through the window.

GLORIA. So it has come to this, that you follow me about in public to
stare at me.

VALENTINE. Yes: somebody ought to chain me up.

Gloria turns her back on him and goes to the fireplace. He takes the
snub very philosophically, and goes to the opposite side of the room.
The waiter appears at the window, ushering in Mrs. Clandon and McComas.

MRS. CLANDON (hurrying in). I am so sorry to have kept you waiting.

A grotesquely majestic stranger, in a domino and false nose, with
goggles, appears at the window.

WAITER (to the stranger). Beg pardon, sir; but this is a private
apartment, sir. If you will allow me, sir, I will shew you to the
American bar and supper rooms, sir. This way, sir.

He goes into the gardens, leading the way under the impression that the
stranger is following him. The majestic one, however, comes straight
into the room to the end of the table, where, with impressive
deliberation, he takes off the false nose and then the domino, rolling
up the nose into the domino and throwing the bundle on the table like a
champion throwing down his glove. He is now seen to be a stout, tall
man between forty and fifty, clean shaven, with a midnight oil pallor
emphasized by stiff black hair, cropped short and oiled, and eyebrows
like early Victorian horsehair upholstery. Physically and spiritually,
a coarsened man: in cunning and logic, a ruthlessly sharpened one. His
bearing as he enters is sufficiently imposing and disquieting; but
when he speaks, his powerful, menacing voice, impressively articulated
speech, strong inexorable manner, and a terrifying power of intensely
critical listening raise the impression produced by him to absolute
tremendousness.

THE STRANGER. My name is Bohun. (General awe.) Have I the honor of
addressing Mrs. Clandon? (Mrs. Clandon bows. Bohun bows.) Miss Clandon?
(Gloria bows. Bohun bows.) Mr. Clandon?

CRAMPTON (insisting on his rightful name as angrily as he dares). My
name is Crampton, sir.

BOHUN. Oh, indeed. (Passing him over without further notice and turning
to Valentine.) Are you Mr. Clandon?

VALENTINE (making it a point of honor not to be impressed by him). Do I
look like it? My name is Valentine. I did the drugging.

BOHUN. Ah, quite so. Then Mr. Clandon has not yet arrived?

WAITER (entering anxiously through the window). Beg pardon, ma'am; but
can you tell me what became of that-- (He recognizes Bohun, and loses
all his self-possession. Bohun waits rigidly for him to pull himself
together. After a pathetic exhibition of confusion, he recovers himself
sufficiently to address Bohun weakly but coherently.) Beg pardon, sir,
I'm sure, sir. Was--was it you, sir?

BOHUN (ruthlessly). It was I.

WAITER (brokenly). Yes, sir. (Unable to restrain his tears.) You in a
false nose, Walter! (He sinks faintly into a chair at the table.) I beg
pardon, ma'am, I'm sure. A little giddiness--

BOHUN (commandingly). You will excuse him, Mrs. Clandon, when I inform
you that he is my father.

WAITER (heartbroken). Oh, no, no, Walter. A waiter for your father on
the top of a false nose! What will they think of you?

MRS. CLANDON (going to the waiter's chair in her kindest manner). I
am delighted to hear it, Mr. Bohun. Your father has been an excellent
friend to us since we came here. (Bohun bows gravely.)

WAITER (shaking his head). Oh, no, ma'am. It's very kind of you--
very ladylike and affable indeed, ma'am; but I should feel at a
great disadvantage off my own proper footing. Never mind my being the
gentleman's father, ma'am: it is only the accident of birth after all,
ma'am. (He gets up feebly.) You'll all excuse me, I'm sure, having
interrupted your business. (He begins to make his way along the table,
supporting himself from chair to chair, with his eye on the door.)

BOHUN. One moment. (The waiter stops, with a sinking heart.) My father
was a witness of what passed to-day, was he not, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON. Yes, most of it, I think.

BOHUN. In that case we shall want him.

WAITER (pleading). I hope it may not be necessary, sir. Busy evening for
me, sir, with that ball: very busy evening indeed, sir.

BOHUN (inexorably). We shall want you.

MRS. CLANDON (politely). Sit down, won't you?

WAITER (earnestly). Oh, if you please, ma'am, I really must draw the
line at sitting down. I couldn't let myself be seen doing such a thing,
ma'am: thank you, I am sure, all the same. (He looks round from face to
face wretchedly, with an expression that would melt a heart of stone.)

GLORIA. Don't let us waste time. William only wants to go on taking care
of us. I should like a cup of coffee.

WAITER (brightening perceptibly). Coffee, miss? (He gives a little gasp
of hope.) Certainly, miss. Thank you, miss: very timely, miss, very
thoughtful and considerate indeed. (To Mrs. Clandon, timidly but
expectantly.) Anything for you, ma'am?

MRS. CLANDON Er--oh, yes: it's so hot, I think we might have a jug of
claret cup.

WAITER (beaming). Claret cup, ma'am! Certainly, ma'am.

GLORIA Oh, well I'll have a claret cup instead of coffee. Put some
cucumber in it.

WAITER (delighted). Cucumber, miss! yes, miss. (To Bohun.) Anything
special for you, sir? You don't like cucumber, sir.

BOHUN. If Mrs. Clandon will allow me--syphon--Scotch.

WAITER. Right, sir. (To Crampton.) Irish for you, sir, I think,
sir? (Crampton assents with a grunt. The waiter looks enquiringly at
Valentine.)

VALENTINE. I like the cucumber.

WAITER. Right, sir. (Summing up.) Claret cup, syphon, one Scotch and one
Irish?

MRS. CLANDON. I think that's right.

WAITER (perfectly happy). Right, ma'am. Directly, ma'am. Thank you. (He
ambles off through the window, having sounded the whole gamut of human
happiness, from the bottom to the top, in a little over two minutes.)

McCOMAS. We can begin now, I suppose?

BOHUN. We had better wait until Mrs. Clandon's husband arrives.

CRAMPTON. What d'y' mean? I'm her husband.

BOHUN (instantly pouncing on the inconsistency between this and his
previous statement). You said just now your name was Crampton.

CRAMPTON. So it is.

MRS. CLANDON } (all four { I--

GLORIA } speaking { My--

McCOMAS } simul- { Mrs.--

VALENTINE } taneously). { You--

BOHUN (drowning them in two thunderous words). One moment. (Dead
silence.) Pray allow me. Sit down everybody. (They obey humbly. Gloria
takes the saddle-bag chair on the hearth. Valentine slips around to her
side of the room and sits on the ottoman facing the window, so that
he can look at her. Crampton sits on the ottoman with his back to
Valentine's. Mrs. Clandon, who has all along kept at the opposite side
of the room in order to avoid Crampton as much as possible, sits near
the door, with McComas beside her on her left. Bohun places himself
magisterially in the centre of the group, near the corner of the table
on Mrs. Clandon's side. When they are settled, he fixes Crampton with
his eye, and begins.) In this family, it appears, the husband's name is
Crampton: the wife's Clandon. Thus we have on the very threshold of the
case an element of confusion.

VALENTINE (getting up and speaking across to him with one knee on the
ottoman). But it's perfectly simple.

BOHUN (annihilating him with a vocal thunderbolt). It is. Mrs. Clandon
has adopted another name. That is the obvious explanation which you
feared I could not find out for myself. You mistrust my intelligence,
Mr. Valentine-- (Stopping him as he is about to protest.) No: I don't
want you to answer that: I want you to think over it when you feel your
next impulse to interrupt me.

VALENTINE (dazed). This is simply breaking a butterfly on a wheel. What
does it matter? (He sits down again.)

BOHUN. I will tell you what it matters, sir. It matters that if this
family difference is to be smoothed over as we all hope it may be, Mrs.
Clandon, as a matter of social convenience and decency, will have to
resume her husband's name. (Mrs. Clandon assumes an expression of the
most determined obstinacy.) Or else Mr. Crampton will have to call
himself Mr. Clandon. (Crampton looks indomitably resolved to do nothing
of the sort.) No doubt you think that an easy matter, Mr. Valentine. (He
looks pointedly at Mrs. Clandon, then at Crampton.) I differ from you.
(He throws himself back in his chair, frowning heavily.)

McCOMAS (timidly). I think, Bohun, we had perhaps better dispose of the
important questions first.

BOHUN. McComas: there will be no difficulty about the important
questions. There never is. It is the trifles that will wreck you at the
harbor mouth. (McComas looks as if he considered this a paradox.) You
don't agree with me, eh?

McCOMAS (flatteringly). If I did--

BOHUN (interrupting him). If you did, you would be me, instead of being
what you are.

McCOMAS (fawning on him). Of course, Bohun, your specialty--

BOHUN (again interrupting him). My specialty is being right when other
people are wrong. If you agreed with me I should be of no use here. (He
nods at him to drive the point home; then turns suddenly and forcibly on
Crampton.) Now you, Mr. Crampton: what point in this business have you
most at heart?

CRAMPTON (beginning slowly). I wish to put all considerations of self
aside in this matter--

BOHUN (interrupting him). So do we all, Mr. Crampton. (To Mrs. Clandon.)
Y o u wish to put self aside, Mrs. Clandon?

MRS. CLANDON. Yes: I am not consulting my own feelings in being here.

BOHUN. So do you, Miss Clandon?

GLORIA. Yes.

BOHUN. I thought so. We all do.

VALENTINE. Except me. My aims are selfish.

BOHUN. That's because you think an impression of sincerity will produce
a better effect on Miss Clandon than an impression of disinterestedness.
(Valentine, utterly dismantled and destroyed by this just remark, takes
refuge in a feeble, speechless smile. Bohun, satisfied at having now
effectually crushed all rebellion, throws himself back in his chair,
with an air of being prepared to listen tolerantly to their grievances.)
Now, Mr. Crampton, go on. It's understood that self is put aside. Human
nature always begins by saying that.

CRAMPTON. But I mean it, sir.

BOHUN. Quite so. Now for your point.

CRAMPTON. Every reasonable person will admit that it's an unselfish
one--the children.

BOHUN. Well? What about the children?

CRAMPTON (with emotion). They have--

BOHUN (pouncing forward again). Stop. You're going to tell me about your
feelings, Mr. Crampton. Don't: I sympathize with them; but they're not
my business. Tell us exactly what you want: that's what we have to get
at.

CRAMPTON (uneasily). It's a very difficult question to answer, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN. Come: I'll help you out. What do you object to in the present
circumstances of the children?

CRAMPTON. I object to the way they have been brought up.

BOHUN. How do you propose to alter that now?

CRAMPTON. I think they ought to dress more quietly.

VALENTINE. Nonsense.

BOHUN (instantly flinging himself back in his chair, outraged by the
interruption). When you are done, Mr. Valentine--when you are quite
done.

VALENTINE. What's wrong with Miss Clandon's dress?

CRAMPTON (hotly to Valentine). My opinion is as good as yours.

GLORIA (warningly). Father!

CRAMPTON (subsiding piteously). I didn't mean you, my dear. (Pleading
earnestly to Bohun.) But the two younger ones! you have not seen them,
Mr. Bohun; and indeed I think you would agree with me that there is
something very noticeable, something almost gay and frivolous in their
style of dressing.

MRS. CLANDON (impatiently). Do you suppose I choose their clothes for
them? Really this is childish.

CRAMPTON (furious, rising). Childish! (Mrs. Clandon rises indignantly.)

McCOMAS } (all ris- } Crampton, you promised--

VALENTINE } ing and } Ridiculous. They dress

          }  speaking   }   charmingly.

GLORIA } together). } Pray let us behave reasonably.

Tumult. Suddenly they hear a chime of glasses in the room behind them.
They turn in silent surprise and find that the waiter has just come back
from the bar in the garden, and is jingling his tray warningly as he
comes softly to the table with it.

WAITER (to Crampton, setting a tumbler apart on the table). Irish for
you, sir. (Crampton sits down a little shamefacedly. The waiter sets
another tumbler and a syphon apart, saying to Bohun) Scotch and syphon
for you, sir. (Bohun waves his hand impatiently. The waiter places a
large glass jug in the middle.) And claret cup. (All subside into their
seats. Peace reigns.)

MRS. CLANDON (humbly to Bohun). I am afraid we interrupted you, Mr.
Bohun.

BOHUN (calmly). You did. (To the waiter, who is going out.) Just wait a
bit.

WAITER. Yes, sir. Certainly, sir. (He takes his stand behind Bohun's
chair.)

MRS. CLANDON (to the waiter). You don't mind our detaining you, I hope.
Mr. Bohun wishes it.

WAITER (now quite at his ease). Oh, no, ma'am, not at all, ma'am. It
is a pleasure to me to watch the working of his trained and powerful
mind--very stimulating, very entertaining and instructive indeed, ma'am.

BOHUN (resuming command of the proceedings). Now, Mr. Crampton: we are
waiting for you. Do you give up your objection to the dressing, or do
you stick to it?

CRAMPTON (pleading). Mr. Bohun: consider my position for a moment. I
haven't got myself alone to consider: there's my sister Sophronia and
my brother-in-law and all their circle. They have a great horror of
anything that is at all--at all--well--

BOHUN. Out with it. Fast? Loud? Gay?

CRAMPTON. Not in any unprincipled sense of course; but--but-- (blurting
it out desperately) those two children would shock them. They're not fit
to mix with their own people. That's what I complain of.

MRS. CLANDON (with suppressed impatience). Mr. Valentine: do you think
there is anything fast or loud about Phil and Dolly?

VALENTINE. Certainly not. It's utter bosh. Nothing can be in better
taste.

CRAMPTON. Oh, yes: of course you say so.

MRS. CLANDON. William: you see a great deal of good English society. Are
my children overdressed?

WAITER (reassuringly). Oh, dear, no, ma'am. (Persuasively.) Oh, no,
sir, not at all. A little pretty and tasty no doubt; but very choice
and classy--very genteel and high toned indeed. Might be the son and
daughter of a Dean, sir, I assure you, sir. You have only to look at
them, sir, to-- (At this moment a harlequin and columbine, dancing to
the music of the band in the garden, which has just reached the coda of
a waltz, whirl one another into the room. The harlequin's dress is
made of lozenges, an inch square, of turquoise blue silk and gold
alternately. His hat is gilt and his mask turned up. The columbine's
petticoats are the epitome of a harvest field, golden orange and poppy
crimson, with a tiny velvet jacket for the poppy stamens. They pass, an
exquisite and dazzling apparition, between McComas and Bohun, and then
back in a circle to the end of the table, where, as the final chord of
the waltz is struck, they make a tableau in the middle of the company,
the harlequin down on his left knee, and the columbine standing on his
right knee, with her arms curved over her head. Unlike their dancing,
which is charmingly graceful, their attitudinizing is hardly a success,
and threatens to end in a catastrophe.)

THE COLUMBINE (screaming). Lift me down, somebody: I'm going to fall.
Papa: lift me down.

CRAMPTON (anxiously running to her and taking her hands). My child!

DOLLY (jumping down with his help). Thanks: so nice of you. (Phil,
putting his hat into his belt, sits on the side of the table and pours
out some claret cup. Crampton returns to his place on the ottoman in
great perplexity.) Oh, what fun! Oh, dear. (She seats herself with a
vault on the front edge of the table, panting.) Oh, claret cup! (She
drinks.)

BOHUN (in powerful tones). This is the younger lady, is it?

DOLLY (slipping down off the table in alarm at his formidable voice and
manner). Yes, sir. Please, who are you?

MRS. CLANDON. This is Mr. Bohun, Dolly, who has very kindly come to help
us this evening.

DOLLY. Oh, then he comes as a boon and a blessing--

PHILIP. Sh!

CRAMPTON. Mr. Bohun--McComas: I appeal to you. Is this right? Would you
blame my sister's family for objecting to this?

DOLLY (flushing ominously). Have you begun again?

CRAMPTON (propitiating her). No, no. It's perhaps natural at your age.

DOLLY (obstinately). Never mind my age. Is it pretty?

CRAMPTON. Yes, dear, yes. (He sits down in token of submission.)

DOLLY (following him insistently). Do you like it?

CRAMPTON. My child: how can you expect me to like it or to approve of
it?

DOLLY (determined not to let him off). How can you think it pretty and
not like it?

McCOMAS (rising, angry and scandalized). Really I must say-- (Bohun,
who has listened to Dolly with the highest approval, is down on him
instantly.)

BOHUN. No: don't interrupt, McComas. The young lady's method is right.
(To Dolly, with tremendous emphasis.) Press your questions, Miss
Clandon: press your questions.

DOLLY (rising). Oh, dear, you are a regular overwhelmer! Do you always
go on like this?

BOHUN (rising). Yes. Don't you try to put me out of countenance, young
lady: you're too young to do it. (He takes McComas's chair from
beside Mrs. Clandon's and sets it beside his own.) Sit down. (Dolly,
fascinated, obeys; and Bohun sits down again. McComas, robbed of
his seat, takes a chair on the other side between the table and the
ottoman.) Now, Mr. Crampton, the facts are before you--both of them. You
think you'd like to have your two youngest children to live with you.
Well, you wouldn't-- (Crampton tries to protest; but Bohun will not
have it on any terms.) No, you wouldn't: you think you would; but I know
better than you. You'd want this young lady here to give up dressing
like a stage columbine in the evening and like a fashionable columbine
in the morning. Well, she won't--never. She thinks she will; but--

DOLLY (interrupting him). No I don't. (Resolutely.) I'll n e v e r give
up dressing prettily. Never. As Gloria said to that man in Madeira,
never, never, never while grass grows or water runs.

VALENTINE (rising in the wildest agitation). What! What! (Beginning to
speak very fast.) When did she say that? Who did she say that to?

BOHUN (throwing himself back with massive, pitying remonstrance). Mr.
Valentine--

VALENTINE (pepperily). Don't you interrupt me, sir: this is something
really serious. I i n s i s t on knowing who Miss Clandon said that to.

DOLLY. Perhaps Phil remembers. Which was it, Phil? number three or
number five?

VALENTINE. Number five!!!

PHILIP. Courage, Valentine. It wasn't number five: it was only a tame
naval lieutenant that was always on hand--the most patient and harmless
of mortals.

GLORIA (coldly). What are we discussing now, pray?

VALENTINE (very red). Excuse me: I am sorry I interrupted. I shall
intrude no further, Mrs. Clandon. (He bows to Mrs. Clandon and marches
away into the garden, boiling with suppressed rage.)

DOLLY. Hmhm!

PHILIP. Ahah!

GLORIA. Please go on, Mr. Bohun.

DOLLY (striking in as Bohun, frowning formidably, collects himself for a
fresh grapple with the case). You're going to bully us, Mr. Bohun.

BOHUN. I--

DOLLY (interrupting him). Oh, yes, you are: you think you're not; but
you are. I know by your eyebrows.

BOHUN (capitulating). Mrs. Clandon: these are clever children-- clear
headed, well brought up children. I make that admission deliberately.
Can you, in return, point out to me any way of inducting them to hold
their tongues?

MRS. CLANDON. Dolly, dearest--!

PHILIP. Our old failing, Dolly. Silence! (Dolly holds her mouth.)

MRS. CLANDON. Now, Mr. Bohun, before they begin again--

WAITER (softer). Be quick, sir: be quick.

DOLLY (beaming at him). Dear William!

PHILIP. Sh!

BOHUN (unexpectedly beginning by hurling a question straight at Dolly).
Have you any intention of getting married?

DOLLY. I! Well, Finch calls me by my Christian name.

McCOMAS. I will not have this. Mr. Bohun: I use the young lady's
Christian name naturally as an old friend of her mother's.

DOLLY. Yes, you call me Dolly as an old friend of my mother's. But what
about Dorothee-ee-a? (McComas rises indignantly.)

CRAMPTON (anxiously, rising to restrain him). Keep your temper, McComas.
Don't let us quarrel. Be patient.

McCOMAS. I will not be patient. You are shewing the most wretched
weakness of character, Crampton. I say this is monstrous.

DOLLY. Mr. Bohun: please bully Finch for us.

BOHUN. I will. McComas: you're making yourself ridiculous. Sit down.

McCOMAS. I--

BOHUN (waving him down imperiously). No: sit down, sit down. (McComas
sits down sulkily; and Crampton, much relieved, follows his example.)

DOLLY (to Bohun, meekly). Thank you.

BOHUN. Now, listen to me, all of you. I give no opinion, McComas, as
to how far you may or may not have committed yourself in the direction
indicated by this young lady. (McComas is about to protest.) No: don't
interrupt me: if she doesn't marry you she will marry somebody else.
That is the solution of the difficulty as to her not bearing her
father's name. The other lady intends to get married.

GLORIA (flushing). Mr. Bohun!

BOHUN. Oh, yes, you do: you don't know it; but you do.

GLORIA (rising). Stop. I warn you, Mr. Bohun, not to answer for my
intentions.

BOHUN (rising). It's no use, Miss Clandon: you can't put me down. I tell
you your name will soon be neither Clandon nor Crampton; and I could
tell you what it will be if I chose. (He goes to the other end of the
table, where he unrolls his domino, and puts the false nose on the
table. When he moves they all rise; and Phil goes to the window. Bohun,
with a gesture, summons the waiter to help him in robing.) Mr. Crampton:
your notion of going to law is all nonsense: your children will be of
age before you could get the point decided. (Allowing the waiter to put
the domino on his shoulders.) You can do nothing but make a friendly
arrangement. If you want your family more than they want you, you'll get
the worse of the arrangement: if they want you more than you want them,
you'll get the better of it. (He shakes the domino into becoming
folds and takes up the false nose. Dolly gazes admiringly at him.) The
strength of their position lies in their being very agreeable people
personally. The strength of your position lies in your income. (He claps
on the false nose, and is again grotesquely transfigured.)

DOLLY (running to him). Oh, now you look quite like a human being.
Mayn't I have just one dance with you? C a n you dance? (Phil, resuming
his part of harlequin, waves his hat as if casting a spell on them.)

BOHUN (thunderously). Yes: you think I can't; but I can. Come along. (He
seizes her and dances off with her through the window in a most powerful
manner, but with studied propriety and grace. The waiter is meanwhile
busy putting the chairs back in their customary places.)

PHILIP. "On with the dance: let joy be unconfined." William!

WAITER. Yes, sir.

PHILIP. Can you procure a couple of dominos and false noses for my
father and Mr. McComas?

McCOMAS. Most certainly not. I protest--

CRAMPTON. No, no. What harm will it do, just for once, McComas? Don't
let us be spoil-sports.

McCOMAS. Crampton: you are not the man I took you for. (Pointedly.)
Bullies are always cowards. (He goes disgustedly towards the window.)

CRAMPTON (following him). Well, never mind. We must indulge them a
little. Can you get us something to wear, waiter?

WAITER. Certainly, sir. (He precedes them to the window, and stands
aside there to let them pass out before him.) This way, sir. Dominos and
noses, sir?

McCOMAS (angrily, on his way out). I shall wear my own nose.

WAITER (suavely). Oh, dear, yes, sir: the false one will fit over it
quite easily, sir: plenty of room, sir, plenty of room. (He goes out
after McComas.)

CRAMPTON (turning at the window to Phil with an attempt at genial
fatherliness). Come along, my boy, come along. (He goes.)

PHILIP (cheerily, following him). Coming, dad, coming. (On the window
threshold, he stops; looking after Crampton; then turns fantastically
with his bat bent into a halo round his head, and says with a lowered
voice to Mrs. Clandon and Gloria) Did you feel the pathos of that? (He
vanishes.)

MRS. CLANDON (left alone with Gloria). Why did Mr. Valentine go away so
suddenly, I wonder?

GLORIA (petulantly). I don't know. Yes, I d o know. Let us go and see
the dancing. (They go towards the window, and are met by Valentine, who
comes in from the garden walking quickly, with his face set and sulky.)

VALENTINE (stiffly). Excuse me. I thought the party had quite broken up.

GLORIA (nagging). Then why did you come back?

VALENTINE. I came back because I am penniless. I can't get out that way
without a five shilling ticket.

MRS. CLANDON. Has anything annoyed you, Mr. Valentine?

GLORIA. Never mind him, mother. This is a fresh insult to me: that is
all.

MRS. CLANDON (hardly able to realize that Gloria is deliberately
provoking an altercation). Gloria!

VALENTINE. Mrs. Clandon: have I said anything insulting? Have I done
anything insulting?

GLORIA. you have implied that my past has been like yours. That is the
worst of insults.

VALENTINE. I imply nothing of the sort. I declare that my past has been
blameless in comparison with yours.

MRS. CLANDON (most indignantly). Mr. Valentine!

VALENTINE. Well, what am I to think when I learn that Miss Clandon
has made exactly the same speeches to other men that she has made
to me--when I hear of at least five former lovers, with a tame naval
lieutenant thrown in? Oh, it's too bad.

MRS. CLANDON. But you surely do not believe that these affairs-- mere
jokes of the children's--were serious, Mr. Valentine?

VALENTINE. Not to you--not to her, perhaps. But I know what the men
felt. (With ludicrously genuine earnestness.) Have you ever thought
of the wrecked lives, the marriages contracted in the recklessness of
despair, the suicides, the--the--the--

GLORIA (interrupting him contemptuously). Mother: this man is a
sentimental idiot. (She sweeps away to the fireplace.)

MRS. CLANDON (shocked). Oh, my d e a r e s t Gloria, Mr. Valentine will
think that rude.

VALENTINE. I am not a sentimental idiot. I am cured of sentiment for
ever. (He sits down in dudgeon.)

MRS. CLANDON. Mr. Valentine: you must excuse us all. Women have to
unlearn the false good manners of their slavery before they acquire the
genuine good manners of their freedom. Don't think Gloria vulgar (Gloria
turns, astonished): she is not really so.

GLORIA. Mother! You apologize for me to h i m!

MRS. CLANDON. My dear: you have some of the faults of youth as well as
its qualities; and Mr. Valentine seems rather too old fashioned in his
ideas about his own sex to like being called an idiot. And now had we
not better go and see what Dolly is doing? (She goes towards the window.
Valentine rises.)

GLORIA. Do you go, mother. I wish to speak to Mr. Valentine alone.

MRS. CLANDON (startled into a remonstrance). My dear! (Recollecting
herself.) I beg your pardon, Gloria. Certainly, if you wish. (She bows
to Valentine and goes out.)

VALENTINE. Oh, if your mother were only a widow! She's worth six of you.

GLORIA. That is the first thing I have heard you say that does you
honor.

VALENTINE. Stuff! Come: say what you want to say and let me go.

GLORIA. I have only this to say. You dragged me down to your level for
a moment this afternoon. Do you think, if that had ever happened before,
that I should not have been on my guard--that I should not have known
what was coming, and known my own miserable weakness?

VALENTINE (scolding at her passionately). Don't talk of it in that way.
What do I care for anything in you but your weakness, as you call it?
You thought yourself very safe, didn't you, behind your advanced ideas!
I amused myself by upsetting t h e m pretty easily.

GLORIA (insolently, feeling that now she can do as she likes with him).
Indeed!

VALENTINE. But why did I do it? Because I was being tempted to awaken
your heart--to stir the depths in you. Why was I tempted? Because Nature
was in deadly earnest with me when I was in jest with her. When the
great moment came, who was awakened? who was stirred? in whom did the
depths break up? In myself--m y s e l f: I was transported: you were
only offended--shocked. You were only an ordinary young lady, too
ordinary to allow tame lieutenants to go as far as I went. That's all.
I shall not trouble you with conventional apologies. Good-bye. (He makes
resolutely for the door.)

GLORIA. Stop. (He hesitates.) Oh, will you understand, if I tell you the
truth, that I am not making an advance to you?

VALENTINE. Pooh! I know what you're going to say. You think you're not
ordinary--that I was right--that you really have those depths in your
nature. It flatters you to believe it. (She recoils.) Well, I grant that
you are not ordinary in some ways: you are a clever girl (Gloria stifles
an exclamation of rage, and takes a threatening step towards him); but
you've not been awakened yet. You didn't care: you don't care. It was
my tragedy, not yours. Good-bye. (He turns to the door. She watches him,
appalled to see him slipping from her grasp. As he turns the handle, he
pauses; then turns again to her, offering his hand.) Let us part kindly.

GLORIA (enormously relieved, and immediately turning her back on him
deliberately.) Good-bye. I trust you will soon recover from the wound.

VALENTINE (brightening up as it flashes on him that he is master of the
situation after all). I shall recover: such wounds heal more than they
harm. After all, I still have my own Gloria.

GLORIA (facing him quickly). What do you mean?

VALENTINE. The Gloria of my imagination.

GLORIA (proudly). Keep your own Gloria--the Gloria of your imagination.
(Her emotion begins to break through her pride.) The real Gloria--the
Gloria who was shocked, offended, horrified--oh, yes, quite truly--who
was driven almost mad with shame by the feeling that all her power over
herself had been broken down at her first real encounter with--with--
(The color rushes over her face again. She covers it with her left hand,
and puts her right on his left arm to support herself.)

VALENTINE. Take care. I'm losing my senses again. (Summoning all her
courage, she takes away her hand from her face and puts it on his right
shoulder, turning him towards her and looking him straight in the eyes.
He begins to protest agitatedly.) Gloria: be sensible: it's no use: I
haven't a penny in the world.

GLORIA. Can't you earn one? Other people do.

VALENTINE (half delighted, half frightened). I never could--you'd
be unhappy-- My dearest love: I should be the merest fortune-hunting
adventurer if-- (Her grip on his arms tightens; and she kisses him.)
Oh, Lord! (Breathless.) Oh, I-- (He gasps.) I don't know anything about
women: twelve years' experience is not enough. (In a gust of jealousy
she throws him away from her; and he reels her back into the chair like
a leaf before the wind, as Dolly dances in, waltzing with the waiter,
followed by Mrs. Clandon and Finch, also waltzing, and Phil pirouetting
by himself.)

DOLLY (sinking on the chair at the writing-table). Oh, I'm out of
breath. How beautifully you waltz, William!

MRS. CLANDON (sinking on the saddlebag seat on the hearth). Oh, how
could you make me do such a silly thing, Finch! I haven't danced since
the soiree at South Place twenty years ago.

GLORIA (peremptorily at Valentine). Get up. (Valentine gets up
abjectly.) Now let us have no false delicacy. Tell my mother that we
have agreed to marry one another. (A silence of stupefaction ensues.
Valentine, dumb with panic, looks at them with an obvious impulse to run
away.)

DOLLY (breaking the silence). Number Six!

PHILIP. Sh!

DOLLY (tumultuously). Oh, my feelings! I want to kiss somebody; and we
bar it in the family. Where's Finch?

McCOMAS (starting violently). No, positively-- (Crampton appears in the
window.)

DOLLY (running to Crampton). Oh, you're just in time. (She kisses him.)
Now (leading him forward) bless them.

GLORIA. No. I will have no such thing, even in jest. When I need a
blessing, I shall ask my mother's.

CRAMPTON (to Gloria, with deep disappointment). Am I to understand that
you have engaged yourself to this young gentleman?

GLORIA (resolutely). Yes. Do you intend to be our friend or--

DOLLY (interposing). --or our father?

CRAMPTON. I should like to be both, my child. But surely--! Mr.
Valentine: I appeal to your sense of honor.

VALENTINE. You're quite right. It's perfect madness. If we go out to
dance together I shall have to borrow five shillings from her for a
ticket. Gloria: don't be rash: you're throwing yourself away. I'd much
better clear straight out of this, and never see any of you again. I
shan't commit suicide: I shan't even be unhappy. It'll be a relief to
me: I--I'm frightened, I'm positively frightened; and that's the plain
truth.

GLORIA (determinedly). You shall not go.

VALENTINE (quailing). No, dearest: of course not. But--oh, will somebody
only talk sense for a moment and bring us all to reason! I can't.
Where's Bohun? Bohun's the man. Phil: go and summon Bohun--

PHILIP. From the vastly deep. I go. (He makes his bat quiver in the air
and darts away through the window.)

WAITER (harmoniously to Valentine). If you will excuse my putting in a
word, sir, do not let a matter of five shillings stand between you and
your happiness, sir. We shall be only too pleased to put the ticket down
to you: and you can settle at your convenience. Very glad to meet you in
any way, very happy and pleased indeed, sir.

PHILIP (re-appearing). He comes. (He waves his bat over the window.
Bohun comes in, taking off his false nose and throwing it on the table
in passing as he comes between Gloria and Valentine.)

VALENTINE. The point is, Mr. Bohun--

McCOMAS (interrupting from the hearthrug). Excuse me, sir: the point
must be put to him by a solicitor. The question is one of an engagement
between these two young people. The lady has some property, and (looking
at Crampton) will probably have a good deal more.

CRAMPTON. Possibly. I hope so.

VALENTINE. And the gentleman hasn't a rap.

BOHUN (nailing Valentine to the point instantly). Then insist on a
settlement. That shocks your delicacy: most sensible precautions do. But
you ask my advice; and I give it to you. Have a settlement.

GLORIA (proudly). He shall have a settlement.

VALENTINE. My good sir, I don't want advice for myself. Give h e r some
advice.

BOHUN. She won't take it. When you're married, she won't take yours
either-- (turning suddenly on Gloria) oh, no, you won't: you think you
will; but you won't. He'll set to work and earn his living-- (turning
suddenly to Valentine) oh, yes, you will: you think you won't; but you
will. She'll make you.

CRAMPTON (only half persuaded). Then, Mr. Bohun, you don't think this
match an unwise one?

BOHUN. Yes, I do: all matches are unwise. It's unwise to be born; it's
unwise to be married; it's unwise to live; and it's unwise to die.

WAITER (insinuating himself between Crampton and Valentine). Then, if
I may respectfully put in a word in, sir, so much the worse for
wisdom! (To Valentine, benignly.) Cheer up, sir, cheer up: every man is
frightened of marriage when it comes to the point; but it often turns
out very comfortable, very enjoyable and happy indeed, sir--from time
to time. I never was master in my own house, sir: my wife was like your
young lady: she was of a commanding and masterful disposition, which my
son has inherited. But if I had my life to live twice over, I'd do it
again, I'd do it again, I assure you. You never can tell, sir: you never
can tell.

PHILIP. Allow me to remark that if Gloria has made up her mind--

DOLLY. The matter's settled and Valentine's done for. And we're missing
all the dances.

VALENTINE (to Gloria, gallantly making the best of it). May I have a
dance--

BOHUN (interposing in his grandest diapason). Excuse me: I claim that
privilege as counsel's fee. May I have the honor--thank you. (He dances
away with Gloria and disappears among the lanterns, leaving Valentine
gasping.)

VALENTINE (recovering his breath). Dolly: may I-- (offering himself as
her partner)?

DOLLY. Nonsense! (Eluding him and running round the table to the
fireplace.) Finch--my Finch! (She pounces on McComas and makes him
dance.)

McCOMAS (protesting). Pray restrain--really--(He is borne off dancing
through the window.)

VALENTINE (making a last effort). Mrs. Clandon: may I--

PHILIP (forestalling him). Come, mother. (He seizes his mother and
whirls her away.)

MRS. CLANDON (remonstrating). Phil, Phil-- (She shares McComas's fate.)

CRAMPTON (following them with senile glee). Ho! ho! He! he! he! (He goes
into the garden chuckling at the fun.)

VALENTINE (collapsing on the ottoman and staring at the waiter). I might
as well be a married man already. (The waiter contemplates the captured
Duellist of Sex with affectionate commiseration, shaking his head
slowly.)

CURTAIN.

========================================
