========================================

THE RESEARCH MAGNIFICENT

by H. G. Wells

(1915)



CONTENTS


     THE PRELUDE

           ON FEAR AND ARISTOCRACY


     THE STORY

       I.  THE BOY GROWS UP

      II.  THE YOUNG MAN ABOUT TOWN

     III.  AMANDA

      IV.  THE SPIRITED HONEYMOON

       V.  THE ASSIZE OF JEALOUSY

      VI.  THE NEW HAROUN AL RASCHID




THE RESEARCH MAGNIFICENT




THE PRELUDE




ON FEAR AND ARISTOCRACY



1

The story of William Porphyry Benham is the story of a man who was led
into adventure by an idea. It was an idea that took possession of his
imagination quite early in life, it grew with him and changed with him,
it interwove at last completely with his being. His story is its story.
It was traceably germinating in the schoolboy; it was manifestly present
in his mind at the very last moment of his adventurous life. He belonged
to that fortunate minority who are independent of daily necessities, so
that he was free to go about the world under its direction. It led him
far. It led him into situations that bordered upon the fantastic, it
made him ridiculous, it came near to making him sublime. And this idea
of his was of such a nature that in several aspects he could document
it. Its logic forced him to introspection and to the making of a record.

An idea that can play so large a part in a life must necessarily have
something of the complication and protean quality of life itself. It is
not to be stated justly in any formula, it is not to be rendered by an
epigram. As well one might show a man's skeleton for his portrait. Yet,
essentially, Benham's idea was simple. He had an incurable, an almost
innate persuasion that he had to live life nobly and thoroughly. His
commoner expression for that thorough living is "the aristocratic life."
But by "aristocratic" he meant something very different from the
quality of a Russian prince, let us say, or an English peer. He meant an
intensity, a clearness.... Nobility for him was to get something out of
his individual existence, a flame, a jewel, a splendour--it is a thing
easier to understand than to say.

One might hesitate to call this idea "innate," and yet it comes soon
into a life when it comes at all. In Benham's case we might trace it
back to the Day Nursery at Seagate, we might detect it stirring already
at the petticoat stage, in various private struttings and valiant
dreamings with a helmet of pasteboard and a white-metal sword. We have
most of us been at least as far as that with Benham. And we have
died like Horatius, slaying our thousands for our country, or we have
perished at the stake or faced the levelled muskets of the firing
party--"No, do not bandage my eyes"--because we would not betray the
secret path that meant destruction to our city. But with Benham the
vein was stronger, and it increased instead of fading out as he grew
to manhood. It was less obscured by those earthy acquiescences, those
discretions, that saving sense of proportion, which have made most of
us so satisfactorily what we are. "Porphyry," his mother had discovered
before he was seventeen, "is an excellent boy, a brilliant boy, but, I
begin to see, just a little unbalanced."

The interest of him, the absurdity of him, the story of him, is that.

Most of us are--balanced; in spite of occasional reveries we do come to
terms with the limitations of life, with those desires and dreams and
discretions that, to say the least of it, qualify our nobility, we take
refuge in our sense of humour and congratulate ourselves on a certain
amiable freedom from priggishness or presumption, but for Benham that
easy declension to a humorous acceptance of life as it is did not occur.
He found his limitations soon enough; he was perpetually
rediscovering them, but out of these interments of the spirit he rose
again--remarkably. When we others have decided that, to be plain about
it, we are not going to lead the noble life at all, that the thing is
too ambitious and expensive even to attempt, we have done so because
there were other conceptions of existence that were good enough for us,
we decided that instead of that glorious impossible being of ourselves,
we would figure in our own eyes as jolly fellows, or sly dogs, or sane,
sound, capable men or brilliant successes, and so forth--practicable
things. For Benham, exceptionally, there were not these practicable
things. He blundered, he fell short of himself, he had--as you will
be told--some astonishing rebuffs, but they never turned him aside for
long. He went by nature for this preposterous idea of nobility as a
linnet hatched in a cage will try to fly.

And when he discovered--and in this he was assisted not a little by his
friend at his elbow--when he discovered that Nobility was not the simple
thing he had at first supposed it to be, he set himself in a mood only
slightly disconcerted to the discovery of Nobility. When it dawned upon
him, as it did, that one cannot be noble, so to speak, IN VACUO, he set
himself to discover a Noble Society. He began with simple beliefs and
fine attitudes and ended in a conscious research. If he could not get
through by a stride, then it followed that he must get through by a
climb. He spent the greater part of his life studying and experimenting
in the noble possibilities of man. He never lost his absurd faith in
that conceivable splendour. At first it was always just round the corner
or just through the wood; to the last it seemed still but a little way
beyond the distant mountains.

For this reason this story has been called THE RESEARCH MAGNIFICENT. It
was a real research, it was documented. In the rooms in Westhaven Street
that at last were as much as one could call his home, he had accumulated
material for--one hesitates to call it a book--let us say it was an
analysis of, a guide to the noble life. There after his tragic death
came his old friend White, the journalist and novelist, under a promise,
and found these papers; he found them to the extent of a crammed
bureau, half a score of patent files quite distended and a writing-table
drawer-full, and he was greatly exercised to find them. They were,
White declares, they are still after much experienced handling, an
indigestible aggregation. On this point White is very assured. When
Benham thought he was gathering together a book he was dreaming, White
says. There is no book in it....

Perhaps too, one might hazard, Benham was dreaming when he thought the
noble life a human possibility. Perhaps man, like the ape and the hyaena
and the tapeworm and many other of God's necessary but less attractive
creatures, is not for such exalted ends. That doubt never seems to have
got a lodgment in Benham's skull; though at times one might suppose it
the basis of White's thought. You will find in all Benham's story,
if only it can be properly told, now subdued, now loud and amazed and
distressed, but always traceable, this startled, protesting question,
"BUT WHY THE DEVIL AREN'T WE?" As though necessarily we ought to be.
He never faltered in his persuasion that behind the dingy face of this
world, the earthy stubbornness, the baseness and dulness of himself
and all of us, lurked the living jewels of heaven, the light of glory,
things unspeakable. At first it seemed to him that one had only just to
hammer and will, and at the end, after a life of willing and hammering,
he was still convinced there was something, something in the nature of
an Open Sesame, perhaps a little more intricate than one had supposed
at first, a little more difficult to secure, but still in that nature,
which would suddenly roll open for mankind the magic cave of the
universe, that precious cave at the heart of all things, in which one
must believe.

And then life--life would be the wonder it so perplexingly just
isn't....



2


Benham did not go about the world telling people of this consuming
research. He was not the prophet or preacher of his idea. It was too
living and intricate and uncertain a part of him to speak freely about.
It was his secret self; to expose it casually would have shamed him. He
drew all sorts of reserves about him, he wore his manifest imperfections
turned up about him like an overcoat in bitter wind. He was content
to be inexplicable. His thoughts led him to the conviction that this
magnificent research could not be, any more than any other research
can be, a solitary enterprise, but he delayed expression; in a mighty
writing and stowing away of these papers he found a relief from the
unpleasant urgency to confess and explain himself prematurely. So that
White, though he knew Benham with the intimacy of an old schoolfellow
who had renewed his friendship, and had shared his last days and been a
witness of his death, read the sheets of manuscript often with surprise
and with a sense of added elucidation.

And, being also a trained maker of books, White as he read was more
and more distressed that an accumulation so interesting should be so
entirely unshaped for publication. "But this will never make a book,"
said White with a note of personal grievance. His hasty promise in their
last moments together had bound him, it seemed, to a task he now found
impossible. He would have to work upon it tremendously; and even then he
did not see how it could be done.

This collection of papers was not a story, not an essay, not a
confession, not a diary. It was--nothing definable. It went into no
conceivable covers. It was just, White decided, a proliferation. A vast
proliferation. It wanted even a title. There were signs that Benham had
intended to call it THE ARISTOCRATIC LIFE, and that he had tried at some
other time the title of AN ESSAY ON ARISTOCRACY. Moreover, it would
seem that towards the end he had been disposed to drop the word
"aristocratic" altogether, and adopt some such phrase as THE LARGER
LIFE. Once it was LIFE SET FREE. He had fallen away more and more from
nearly everything that one associates with aristocracy--at the end only
its ideals of fearlessness and generosity remained.

Of all these titles THE ARISTOCRATIC LIFE seemed at first most like
a clue to White. Benham's erratic movements, his sudden impulses, his
angers, his unaccountable patiences, his journeys to strange places, and
his lapses into what had seemed to be pure adventurousness, could all be
put into system with that. Before White had turned over three pages of
the great fascicle of manuscript that was called Book Two, he had found
the word "Bushido" written with a particularly flourishing capital
letter and twice repeated. "That was inevitable," said White with the
comforting regret one feels for a friend's banalities. "And it dates...
[unreadable] this was early...."

"Modern aristocracy, the new aristocracy," he read presently, "has still
to be discovered and understood. This is the necessary next step for
mankind. As far as possible I will discover and understand it, and as
far as I know it I will be it. This is the essential disposition of my
mind. God knows I have appetites and sloths and habits and blindnesses,
but so far as it is in my power to release myself I will escape to
this...."



3


White sat far into the night and for several nights turning over papers
and rummaging in untidy drawers. Memories came back to him of his dead
friend and pieced themselves together with other memories and joined
on to scraps in this writing. Bold yet convincing guesses began to leap
across the gaps. A story shaped itself....

The story began with the schoolfellow he had known at Minchinghampton
School.

Benham had come up from his father's preparatory school at Seagate. He
had been a boy reserved rather than florid in his acts and manners, a
boy with a pale face, incorrigible hair and brown eyes that went dark
and deep with excitement. Several times White had seen him excited, and
when he was excited Benham was capable of tensely daring things. On one
occasion he had insisted upon walking across a field in which was an
aggressive bull. It had been put there to prevent the boys taking
a short cut to the swimming place. It had bellowed tremendously and
finally charged him. He had dodged it and got away; at the time it had
seemed an immense feat to White and the others who were safely up
the field. He had walked to the fence, risking a second charge by his
deliberation. Then he had sat on the fence and declared his intention
of always crossing the field so long as the bull remained there. He had
said this with white intensity, he had stopped abruptly in mid-sentence,
and then suddenly he had dropped to the ground, clutched the fence,
struggled with heaving shoulders, and been sick.

The combination of apparently stout heart and manifestly weak stomach
had exercised the Minchinghampton intelligence profoundly.

On one or two other occasions Benham had shown courage of the same
rather screwed-up sort. He showed it not only in physical but in mental
things. A boy named Prothero set a fashion of religious discussion
in the school, and Benham, after some self-examination, professed an
atheistical republicanism rather in the manner of Shelley. This brought
him into open conflict with Roddles, the History Master. Roddles had
discovered these theological controversies in some mysterious way, and
he took upon himself to talk at Benham and Prothero. He treated them to
the common misapplication of that fool who "hath said in his heart there
is no God." He did not perceive there was any difference between the
fool who says a thing in his heart and one who says it in the dormitory.
He revived that delectable anecdote of the Eton boy who professed
disbelief and was at once "soundly flogged" by his head master. "Years
afterwards that boy came back to thank ----"

"Gurr," said Prothero softly. "STEW--ard!"

"Your turn next, Benham," whispered an orthodox controversialist.

"Good Lord! I'd like to see him," said Benham with a forced loudness
that could scarcely be ignored.

The subsequent controversy led to an interview with the head. From
it Benham emerged more whitely strung up than ever. "He said he would
certainly swish me if I deserved it, and I said I would certainly kill
him if he did."

"And then?"

"He told me to go away and think it over. Said he would preach about
it next Sunday.... Well, a swishing isn't a likely thing anyhow. But
I would.... There isn't a master here I'd stand a thrashing from--not
one.... And because I choose to say what I think!... I'd run amuck."

For a week or so the school was exhilarated by a vain and ill-concealed
hope that the head might try it just to see if Benham would. It was
tantalizingly within the bounds of possibility....

These incidents came back to White's mind as he turned over the
newspapers in the upper drawer of the bureau. The drawer was labelled
"Fear--the First Limitation," and the material in it was evidently
designed for the opening volume of the great unfinished book. Indeed, a
portion of it was already arranged and written up.

As White read through this manuscript he was reminded of a score of
schoolboy discussions Benham and he and Prothero had had together. Here
was the same old toughness of mind, a kind of intellectual hardihood,
that had sometimes shocked his schoolfellows. Benham had been one of
those boys who do not originate ideas very freely, but who go out to
them with a fierce sincerity. He believed and disbelieved with emphasis.
Prothero had first set him doubting, but it was Benham's own temperament
took him on to denial. His youthful atheism had been a matter for secret
consternation in White. White did not believe very much in God even
then, but this positive disbelieving frightened him. It was going
too far. There had been a terrible moment in the dormitory, during a
thunderstorm, a thunderstorm so vehement that it had awakened them
all, when Latham, the humourist and a quietly devout boy, had suddenly
challenged Benham to deny his Maker.

"NOW say you don't believe in God?"

Benham sat up in bed and repeated his negative faith, while little
Hopkins, the Bishop's son, being less certain about the accuracy of
Providence than His aim, edged as far as he could away from Benham's
cubicle and rolled his head in his bedclothes.

"And anyhow," said Benham, when it was clear that he was not to be
struck dead forthwith, "you show a poor idea of your God to think he'd
kill a schoolboy for honest doubt. Even old Roddles--"

"I can't listen to you," cried Latham the humourist, "I can't listen to
you. It's--HORRIBLE."

"Well, who began it?" asked Benham.

A flash of lightning lit the dormitory and showed him to White
white-faced and ablaze with excitement, sitting up with the bed-clothes
about him. "Oh WOW!" wailed the muffled voice of little Hopkins as the
thunder burst like a giant pistol overhead, and he buried his head still
deeper in the bedclothes and gave way to unappeasable grief.

Latham's voice came out of the darkness. "This ATHEISM that you and
Billy Prothero have brought into the school--"

He started violently at another vivid flash, and every one remained
silent, waiting for the thunder....

But White remembered no more of the controversy because he had made a
frightful discovery that filled and blocked his mind. Every time the
lightning flashed, there was a red light in Benham's eyes....

It was only three days after when Prothero discovered exactly the same
phenomenon in the School House boothole and talked of cats and cattle,
that White's confidence in their friend was partially restored....



4


"Fear, the First Limitation"--his title indicated the spirit of Benham's
opening book very clearly. His struggle with fear was the very beginning
of his soul's history. It continued to the end. He had hardly decided to
lead the noble life before he came bump against the fact that he was
a physical coward. He felt fear acutely. "Fear," he wrote, "is the
foremost and most persistent of the shepherding powers that keep us
in the safe fold, that drive us back to the beaten track and comfort
and--futility. The beginning of all aristocracy is the subjugation of
fear."

At first the struggle was so great that he hated fear without any
qualification; he wanted to abolish it altogether.

"When I was a boy," he writes, "I thought I would conquer fear for good
and all, and never more be troubled by it. But it is not to be done in
that way. One might as well dream of having dinner for the rest of one's
life. Each time and always I have found that it has to be conquered
afresh. To this day I fear, little things as well as big things. I have
to grapple with some little dread every day--urge myself.... Just as
I have to wash and shave myself every day.... I believe it is so with
every one, but it is difficult to be sure; few men who go into dangers
care very much to talk about fear...."

Later Benham found some excuses for fear, came even to dealings with
fear. He never, however, admits that this universal instinct is any
better than a kindly but unintelligent nurse from whose fostering
restraints it is man's duty to escape. Discretion, he declared, must
remain; a sense of proportion, an "adequacy of enterprise," but the
discretion of an aristocrat is in his head, a tactical detail, it has
nothing to do with this visceral sinking, this ebb in the nerves. "From
top to bottom, the whole spectrum of fear is bad, from panic fear at
one extremity down to that mere disinclination for enterprise, that
reluctance and indolence which is its lowest phase. These are things of
the beast, these are for creatures that have a settled environment, a
life history, that spin in a cage of instincts. But man is a beast of
that kind no longer, he has left his habitat, he goes out to limitless
living...."

This idea of man going out into new things, leaving securities, habits,
customs, leaving his normal life altogether behind him, underlay all
Benham's aristocratic conceptions. And it was natural that he
should consider fear as entirely inconvenient, treat it indeed with
ingratitude, and dwell upon the immense liberations that lie beyond for
those who will force themselves through its remonstrances....

Benham confessed his liability to fear quite freely in these notes. His
fear of animals was ineradicable. He had had an overwhelming dread of
bears until he was twelve or thirteen, the child's irrational dread
of impossible bears, bears lurking under the bed and in the evening
shadows. He confesses that even up to manhood he could not cross a
field containing cattle without keeping a wary eye upon them--his bull
adventure rather increased than diminished that disposition--he hated a
strange dog at his heels and would manoeuvre himself as soon as possible
out of reach of the teeth or heels of a horse. But the peculiar dread of
his childhood was tigers. Some gaping nursemaid confronted him suddenly
with a tiger in a cage in the menagerie annexe of a circus. "My small
mind was overwhelmed."

"I had never thought," White read, "that a tiger was much larger than
a St. Bernard dog.... This great creature!... I could not believe any
hunter would attack such a monster except by stealth and with weapons of
enormous power....

"He jerked himself to and fro across his cramped, rickety cage and
looked over my head with yellow eyes--at some phantom far away. Every
now and then he snarled. The contempt of his detestable indifference
sank deeper and deeper into my soul. I knew that were the cage to vanish
I should stand there motionless, his helpless prey. I knew that were he
at large in the same building with me I should be too terror-stricken
to escape him. At the foot of a ladder leading clear to escape I should
have awaited him paralyzed. At last I gripped my nurse's hand. 'Take me
away,' I whispered.

"In my dreams that night he stalked me. I made my frozen flight from
him, I slammed a door on him, and he thrust his paw through a panel
as though it had been paper and clawed for me. The paw got longer and
longer....

"I screamed so loudly that my father came up from his study.

"I remember that he took me in his arms.

"'It's only a big sort of pussy, Poff,' he said. 'FELIS TIGRIS. FELIS,
you know, means cat.'

"But I knew better. I was in no mood then for my father's insatiable
pedagoguery.

"'And my little son mustn't be a coward.'...

"After that I understood I must keep silence and bear my tigers alone.

"For years the thought of that tiger's immensity haunted my mind. In
my dreams I cowered before it a thousand times; in the dusk it rarely
failed me. On the landing on my way to bed there was a patch of darkness
beyond a chest that became a lurking horror for me, and sometimes the
door of my father's bedroom would stand open and there was a long buff
and crimson-striped shape, by day indeed an ottoman, but by night--.
Could an ottoman crouch and stir in the flicker of a passing candle?
Could an ottoman come after you noiselessly, and so close that you could
not even turn round upon it? No!"



5


When Benham was already seventeen and, as he supposed, hardened against
his fear of beasts, his friend Prothero gave him an account of the
killing of an old labouring man by a stallion which had escaped out of
its stable. The beast had careered across a field, leapt a hedge and
come upon its victim suddenly. He had run a few paces and stopped,
trying to defend his head with the horse rearing over him. It beat him
down with two swift blows of its fore hoofs, one, two, lifted him up in
its long yellow teeth and worried him as a terrier does a rat--the poor
old wretch was still able to make a bleating sound at that--dropped him,
trampled and kicked him as he tried to crawl away, and went on trampling
and battering him until he was no more than a bloody inhuman bundle of
clothes and mire. For more than half an hour this continued, and then
its animal rage was exhausted and it desisted, and went and grazed at
a little distance from this misshapen, hoof-marked, torn, and muddy
remnant of a man. No one it seems but a horror-stricken child knew what
was happening....

This picture of human indignity tortured Benham's imagination much more
than it tortured the teller of the tale. It filled him with shame and
horror. For three or four years every detail of that circumstantial
narrative seemed unforgettable. A little lapse from perfect health and
the obsession returned. He could not endure the neighing of horses: when
he saw horses galloping in a field with him his heart stood still. And
all his life thereafter he hated horses.



6


A different sort of fear that also greatly afflicted Benham was due to a
certain clumsiness and insecurity he felt in giddy and unstable places.
There he was more definitely balanced between the hopelessly rash and
the pitifully discreet.

He had written an account of a private struggle between himself and a
certain path of planks and rock edges called the Bisse of Leysin. This
happened in his adolescence. He had had a bad attack of influenza and
his doctor had sent him to a little hotel--the only hotel it was in
those days--at Montana in Valais. There, later, when he had picked up
his strength, his father was to join him and take him mountaineering,
that second-rate mountaineering which is so dear to dons and
schoolmasters. When the time came he was ready for that, but he had had
his experiences. He had gone through a phase of real cowardice. He was
afraid, he confessed, before even he reached Montana; he was afraid of
the steepness of the mountains. He had to drive ten or twelve miles
up and up the mountain-side, a road of innumerable hairpin bends and
precipitous banks, the horse was gaunt and ugly with a disposition to
shy, and he confesses he clutched the side of the vehicle and speculated
how he should jump if presently the whole turnout went tumbling over....

"And afterwards I dreamt dreams of precipices. I made strides over
precipices, I fell and fell with a floating swiftness towards remote
valleys, I was assailed by eagles upon a perilous ledge that crumbled
away and left me clinging by my nails to nothing."

The Bisse of Leysin is one of those artificial water-courses which bring
water from some distant source to pastures that have an insufficient
or uncertain supply. It is a little better known than most because of
a certain exceptional boldness in its construction; for a distance of a
few score yards it runs supported by iron staples across the front of
a sheer precipice, and for perhaps half a mile it hangs like an eyebrow
over nearly or quite vertical walls of pine-set rock. Beside it, on
the outer side of it, runs a path, which becomes an offhand gangway
of planking at the overhanging places. At one corner, which gives the
favourite picture postcard from Montana, the rocks project so sharply
above the water that the passenger on the gangway must crouch down upon
the bending plank as he walks. There is no hand-hold at all.

A path from Montana takes one over a pine-clad spur and down a
precipitous zig-zag upon the middle of the Bisse, and thither Benham
came, fascinated by the very fact that here was something of which the
mere report frightened him. He had to walk across the cold clear rush
of the Bisse upon a pine log, and then he found himself upon one of the
gentler interludes of the Bisse track. It was a scrambling path nearly
two feet wide, and below it were slopes, but not so steep as to terrify.
At a vast distance below he saw through tree-stems and blue haze a
twisted strand of bright whiteness, the river that joins the Rhone at
Sion. It looped about and passed out of sight remotely beneath his feet.
He turned to the right, and came to a corner that overhung a precipice.
He craned his head round this corner and saw the evil place of the
picture-postcards.

He remained for a long time trying to screw himself up to walk along the
jagged six-inch edge of rock between cliff and torrent into which the
path has shrunken, to the sagging plank under the overhanging rock
beyond.

He could not bring himself to do that.

"It happened that close to the corner a large lump of rock and earth
was breaking away, a cleft was opening, so that presently, it seemed
possible at any moment, the mass would fall headlong into the blue deeps
below. This impending avalanche was not in my path along the Bisse, it
was no sort of danger to me, but in some way its insecurity gave a final
touch to my cowardice. I could not get myself round that corner."

He turned away. He went and examined the planks in the other direction,
and these he found less forbidding. He crossed one precipitous place,
with a fall of twoscore feet or less beneath him, and found worse ahead.
There also he managed. A third place was still more disagreeable.
The plank was worn and thin, and sagged under him. He went along it
supporting himself against the rock above the Bisse with an extended
hand. Halfway the rock fell back, so that there was nothing whatever
to hold. He stopped, hesitating whether he should go back--but on
this plank there was no going back because no turning round seemed
practicable. While he was still hesitating there came a helpful
intervention. Behind him he saw a peasant appearing and disappearing
behind trees and projecting rock masses, and coming across the previous
plank at a vigorous trot....

Under the stimulus of a spectator Benham got to the end of this third
place without much trouble. Then very politely he stood aside for the
expert to go ahead so that he could follow at his own pace.

There were, however, more difficulties yet to come, and a disagreeable
humiliation. That confounded peasant developed a parental solicitude.
After each crossing he waited, and presently began to offer advice and
encouragement. At last came a place where everything was overhanging,
where the Bisse was leaking, and the plank wet and slippery. The water
ran out of the leak near the brim of the wooden channel and fell in a
long shivering thread of silver. THERE WAS NO SOUND OF ITS FALL. It just
fell--into a void. Benham wished he had not noted that. He groaned, but
faced the plank; he knew this would be the slowest affair of all.

The peasant surveyed him from the further side.

"Don't be afraid!" cried the peasant in his clumsy Valaisian French,
and returned, returning along the plank that seemed quite sufficiently
loaded without him, extending a charitable hand.

"Damn!" whispered Benham, but he took the hand.

Afterwards, rather ignobly, he tried to explain in his public-school
French. "Pas de peur," he said. "Pas de peur. Mais la tete, n'a pas
l'habitude."

The peasant, failing to understand, assured him again that there was no
danger.

("Damn!")

Benham was led over all the other planks, he was led as if he was an
old lady crossing a glacier. He was led into absolute safety, and
shamefacedly he rewarded his guide. Then he went a little way and sat
down, swore softly, and watched the honest man go striding and plunging
down towards Lens until he was out of sight.

"Now," said Benham to himself, "if I do not go back along the planks my
secret honour is gone for ever."

He told himself that he had not a good head, that he was not well, that
the sun was setting and the light no longer good, that he had a very
good chance indeed of getting killed. Then it came to him suddenly as a
clear and simple truth, as something luminously plain, that it is better
to get killed than go away defeated by such fears and unsteadiness as
his. The change came into his mind as if a white light were suddenly
turned on--where there had been nothing but shadows and darkness. He
rose to his feet and went swiftly and intently the whole way back, going
with a kind of temperate recklessness, and, because he was no longer
careful, easily. He went on beyond his starting place toward the corner,
and did that supreme bit, to and fro, that bit where the lump was
falling away, and he had to crouch, as gaily as the rest. Then he
recrossed the Bisse upon the pine log, clambered up through the pines to
the crest, and returned through the meadows to his own hotel.

After that he should have slept the sleep of contentment, but instead
he had quite dreadful nightmares, of hanging in frozen fear above
incredible declivities, of ill-aimed leaps across chasms to slippery
footholds, of planks that swayed and broke suddenly in the middle and
headed him down and down....

The next day in the sunshine he walked the Bisse again with those dreams
like trailing mists in his mind, and by comparison the path of the Bisse
was nothing, it was like walking along a kerbstone, it was an exercise
for young ladies....



7


In his younger days Benham had regarded Fear as a shameful secret and as
a thing to be got rid of altogether. It seemed to him that to feel fear
was to fall short of aristocracy, and in spite of the deep dreads
and disgusts that haunted his mind, he set about the business of its
subjugation as if it were a spiritual amputation. But as he emerged
from the egotism of adolescence he came to realize that this was
too comprehensive an operation; every one feels fear, and your true
aristocrat is not one who has eliminated, but one who controls or
ignores it. Brave men are men who do things when they are afraid to do
them, just as Nelson, even when he was seasick, and he was frequently
seasick, was still master of the sea. Benham developed two leading ideas
about fear; one that it is worse at the first onset, and far worse than
any real experience, and the other that fear is essentially a social
instinct. He set himself upon these lines to study--what can we call
it?--the taming of fear, the nature, care, and management of fear....

"Fear is very like pain in this, that it is a deterrent thing. It is
superficial. Just as a man's skin is infinitely more sensitive than
anything inside.... Once you have forced yourself or have been forced
through the outward fear into vivid action or experience, you feel very
little. The worst moment is before things happen. Rowe, the African
sportsman, told me that he had seen cowardice often enough in the
presence of lions, but he had never seen any one actually charged by a
lion who did not behave well. I have heard the same thing of many sorts
of dangers.

"I began to suspect this first in the case of falling or jumping down.
Giddiness may be an almost intolerable torture, and falling nothing of
the sort. I once saw the face of an old man who had flung himself out
of a high window in Rome, and who had been killed instantly on the
pavement; it was not simply a serene face, it was glad, exalted. I
suspect that when we have broken the shell of fear, falling may be
delightful. Jumping down is, after all, only a steeper tobogganing, and
tobogganing a milder jumping down. Always I used to funk at the top
of the Cresta run. I suffered sometimes almost intolerably; I found
it almost impossible to get away. The first ten yards was like being
slashed open with a sharp sword. But afterwards there was nothing but
joyful thrills. All instinct, too, fought against me when I tried high
diving. I managed it, and began to like it. I had to give it up because
of my ears, but not until I had established the habit of stepping
through that moment of disinclination.

"I was Challoner's passenger when he was killed at Sheerness. That was
a queer unexpected experience, you may have supposed it an agony of
terror, but indeed there was no fear in it at all. At any rate, I do not
remember a moment of fear; it has gone clean out of my memory if ever it
was there. We were swimming high and fast, three thousand feet or so, in
a clear, sweet air over the town of Sheerness. The river, with a
string of battleships, was far away to the west of us, and the endless
grey-blue flats of the Thames to the north. The sun was low behind a
bank of cloud. I was watching a motor-car, which seemed to be crawling
slowly enough, though, no doubt, it was making a respectable pace,
between two hedges down below. It is extraordinary how slowly everything
seems to be going when one sees it from such an height.

"Then the left wing of the monoplane came up like a door that slams,
some wires whistled past my head, and one whipped off my helmet, and
then, with the seat slipping away from me, down we went. I snatched
unavailingly for the helmet, and then gripped the sides. It was like
dropping in a boat suddenly into the trough of a wave--and going on
dropping. We were both strapped, and I got my feet against the side and
clung to the locked second wheel.

"The sensation was as though something like an intermittent electric
current was pouring through me. It's a ridiculous image to use, I can't
justify it, but it was as if I was having cold blue light squirted
through every pore of my being. There was an astonishment, a feeling
of confirmation. 'Of course these things do happen sometimes,' I told
myself. I don't remember that Challoner looked round or said anything at
all. I am not sure that I looked at him....

"There seemed to be a long interval of intensely excited curiosity, and
I remember thinking, 'Lord, but we shall come a smash in a minute!'
Far ahead I saw the grey sheds of Eastchurch and people strolling
about apparently unaware of our disaster. There was a sudden silence as
Challoner stopped the engine....

"But the point I want to insist upon is that I did not feel afraid. I
was simply enormously, terribly INTERESTED....

"There came a tremendous jolt and a lunge, and we were both tipped
forward, so that we were hanging forehead down by our straps, and it
looked as if the sheds were in the sky, then I saw nothing but sky, then
came another vast swerve, and we were falling sideways, sideways....

"I was altogether out of breath and PHYSICALLY astonished, and I
remember noting quite intelligently as we hit the ground how the green
grass had an effect of POURING OUT in every direction from below us....

"Then I remember a jerk and a feeling that I was flying up again. I was
astonished by a tremendous popping--fabric, wires, everything seemed
going pop, pop, pop, like a machine-gun, and then came a flash of
intense pain as my arm crumpled up. It was quite impersonal pain. As
impersonal as seeing intense colour. SPLINTERS! I remember the word came
into my head instantly. I remember that very definitely.

"I thought, I suppose, my arm was in splinters. Or perhaps of the scraps
and ends of rods and wires flying about us. It is curious that while I
remember the word I cannot recall the idea....

"When I became conscious again the chief thing present in my mind was
that all those fellows round were young soldiers who wouldn't at all
understand bad behaviour. My arm was--orchestral, but still far from
being real suffering IN me. Also I wanted to know what Challoner had
got. They wouldn't understand my questions, and then I twisted round and
saw from the negligent way his feet came out from under the engine that
he must be dead. And dark red stains with bright red froth--

"Of course!

"There again the chief feeling was a sense of oddity. I wasn't sorry for
him any more than I was for myself.

"It seemed to me that it was all right with us both, remarkable, vivid,
but all right...."



8


"But though there is little or no fear in an aeroplane, even when it
is smashing up, there is fear about aeroplanes. There is something that
says very urgently, 'Don't,' to the man who looks up into the sky. It
is very interesting to note how at a place like Eastchurch or Brooklands
the necessary discretion trails the old visceral feeling with it,
and how men will hang about, ready to go up, resolved to go up, but
delaying. Men of indisputable courage will get into a state between
dread and laziness, and waste whole hours of flying weather on any
excuse or no excuse. Once they are up that inhibition vanishes. The man
who was delaying and delaying half an hour ago will now be cutting the
most venturesome capers in the air. Few men are in a hurry to get down
again. I mean that quite apart from the hesitation of landing, they like
being up there."

Then, abruptly, Benham comes back to his theory.

"Fear, you see, is the inevitable janitor, but it is not the ruler of
experience. That is what I am driving at in all this. The bark of danger
is worse than its bite. Inside the portals there may be events and
destruction, but terror stays defeated at the door. It may be that when
that old man was killed by a horse the child who watched suffered more
than he did....

"I am sure that was so...."



9


As White read Benham's notes and saw how his argument drove on, he was
reminded again and again of those schoolboy days and Benham's hardihood,
and his own instinctive unreasonable reluctance to follow those gallant
intellectual leads. If fear is an ancient instinctive boundary that the
modern life, the aristocratic life, is bound to ignore and transcend,
may this not also be the case with pain? We do a little adventure into
the "life beyond fear"; may we not also think of adventuring into the
life beyond pain? Is pain any saner a warning than fear? May not pain
just as much as fear keep us from possible and splendid things? But why
ask a question that is already answered in principle in every dentist's
chair? Benham's idea, however, went much further than that, he was
clearly suggesting that in pain itself, pain endured beyond a certain
pitch, there might come pleasure again, an intensity of sensation
that might have the colour of delight. He betrayed a real anxiety to
demonstrate this possibility, he had the earnestness of a man who is
sensible of dissentient elements within. He hated the thought of
pain even more than he hated fear. His arguments did not in the least
convince White, who stopped to poke the fire and assure himself of his
own comfort in the midst of his reading.

Young people and unseasoned people, Benham argued, are apt to imagine
that if fear is increased and carried to an extreme pitch it becomes
unbearable, one will faint or die; given a weak heart, a weak artery or
any such structural defect and that may well happen, but it is just as
possible that as the stimulation increases one passes through a brief
ecstasy of terror to a new sane world, exalted but as sane as normal
existence. There is the calmness of despair. Benham had made some notes
to enforce this view, of the observed calm behaviour of men already
hopelessly lost, men on sinking ships, men going to execution, men
already maimed and awaiting the final stroke, but for the most part
these were merely references to books and periodicals. In exactly the
same way, he argued, we exaggerate the range of pain as if it were
limitless. We think if we are unthinking that it passes into agony and
so beyond endurance to destruction. It probably does nothing of the
kind. Benham compared pain to the death range of the electric current.
At a certain voltage it thrills, at a greater it torments and convulses,
at a still greater it kills. But at enormous voltages, as Tesla was
the first to demonstrate, it does no injury. And following on this came
memoranda on the recorded behaviour of martyrs, on the self-torture of
Hindoo ascetics, of the defiance of Red Indian prisoners.

"These things," Benham had written, "are much more horrible when one
considers them from the point of view of an easy-chair";--White gave
an assenting nod--"ARE THEY REALLY HORRIBLE AT ALL? Is it possible that
these charred and slashed and splintered persons, those Indians hanging
from hooks, those walkers in the fiery furnace, have had glimpses
through great windows that were worth the price they paid for them?
Haven't we allowed those checks and barriers that are so important a
restraint upon childish enterprise, to creep up into and distress and
distort adult life?...

"The modern world thinks too much as though painlessness and freedom
from danger were ultimate ends. It is fear-haunted, it is troubled
by the thoughts of pain and death, which it has never met except as
well-guarded children meet these things, in exaggerated and untestable
forms, in the menagerie or in nightmares. And so it thinks the discovery
of anaesthetics the crowning triumph of civilization, and cosiness and
innocent amusement, those ideals of the nursery, the whole purpose of
mankind...."

"Mm," said White, and pressed his lips together and knotted his brows
and shook his head.



10


But the bulk of Benham's discussion of fear was not concerned with
this perverse and overstrained suggestion of pleasure reached through
torture, this exaggeration of the man resolved not to shrink at
anything; it was an examination of the present range and use of fear
that led gradually to something like a theory of control and discipline.
The second of his two dominating ideas was that fear is an instinct
arising only in isolation, that in a crowd there may be a collective
panic, but that there is no real individual fear. Fear, Benham held,
drives the man back to the crowd, the dog to its master, the wolf to the
pack, and when it is felt that the danger is pooled, then fear leaves
us. He was quite prepared to meet the objection that animals of a
solitary habit do nevertheless exhibit fear. Some of this apparent fear,
he argued, was merely discretion, and what is not discretion is the
survival of an infantile characteristic. The fear felt by a tiger cub
is certainly a social emotion, that drives it back to the other cubs,
to its mother and the dark hiding of the lair. The fear of a fully grown
tiger sends it into the reeds and the shadows, to a refuge, that must be
"still reminiscent of the maternal lair." But fear has very little hold
upon the adult solitary animal, it changes with extreme readiness to
resentment and rage.

"Like most inexperienced people," ran his notes, "I was astonished at
the reported feats of men in war; I believed they were exaggerated,
and that there was a kind of unpremeditated conspiracy of silence about
their real behaviour. But when on my way to visit India for the third
time I turned off to see what I could of the fighting before Adrianople,
I discovered at once that a thousand casually selected conscripts will,
every one of them, do things together that not one of them could by any
means be induced to do alone. I saw men not merely obey orders that
gave them the nearly certain prospect of death, but I saw them exceeding
orders; I saw men leap out of cover for the mere sake of defiance, and
fall shot through and smashed by a score of bullets. I saw a number
of Bulgarians in the hands of the surgeon, several quite frightfully
wounded, refuse chloroform merely to impress the English onlooker, some
of their injuries I could scarcely endure to see, and I watched a line
of infantry men go on up a hill and keep on quite manifestly cheerful
with men dropping out and wriggling, and men dropping out and lying
still until every other man was down.... Not one man would have gone up
that hill alone, without onlookers...."

Rowe, the lion hunter, told Benham that only on one occasion in his life
had he given way to ungovernable fear, and that was when he was alone.
Many times he had been in fearful situations in the face of charging
lions and elephants, and once he had been bowled over and carried some
distance by a lion, but on none of these occasions had fear demoralized
him. There was no question of his general pluck. But on one occasion he
was lost in rocky waterless country in Somaliland. He strayed out in the
early morning while his camels were being loaded, followed some antelope
too far, and lost his bearings. He looked up expecting to see the sun
on his right hand and found it on his left. He became bewildered. He
wandered some time and then fired three signal shots and got no reply.
Then losing his head he began shouting. He had only four or five more
cartridges and no water-bottle. His men were accustomed to his going on
alone, and might not begin to remark upon his absence until sundown....
It chanced, however, that one of the shikari noted the water-bottle he
had left behind and organized a hunt for him.

Long before they found him he had passed to an extremity of terror. The
world had become hideous and threatening, the sun was a pitiless glare,
each rocky ridge he clambered became more dreadful than the last, each
new valley into which he looked more hateful and desolate, the cramped
thorn bushes threatened him gauntly, the rocks had a sinister lustre,
and in every blue shadow about him the night and death lurked and
waited. There was no hurry for them, presently they would spread out
again and join and submerge him, presently in the confederated darkness
he could be stalked and seized and slain. Yes, this he admitted was real
fear. He had cracked his voice, yelling as a child yells. And then he
had become afraid of his own voice....

"Now this excess of fear in isolation, this comfort in a crowd, in
support and in a refuge, even when support or refuge is quite illusory,
is just exactly what one would expect of fear if one believed it to be
an instinct which has become a misfit. In the ease of the soldier fear
is so much a misfit that instead of saving him for the most part it
destroys him. Raw soldiers under fire bunch together and armies fight in
masses, men are mowed down in swathes, because only so is the courage of
the common men sustained, only so can they be brave, albeit spread out
and handling their weapons as men of unqualified daring would handle
them they would be infinitely safer and more effective....

"And all of us, it may be, are restrained by this misfit fear from a
thousand bold successful gestures of mind and body, we are held back
from the attainment of mighty securities in pitiful temporary shelters
that are perhaps in the end no better than traps...."

From such considerations Benham went on to speculate how far the crowd
can be replaced in a man's imagination, how far some substitute for that
social backing can be made to serve the same purpose in neutralizing
fear. He wrote with the calm of a man who weighs the probabilities of a
riddle, and with the zeal of a man lost to every material consideration.
His writing, it seemed to White, had something of the enthusiastic
whiteness of his face, the enthusiastic brightness of his eyes. We can
no more banish fear from our being at present than we can carve out the
fleshy pillars of the heart or the pineal gland in the brain. It is deep
in our inheritance. As deep as hunger. And just as we have to satisfy
hunger in order that it should leave us free, so we have to satisfy the
unconquerable importunity of fear. We have to reassure our faltering
instincts. There must be something to take the place of lair and
familiars, something not ourselves but general, that we must carry with
us into the lonely places. For it is true that man has now not only
to learn to fight in open order instead of in a phalanx, but he has to
think and plan and act in open order, to live in open order....

Then with one of his abrupt transitions Benham had written, "This brings
me to God."

"The devil it does!" said White, roused to a keener attention.

"By no feat of intention can we achieve courage in loneliness so long as
we feel indeed alone. An isolated man, an egoist, an Epicurean man, will
always fail himself in the solitary place. There must be something more
with us to sustain us against this vast universe than the spark of life
that began yesterday and must be extinguished to-morrow. There can be
no courage beyond social courage, the sustaining confidence of the herd,
until there is in us the sense of God. But God is a word that covers a
multitude of meanings. When I was a boy I was a passionate atheist, I
defied God, and so far as God is the mere sanction of social traditions
and pressures, a mere dressing up of the crowd's will in canonicals, I
do still deny him and repudiate him. That God I heard of first from my
nursemaid, and in very truth he is the proper God of all the nursemaids
of mankind. But there is another God than that God of obedience, God the
immortal adventurer in me, God who calls men from home and country, God
scourged and crowned with thorns, who rose in a nail-pierced body out of
death and came not to bring peace but a sword."

With something bordering upon intellectual consternation, White, who
was a decent self-respecting sceptic, read these last clamberings of
Benham's spirit. They were written in pencil; they were unfinished when
he died.

(Surely the man was not a Christian!)

"You may be heedless of death and suffering because you think you cannot
suffer and die, or you may be heedless of death and pain because you
have identified your life with the honour of mankind and the insatiable
adventurousness of man's imagination, so that the possible death is
negligible and the possible achievement altogether outweighs it."...

White shook his head over these pencilled fragments.

He was a member of the Rationalist Press Association, and he had always
taken it for granted that Benham was an orthodox unbeliever. But this
was hopelessly unsound, heresy, perilous stuff; almost, it seemed to
him, a posthumous betrayal....



11


One night when he was in India the spirit of adventure came upon Benham.
He had gone with Kepple, of the forestry department, into the jungle
country in the hills above the Tapti. He had been very anxious to see
something of that aspect of Indian life, and he had snatched at the
chance Kepple had given him. But they had scarcely started before the
expedition was brought to an end by an accident, Kepple was thrown by
a pony and his ankle broken. He and Benham bandaged it as well as they
could, and a litter was sent for, and meanwhile they had to wait in the
camp that was to have been the centre of their jungle raids. The second
day of this waiting was worse for Kepple than the first, and he suffered
much from the pressure of this amateurish bandaging. In the evening
Benham got cool water from the well and rearranged things better; the
two men dined and smoked under their thatched roof beneath the big
banyan, and then Kepple, tired out by his day of pain, was carried to
his tent. Presently he fell asleep and Benham was left to himself.

Now that the heat was over he found himself quite indisposed to sleep.
He felt full of life and anxious for happenings.

He went back and sat down upon the iron bedstead beneath the banyan,
that Kepple had lain upon through the day, and he watched the soft
immensity of the Indian night swallow up the last lingering colours of
the world. It left the outlines, it obliterated nothing, but it stripped
off the superficial reality of things. The moon was full and high
overhead, and the light had not so much gone as changed from definition
and the blazing glitter and reflections of solidity to a translucent and
unsubstantial clearness. The jungle that bordered the little encampment
north, south, and west seemed to have crept a little nearer, enriched
itself with blackness, taken to itself voices.

(Surely it had been silent during the day.)

A warm, faintly-scented breeze just stirred the dead grass and the
leaves. In the day the air had been still.

Immediately after the sunset there had been a great crying of peacocks
in the distance, but that was over now; the crickets, however,
were still noisy, and a persistent sound had become predominant, an
industrious unmistakable sound, a sound that took his mind back to
England, in midsummer. It was like a watchman's rattle--a nightjar!

So there were nightjars here in India, too! One might have expected
something less familiar. And then came another cry from far away over
the heat-stripped tree-tops, a less familiar cry. It was repeated. Was
that perhaps some craving leopard, a tiger cat, a panther?--

"HUNT, HUNT"; that might be a deer.

Then suddenly an angry chattering came from the dark trees quite close
at hand. A monkey?...

These great, scarce visible, sweeping movements through the air were
bats....

Of course, the day jungle is the jungle asleep. This was its waking
hour. Now the deer were arising from their forms, the bears creeping
out of their dens amidst the rocks and blundering down the gullies,
the tigers and panthers and jungle cats stalking noiselessly from their
lairs in the grass. Countless creatures that had hidden from the heat
and pitiless exposure of the day stood now awake and alertly intent upon
their purposes, grazed or sought water, flitting delicately through the
moonlight and shadows. The jungle was awakening. Again Benham heard that
sound like the belling of a stag....

This was the real life of the jungle, this night life, into which man
did not go. Here he was on the verge of a world that for all the stuffed
trophies of the sportsman and the specimens of the naturalist is still
almost as unknown as if it was upon another planet. What intruders men
are, what foreigners in the life of this ancient system!

He looked over his shoulder, and there were the two little tents,
one that sheltered Kepple and one that awaited him, and beyond, in an
irregular line, glowed the ruddy smoky fires of the men. One or two
turbaned figures still flitted about, and there was a voice--low,
monotonous--it must have been telling a tale. Further, sighing and
stirring ever and again, were tethered beasts, and then a great pale
space of moonlight and the clumsy outlines of the village well. The
clustering village itself slept in darkness beyond the mango trees,
and still remoter the black encircling jungle closed in. One might have
fancied this was the encampment of newly-come invaders, were it not
for the larger villages that are overgrown with thickets and altogether
swallowed up again in the wilderness, and for the deserted temples that
are found rent asunder by the roots of trees and the ancient embankments
that hold water only for the drinking of the sambur deer....

Benham turned his face to the dim jungle again....

He had come far out of his way to visit this strange world of the
ancient life, that now recedes and dwindles before our new civilization,
that seems fated to shrivel up and pass altogether before the dry
advance of physical science and material organization. He was full of
unsatisfied curiosities about its fierce hungers and passions, its fears
and cruelties, its instincts and its well-nigh incommunicable and yet
most precious understandings. He had long ceased to believe that the
wild beast is wholly evil, and safety and plenty the ultimate good for
men....

Perhaps he would never get nearer to this mysterious jungle life than he
was now.

It was intolerably tantalizing that it should be so close at hand and so
inaccessible....

As Benham sat brooding over his disappointment the moon, swimming on
through the still circle of the hours, passed slowly over him. The
lights and shadows about him changed by imperceptible gradations and
a long pale alley where the native cart track drove into the forest,
opened slowly out of the darkness, slowly broadened, slowly lengthened.
It opened out to him with a quality of invitation....

There was the jungle before him. Was it after all so inaccessible?

"Come!" the road said to him.

Benham rose and walked out a few paces into the moonlight and stood
motionless.

Was he afraid?

Even now some hungry watchful monster might lurk in yonder shadows,
watching with infinite still patience. Kepple had told him how they
would sit still for hours--staring unblinkingly as cats stare at a
fire--and then crouch to advance. Beneath the shrill overtone of
the nightjars, what noiseless grey shapes, what deep breathings and
cracklings and creepings might there not be?...

Was he afraid?

That question determined him to go.

He hesitated whether he should take a gun. A stick? A gun, he knew, was
a dangerous thing to an inexperienced man. No! He would go now, even as
he was with empty hands. At least he would go as far as the end of that
band of moonlight. If for no other reason than because he was afraid.
NOW!

For a moment it seemed to him as though his feet were too heavy to lift
and then, hands in pockets, khaki-clad, an almost invisible figure, he
strolled towards the cart-track.

Come to that, he halted for a moment to regard the distant fires of
the men. No one would miss him. They would think he was in his tent.
He faced the stirring quiet ahead. The cart-track was a rutted path of
soft, warm sand, on which he went almost noiselessly. A bird squabbled
for an instant in a thicket. A great white owl floated like a flake of
moonlight across the track and vanished without a sound among the trees.

Along the moonlit path went Benham, and when he passed near trees his
footsteps became noisy with the rustle and crash of dead leaves. The
jungle was full of moonlight; twigs, branches, creepers, grass-clumps
came out acutely vivid. The trees and bushes stood in pools of darkness,
and beyond were pale stretches of misty moonshine and big rocks shining
with an unearthly lustre. Things seemed to be clear and yet uncertain.
It was as if they dissolved or retired a little and then returned to
solidity.

A sudden chattering broke out overhead, and black across the great
stars soared a flying squirrel and caught a twig, and ran for shelter.
A second hesitated in a tree-top and pursued. They chased each other and
vanished abruptly. He forgot his sense of insecurity in the interest of
these active little silhouettes. And he noted how much bigger and more
wonderful the stars can look when one sees them through interlacing
branches.

Ahead was darkness; but not so dark when he came to it that the track
was invisible. He was at the limit of his intention, but now he saw that
that had been a childish project. He would go on, he would walk right
into the jungle. His first disinclination was conquered, and the soft
intoxication of the subtropical moonshine was in his blood.... But he
wished he could walk as a spirit walks, without this noise of leaves....

Yes, this was very wonderful and beautiful, and there must always be
jungles for men to walk in. Always there must be jungles....

Some small beast snarled and bolted from under his feet. He stopped
sharply. He had come into a darkness under great boughs, and now he
stood still as the little creature scuttled away. Beyond the track
emerged into a dazzling whiteness....

In the stillness he could hear the deer belling again in the distance,
and then came a fuss of monkeys in a group of trees near at hand. He
remained still until this had died away into mutterings.

Then on the verge of movement he was startled by a ripe mango that
slipped from its stalk and fell out of the tree and struck his hand.
It took a little time to understand that, and then he laughed, and his
muscles relaxed, and he went on again.

A thorn caught at him and he disentangled himself.

He crossed the open space, and the moon was like a great shield of light
spread out above him. All the world seemed swimming in its radiance. The
stars were like lamps in a mist of silvery blue.

The track led him on across white open spaces of shrivelled grass and
sand, amidst trees where shadows made black patternings upon the silver,
and then it plunged into obscurities. For a time it lifted, and then
on one hand the bush fell away, and he saw across a vast moonlit valley
wide undulations of open cultivation, belts of jungle, copses, and a
great lake as black as ebony. For a time the path ran thus open, and
then the jungle closed in again and there were more thickets, more
levels of grass, and in one place far overhead among the branches he
heard and stood for a time perplexed at a vast deep humming of bees....

Presently a black monster with a hunched back went across his path
heedless of him and making a great noise in the leaves. He stood quite
still until it had gone. He could not tell whether it was a boar or
hyaena; most probably, he thought, a boar because of the heaviness of
its rush.

The path dropped downhill for a time, crossed a ravine, ascended. He
passed a great leafless tree on which there were white flowers. On the
ground also, in the darkness under the tree, there were these flowers;
they were dropping noiselessly, and since they were visible in the
shadows, it seemed to him that they must be phosphorescent. And they
emitted a sweetish scent that lay heavily athwart the path. Presently he
passed another such tree. Then he became aware of a tumult ahead of him,
a smashing of leaves, a snorting and slobbering, grunting and sucking,
a whole series of bestial sounds. He halted for a little while, and then
drew nearer, picking his steps to avoid too great a noise. Here were
more of those white-blossomed trees, and beneath, in the darkness,
something very black and big was going to and fro, eating greedily. Then
he found that there were two and then more of these black things, three
or four of them.

Curiosity made Benham draw nearer, very softly.

Presently one showed in a patch of moonlight, startlingly big, a huge,
black hairy monster with a long white nose on a grotesque face, and he
was stuffing armfuls of white blossom into his mouth with his curved
fore claws. He took not the slightest notice of the still man, who stood
perhaps twenty yards away from him. He was too blind and careless. He
snorted and smacked his slobbering lips, and plunged into the shadows
again. Benham heard him root among the leaves and grunt appreciatively.
The air was heavy with the reek of the crushed flowers.

For some time Benham remained listening to and peering at these
preoccupied gluttons. At last he shrugged his shoulders, and left them
and went on his way. For a long time he could hear them, then just as he
was on the verge of forgetting them altogether, some dispute arose among
them, and there began a vast uproar, squeals, protests, comments, one
voice ridiculously replete and authoritative, ridiculously suggestive
of a drunken judge with his mouth full, and a shrill voice of grievance
high above the others....

The uproar of the bears died away at last, almost abruptly, and left the
jungle to the incessant night-jars....

For what end was this life of the jungle?

All Benham's senses were alert to the sounds and appearances about him,
and at the same time his mind was busy with the perplexities of that
riddle. Was the jungle just an aimless pool of life that man must drain
and clear away? Or is it to have a use in the greater life of our race
that now begins? Will man value the jungle as he values the precipice,
for the sake of his manhood? Will he preserve it?

Man must keep hard, man must also keep fierce. Will the jungle keep him
fierce?

For life, thought Benham, there must be insecurity....

He had missed the track....

He was now in a second ravine. He was going downward, walking on silvery
sand amidst great boulders, and now there was a new sound in the
air--. It was the croaking of frogs. Ahead was a solitary gleam. He was
approaching a jungle pool....

Suddenly the stillness was alive, in a panic uproar. "HONK!" cried a
great voice, and "HONK!" There was a clatter of hoofs, a wild rush--a
rush as it seemed towards him. Was he being charged? He backed against a
rock. A great pale shape leaped by him, an antlered shape. It was a herd
of big deer bolting suddenly out of the stillness. He heard the swish
and smash of their retreat grow distant, disperse. He remained standing
with his back to the rock.

Slowly the strophe and antistrophe of frogs and goat-suckers resumed
possession of his consciousness. But now some primitive instinct
perhaps or some subconscious intimation of danger made him meticulously
noiseless.

He went on down a winding sound-deadening path of sand towards the
drinking-place. He came to a wide white place that was almost level, and
beyond it under clustering pale-stemmed trees shone the mirror surface
of some ancient tank, and, sharp and black, a dog-like beast sat on its
tail in the midst of this space, started convulsively and went slinking
into the undergrowth. Benham paused for a moment and then walked out
softly into the light, and, behold! as if it were to meet him, came
a monster, a vast dark shape drawing itself lengthily out of the
blackness, and stopped with a start as if it had been instantly changed
to stone.

It had stopped with one paw advanced. Its striped mask was light and
dark grey in the moonlight, grey but faintly tinged with ruddiness; its
mouth was a little open, its fangs and a pendant of viscous saliva shone
vivid. Its great round-pupilled eyes regarded him stedfastly. At last
the nightmare of Benham's childhood had come true, and he was face to
face with a tiger, uncaged, uncontrolled.

For some moments neither moved, neither the beast nor the man. They
stood face to face, each perhaps with an equal astonishment, motionless
and soundless, in that mad Indian moonlight that makes all things like a
dream.

Benham stood quite motionless, and body and mind had halted together.
That confrontation had an interminableness that had nothing to do with
the actual passage of time. Then some trickle of his previous thoughts
stirred in the frozen quiet of his mind.

He spoke hoarsely. "I am Man," he said, and lifted a hand as he spoke.
"The Thought of the world."

His heart leapt within him as the tiger moved. But the great beast
went sideways, gardant, only that its head was low, three noiseless
instantaneous strides it made, and stood again watching him.

"Man," he said, in a voice that had no sound, and took a step forward.

"Wough!" With two bounds the monster had become a great grey streak
that crackled and rustled in the shadows of the trees. And then it
had vanished, become invisible and inaudible with a kind of
instantaneousness.

For some seconds or some minutes Benham stood rigid, fearlessly
expectant, and then far away up the ravine he heard the deer repeat
their cry of alarm, and understood with a new wisdom that the tiger had
passed among them and was gone....

He walked on towards the deserted tank and now he was talking aloud.

"I understand the jungle. I understand.... If a few men die here, what
matter? There are worse deaths than being killed....

"What is this fool's trap of security?

"Every time in my life that I have fled from security I have fled from
death....

"Let men stew in their cities if they will. It is in the lonely places,
in jungles and mountains, in snows and fires, in the still observatories
and the silent laboratories, in those secret and dangerous places where
life probes into life, it is there that the masters of the world, the
lords of the beast, the rebel sons of Fate come to their own....

"You sleeping away there in the cities! Do you know what it means for
you that I am here to-night?

"Do you know what it means to you?

"I am just one--just the precursor.

"Presently, if you will not budge, those hot cities must be burnt about
you. You must come out of them...."

He wandered now uttering his thoughts as they came to him, and he saw no
more living creatures because they fled and hid before the sound of his
voice. He wandered until the moon, larger now and yellow tinged, was low
between the black bars of the tree stems. And then it sank very suddenly
behind a hilly spur and the light failed swiftly.

He stumbled and went with difficulty. He could go no further among these
rocks and ravines, and he sat down at the foot of a tree to wait for
day.

He sat very still indeed.

A great stillness came over the world, a velvet silence that wrapped
about him, as the velvet shadows wrapped about him. The corncrakes had
ceased, all the sounds and stir of animal life had died away, the breeze
had fallen. A drowsing comfort took possession of him. He grew more
placid and more placid still. He was enormously content to find that
fear had fled before him and was gone. He drifted into that state of
mind when one thinks without ideas, when one's mind is like a starless
sky, serene and empty.



12


Some hours later Benham found that the trees and rocks were growing
visible again, and he saw a very bright star that he knew must be
Lucifer rising amidst the black branches. He was sitting upon a rock at
the foot of a slender-stemmed leafless tree. He had been asleep, and it
was daybreak. Everything was coldly clear and colourless.

He must have slept soundly.

He heard a cock crow, and another answer--jungle fowl these must be,
because there could be no village within earshot--and then far away and
bringing back memories of terraced houses and ripe walled gardens, was
the scream of peacocks. And some invisible bird was making a hollow
beating sound among the trees near at hand. TUNK.... TUNK, and out of
the dry grass came a twittering.

There was a green light in the east that grew stronger, and the stars
after their magnitudes were dissolving in the blue; only a few remained
faintly visible. The sound of birds increased. Through the trees he saw
towering up a great mauve thing like the back of a monster,--but that
was nonsense, it was the crest of a steep hillside covered with woods of
teak.

He stood up and stretched himself, and wondered whether he had dreamed
of a tiger.

He tried to remember and retrace the course of his over-night
wanderings.

A flight of emerald parakeets tore screaming through the trees, and then
far away uphill he heard the creaking of a cart.

He followed the hint of a footmark, and went back up the glen slowly and
thoughtfully.

Presently he came to a familiar place, a group of trees, a sheet of
water, and the ruins of an old embankment. It was the ancient tank of
his overnight encounter. The pool of his dream?

With doubt still in his mind, he walked round its margin to the sandy
level beyond, and cast about and sought intently, and at last found, and
then found clearly, imposed upon the tracks of several sorts of deer and
the footprints of many biggish birds, first the great spoor of the
tiger and then his own. Here the beast had halted, and here it had leapt
aside. Here his own footmarks stopped. Here his heels had come together.

It had been no dream.

There was a white mist upon the water of the old tank like the bloom
upon a plum, and the trees about it seemed smaller and the sand-space
wider and rougher than they had seemed in the moonshine. Then the ground
had looked like a floor of frosted silver.

And thence he went on upward through the fresh morning, until just as
the east grew red with sunrise, he reached the cart-track from which he
had strayed overnight. It was, he found, a longer way back to the camp
than he remembered it to be. Perhaps he had struck the path further
along. It curved about and went up and down and crossed three ravines.
At last he came to that trampled place of littered white blossom under
great trees where he had seen the bears.

The sunlight went before him in a sheaf of golden spears, and his
shadow, that was at first limitless, crept towards his feet. The dew had
gone from the dead grass and the sand was hot to his dry boots before he
came back into the open space about the great banyan and the tents. And
Kepple, refreshed by a night's rest and coffee, was wondering loudly
where the devil he had gone.





THE STORY




CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ THE BOY GROWS UP



1


Benham was the son of a schoolmaster. His father was assistant first at
Cheltenham, and subsequently at Minchinghampton, and then he became
head and later on sole proprietor of Martindale House, a high-class
preparatory school at Seagate. He was extremely successful for some
years, as success goes in the scholastic profession, and then disaster
overtook him in the shape of a divorce. His wife, William Porphyry's
mother, made the acquaintance of a rich young man named Nolan, who was
recuperating at Seagate from the sequelae of snake-bite, malaria, and a
gun accident in Brazil. She ran away with him, and she was divorced.
She was, however, unable to marry him because he died at Wiesbaden
only three days after the Reverend Harold Benham obtained his decree
absolute. Instead, therefore, being a woman of great spirit, enterprise
and sweetness, she married Godfrey Marayne, afterwards Sir Godfrey
Marayne, the great London surgeon.

Nolan was a dark, rather melancholy and sentimental young man, and he
left about a third of his very large fortune entirely to Mrs. Benham
and the rest to her in trust for her son, whom he deemed himself to have
injured. With this and a husband already distinguished, she returned
presently to London, and was on the whole fairly well received there.

It was upon the reverend gentleman at Seagate that the brunt of this
divorce fell. There is perhaps a certain injustice in the fact that a
schoolmaster who has lost his wife should also lose the more valuable
proportion of his pupils, but the tone of thought in England is against
any association of a schoolmaster with matrimonial irregularity. And
also Mr. Benham remarried. It would certainly have been better for him
if he could have produced a sister. His school declined and his efforts
to resuscitate it only hastened its decay. Conceiving that he could now
only appeal to the broader-minded, more progressive type of parent,
he became an educational reformer, and wrote upon modernizing the
curriculum with increasing frequency to the TIMES. He expended a
considerable fraction of his dwindling capital upon a science laboratory
and a fives court; he added a London Bachelor of Science with a Teaching
Diploma to the school staff, and a library of about a thousand volumes,
including the Hundred Best Books as selected by the late Lord Avebury,
to the school equipment. None of these things did anything but enhance
the suspicion of laxity his wife's escapade had created in the limited
opulent and discreet class to which his establishment appealed. One
boy who, under the influence of the Hundred Best Books, had quoted the
ZEND-AVESTA to an irascible but influential grandfather, was withdrawn
without notice or compensation in the middle of the term. It intensifies
the tragedy of the Reverend Harold Benham's failure that in no
essential respect did his school depart from the pattern of all other
properly-conducted preparatory schools.

In appearance he was near the average of scholastic English gentlemen.
He displayed a manifest handsomeness somewhat weakened by disregard and
disuse, a large moustache and a narrow high forehead. His rather
tired brown eyes were magnified by glasses. He was an active man in
unimportant things, with a love for the phrase "ship-shape," and he
played cricket better than any one else on the staff. He walked in wide
strides, and would sometimes use the tail of his gown on the blackboard.
Like so many clergymen and schoolmasters, he had early distrusted
his natural impulse in conversation, and had adopted the defensive
precaution of a rather formal and sonorous speech, which habit had made
a part of him. His general effect was of one who is earnestly keeping up
things that might otherwise give way, keeping them up by act and voice,
keeping up an atmosphere of vigour and success in a school that was
only too manifestly attenuated, keeping up a pretentious economy of
administration in a school that must not be too manifestly impoverished,
keeping up a claim to be in the scientific van and rather a flutterer
of dovecots--with its method of manual training for example--keeping up
ESPRIT DE CORPS and the manliness of himself and every one about him,
keeping up his affection for his faithful second wife and his complete
forgetfulness of and indifference to that spirit of distracting impulse
and insubordination away there in London, who had once been his delight
and insurmountable difficulty. "After my visits to her," wrote Benham,
"he would show by a hundred little expressions and poses and acts how
intensely he wasn't noting that anything of the sort had occurred."

But one thing that from the outset the father seemed to have failed to
keep up thoroughly was his intention to mould and dominate his son.

The advent of his boy had been a tremendous event in the reverend
gentleman's life. It is not improbable that his disposition to
monopolize the pride of this event contributed to the ultimate
disruption of his family. It left so few initiatives within the home to
his wife. He had been an early victim to that wave of philoprogenitive
and educational enthusiasm which distinguished the closing decade of the
nineteenth century. He was full of plans in those days for the education
of his boy, and the thought of the youngster played a large part in
the series of complicated emotional crises with which he celebrated
the departure of his wife, crises in which a number of old school and
college friends very generously assisted--spending weekends at Seagate
for this purpose, and mingling tobacco, impassioned handclasps and
suchlike consolation with much patient sympathetic listening to his
carefully balanced analysis of his feelings. He declared that his son
was now his one living purpose in life, and he sketched out a scheme of
moral and intellectual training that he subsequently embodied in five
very stimulating and intimate articles for the SCHOOL WORLD, but never
put into more than partial operation.

"I have read my father's articles upon this subject," wrote Benham,
"and I am still perplexed to measure just what I owe to him. Did he ever
attempt this moral training he contemplated so freely? I don't think
he did. I know now, I knew then, that he had something in his mind....
There were one or two special walks we had together, he invited me
to accompany him with a certain portentousness, and we would go out
pregnantly making superficial remarks about the school cricket and
return, discussing botany, with nothing said.

"His heart failed him.

"Once or twice, too, he seemed to be reaching out at me from the school
pulpit.

"I think that my father did manage to convey to me his belief that there
were these fine things, honour, high aims, nobilities. If I did not get
this belief from him then I do not know how I got it. But it was as if
he hinted at a treasure that had got very dusty in an attic, a treasure
which he hadn't himself been able to spend...."

The father who had intended to mould his son ended by watching him grow,
not always with sympathy or understanding. He was an overworked man
assailed by many futile anxieties. One sees him striding about the
establishment with his gown streaming out behind him urging on the
groundsman or the gardener, or dignified, expounding the particular
advantages of Seagate to enquiring parents, one sees him unnaturally
cheerful and facetious at the midday dinner table, one imagines him
keeping up high aspirations in a rather too hastily scribbled sermon in
the school pulpit, or keeping up an enthusiasm for beautiful language in
a badly-prepared lesson on Virgil, or expressing unreal indignation and
unjustifiably exalted sentiments to evil doers, and one realizes his
disadvantage against the quiet youngster whose retentive memory was
storing up all these impressions for an ultimate judgment, and one
understands, too, a certain relief that mingled with his undeniable
emotion when at last the time came for young Benham, "the one living
purpose" of his life, to be off to Minchinghampton and the next step in
the mysterious ascent of the English educational system.

Three times at least, and with an increased interval, the father wrote
fine fatherly letters that would have stood the test of publication.
Then his communications became comparatively hurried and matter-of-fact.
His boy's return home for the holidays was always rather a stirring time
for his private feelings, but he became more and more inexpressive. He
would sometimes lay a hand on those growing shoulders and then withdraw
it. They felt braced-up shoulders, stiffly inflexible or--they would
wince. And when one has let the habit of indefinite feelings grow upon
one, what is there left to say? If one did say anything one might be
asked questions....

One or two of the long vacations they spent abroad together. The last
of these occasions followed Benham's convalescence at Montana and his
struggle with the Bisse; the two went to Zermatt and did several peaks
and crossed the Theodule, and it was clear that their joint expeditions
were a strain upon both of them. The father thought the son reckless,
unskilful, and impatient; the son found the father's insistence upon
guides, ropes, precautions, the recognized way, the highest point and
back again before you get a chill, and talk about it sagely but very,
very modestly over pipes, tiresome. He wanted to wander in deserts of
ice and see over the mountains, and discover what it is to be benighted
on a precipice. And gradually he was becoming familiar with his father's
repertory of Greek quotations. There was no breach between them, but
each knew that holiday was the last they would ever spend together....

The court had given the custody of young William Porphyry into his
father's hands, but by a generous concession it was arranged that his
mother should have him to see her for an hour or so five times a year.
The Nolan legacy, however, coming upon the top of this, introduced
a peculiar complication that provided much work for tactful
intermediaries, and gave great and increasing scope for painful
delicacies on the part of Mr. Benham as the boy grew up.

"I see," said the father over his study pipe and with his glasses fixed
on remote distances above the head of the current sympathizer, "I see
more and more clearly that the tale of my sacrifices is not yet at an
end.... In many respects he is like her.... Quick. Too quick.... He must
choose. But I know his choice. Yes, yes,--I'm not blind. She's worked
upon him.... I have done what I could to bring out the manhood in him.
Perhaps it will bear the strain.... It will be a wrench, old man--God
knows."

He did his very best to make it a wrench.



2


Benham's mother, whom he saw quarterly and also on the first of May,
because it was her birthday, touched and coloured his imagination far
more than his father did. She was now Lady Marayne, and a prominent,
successful, and happy little lady. Her dereliction had been forgiven
quite soon, and whatever whisper of it remained was very completely
forgotten during the brief period of moral kindliness which followed
the accession of King Edward the Seventh. It no doubt contributed to
her social reinstatement that her former husband was entirely devoid
of social importance, while, on the other hand, Sir Godfrey Marayne's
temporary monopoly of the caecal operation which became so fashionable
in the last decade of Queen Victoria's reign as to be practically
epidemic, created a strong feeling in her favour.

She was blue-eyed and very delicately complexioned, quick-moving, witty,
given to little storms of clean enthusiasm; she loved handsome things,
brave things, successful things, and the respect and affection of all
the world. She did quite what she liked upon impulse, and nobody ever
thought ill of her.

Her family were the Mantons of Blent, quite good west-country people.
She had broken away from them before she was twenty to marry Benham,
whom she had idealized at a tennis party. He had talked of his work and
she had seen it in a flash, the noblest work in the world, him at
his daily divine toil and herself a Madonna surrounded by a troupe of
Blessed Boys--all of good family, some of quite the best. For a time she
had kept it up even more than he had, and then Nolan had distracted her
with a realization of the heroism that goes to the ends of the earth.
She became sick with desire for the forests of Brazil, and the Pacific,
and--a peak in Darien. Immediately the school was frowsty beyond
endurance, and for the first time she let herself perceive how
dreadfully a gentleman and a scholar can smell of pipes and tobacco.
Only one course lay open to a woman of spirit....

For a year she did indeed live like a woman of spirit, and it was at
Nolan's bedside that Marayne was first moved to admiration. She was
plucky. All men love a plucky woman.

Sir Godfrey Marayne smelt a good deal of antiseptic soap, but he talked
in a way that amused her, and he trusted as well as adored her. She did
what she liked with his money, her own money, and her son's trust money,
and she did very well. From the earliest Benham's visits were to a
gracious presence amidst wealthy surroundings. The transit from the
moral blamelessness of Seagate had an entirely misleading effect of
ascent.

Their earlier encounters became rather misty in his memory; they
occurred at various hotels in Seagate. Afterwards he would go, first
taken by a governess, and later going alone, to Charing Cross, where he
would be met, in earlier times by a maid and afterwards by a deferential
manservant who called him "Sir," and conveyed, sometimes in a hansom cab
and later in a smart brougham, by Trafalgar Square, Lower Regent Street,
Piccadilly, and streets of increasing wealth and sublimity to Sir
Godfrey's house in Desborough Street. Very naturally he fell into
thinking of these discreet and well-governed West End streets as a part
of his mother's atmosphere.

The house had a dignified portico, and always before he had got down
to the pavement the door opened agreeably and a second respectful
manservant stood ready. Then came the large hall, with its noiseless
carpets and great Chinese jars, its lacquered cabinets and the wide
staircase, and floating down the wide staircase, impatient to greet him,
light and shining as a flower petal, sweet and welcoming, radiating a
joyfulness as cool and clear as a dewy morning, came his mother. "WELL,
little man, my son," she would cry in her happy singing voice, "WELL?"

So he thought she must always be, but indeed these meetings meant very
much to her, she dressed for them and staged them, she perceived the
bright advantages of her rarity and she was quite determined to have
her son when the time came to possess him. She kissed him but not
oppressively, she caressed him cleverly; it was only on these rare
occasions that he was ever kissed or caressed, and she talked to his shy
boyishness until it felt a more spirited variety of manhood. "What have
you been doing?" she asked, "since I saw you last."

She never said he had grown, but she told him he looked tall; and though
the tea was a marvellous display it was never an obtrusive tea, it
wasn't poked at a fellow; a various plenty flowed well within reach of
one's arm, like an agreeable accompaniment to their conversation.

"What have you done? All sorts of brave things? Do you swim now? I can
swim. Oh! I can swim half a mile. Some day we will swim races together.
Why not? And you ride?...

"The horse bolted--and you stuck on? Did you squeak? I stick on, but I
HAVE to squeak. But you--of course, No! you mustn't. I'm just a little
woman. And I ride big horses...."

And for the end she had invented a characteristic little ceremony.

She would stand up in front of him and put her hands on his shoulders
and look into his face.

"Clean eyes?" she would say, "--still?"

Then she would take his ears in her little firm hands and kiss very
methodically his eyes and his forehead and his cheeks and at last his
lips. Her own eyes would suddenly brim bright with tears.

"GO," she would say.

That was the end.

It seemed to Benham as though he was being let down out of a sunlit
fairyland to this grey world again.



3


The contrast between Lady Marayne's pretty amenities and the good
woman at Seagate who urged herself almost hourly to forget that William
Porphyry was not her own son, was entirely unfair. The second Mrs.
Benham's conscientious spirit and a certain handsome ability about her
fitted her far more than her predecessor for the onerous duties of a
schoolmaster's wife, but whatever natural buoyancy she possessed was
outweighed by an irrepressible conviction derived from an episcopal
grandparent that the remarriage of divorced persons is sinful, and by a
secret but well-founded doubt whether her husband loved her with a truly
romantic passion. She might perhaps have borne either of these troubles
singly, but the two crushed her spirit.

Her temperament was not one that goes out to meet happiness. She had
reluctant affections and suspected rather than welcomed the facility
of other people's. Her susceptibility to disagreeable impressions was
however very ample, and life was fenced about with protections for her
"feelings." It filled young Benham with inexpressible indignations that
his sweet own mother, so gay, so brightly cheerful that even her tears
were stars, was never to be mentioned in his stepmother's presence, and
it was not until he had fully come to years of reflection that he began
to realize with what honesty, kindness and patience this naturally not
very happy lady had nursed, protected, mended for and generally mothered
him.



4


As Benham grew to look manly and bear himself with pride, his mother's
affection for him blossomed into a passion. She made him come down to
London from Cambridge as often as she could; she went about with him;
she made him squire her to theatres and take her out to dinners and
sup with her at the Carlton, and in the summer she had him with her at
Chexington Manor, the Hertfordshire house Sir Godfrey had given her.
And always when they parted she looked into his eyes to see if they were
still clean--whatever she meant by that--and she kissed his forehead and
cheeks and eyes and lips. She began to make schemes for his career, she
contrived introductions she judged would be useful to him later.

Everybody found the relationship charming. Some of the more
conscientious people, it is true, pretended to think that the Reverend
Harold Benham was a first husband and long since dead, but that was all.
As a matter of fact, in his increasingly futile way he wasn't, either at
Seagate or in the Educational Supplement of the TIMES. But even the
most conscientious of us are not obliged to go to Seagate or read the
Educational Supplement of the TIMES.

Lady Marayne's plans for her son's future varied very pleasantly. She
was an industrious reader of biographies, and more particularly of the
large fair biographies of the recently contemporary; they mentioned
people she knew, they recalled scenes, each sowed its imaginative crop
upon her mind, a crop that flourished and flowered until a newer growth
came to oust it. She saw her son a diplomat, a prancing pro-consul, an
empire builder, a trusted friend of the august, the bold leader of new
movements, the saviour of ancient institutions, the youngest, brightest,
modernest of prime ministers--or a tremendously popular poet. As a rule
she saw him unmarried--with a wonderful little mother at his elbow.
Sometimes in romantic flashes he was adored by German princesses
or eloped with Russian grand-duchesses! But such fancies were HORS
D'OEUVRE. The modern biography deals with the career. Every project was
bright, every project had GO--tremendous go. And they all demanded a
hero, debonnaire and balanced. And Benham, as she began to perceive,
wasn't balanced. Something of his father had crept into him, a touch
of moral stiffness. She knew the flavour of that so well. It was a
stumbling, an elaboration, a spoil-sport and weakness. She tried not to
admit to herself that even in the faintest degree it was there. But it
was there.

"Tell me all that you are doing NOW," she said to him one afternoon when
she had got him to herself during his first visit to Chexington Manor.
"How do you like Cambridge? Are you making friends? Have you joined that
thing--the Union, is it?--and delivered your maiden speech? If you're
for politics, Poff, that's your game. Have you begun it?"

She lay among splashes of sunshine on the red cushions in the punt,
a little curled-up figure of white, with her sweet pale animated face
warmed by the reflection of her red sunshade, and her eyes like little
friendly heavens. And he, lean, and unconsciously graceful, sat at her
feet and admired her beyond measure, and rejoiced that now at last
they were going to be ever so much together, and doubted if it would be
possible ever to love any other woman so much as he did her.

He tried to tell her of Cambridge and his friends and the undergraduate
life he was leading, but he found it difficult. All sorts of things that
seemed right and good at Trinity seemed out of drawing in the
peculiar atmosphere she created about her. All sorts of clumsiness and
youthfulness in himself and his associates he felt she wouldn't accept,
couldn't accept, that it would be wrong of her to accept. Before
they could come before her they must wear a bravery. He couldn't, for
instance, tell her how Billy Prothero, renouncing vanity and all social
pretension, had worn a straw hat into November and the last stages of
decay, and how it had been burnt by a special commission ceremonially in
the great court. He couldn't convey to her the long sessions of beer
and tobacco and high thinking that went on in Prothero's rooms into
the small hours. A certain Gothic greyness and flatness and muddiness
through which the Cambridge spirit struggles to its destiny, he
concealed from her. What remained to tell was--attenuated. He could
not romance. So she tried to fill in his jejune outlines. She tried to
inspire a son who seemed most unaccountably up to nothing.

"You must make good friends," she said. "Isn't young Lord Breeze at
your college? His mother the other day told me he was. And Sir Freddy
Quenton's boy. And there are both the young Baptons at Cambridge."

He knew one of the Baptons.

"Poff," she said suddenly, "has it ever occurred to you what you are
going to do afterwards. Do you know you are going to be quite well off?"

Benham looked up with a faint embarrassment. "My father said something.
He was rather vague. It wasn't his affair--that kind of thing."

"You will be quite well off," she repeated, without any complicating
particulars. "You will be so well off that it will be possible for you
to do anything almost that you like in the world. Nothing will tie you.
Nothing...."

"But--HOW well off?"

"You will have several thousands a year."

"Thousands?"

"Yes. Why not?"

"But--Mother, this is rather astounding.... Does this mean there are
estates somewhere, responsibilities?"

"It is just money. Investments."

"You know, I've imagined--. I've thought always I should have to DO
something."

"You MUST do something, Poff. But it needn't be for a living. The world
is yours without that. And so you see you've got to make plans. You've
got to know the sort of people who'll have things in their hands. You've
got to keep out of--holes and corners. You've got to think of Parliament
and abroad. There's the army, there's diplomacy. There's the Empire. You
can be a Cecil Rhodes if you like. You can be a Winston...."



5


Perhaps it was only the innate eagerness of Lady Marayne which made
her feel disappointed in her son's outlook upon life. He did not choose
among his glittering possibilities, he did not say what he was going to
be, proconsul, ambassador, statesman, for days. And he talked VAGUELY of
wanting to do something fine, but all in a fog. A boy of nearly nineteen
ought to have at least the beginnings of SAVOIR FAIRE.

Was he in the right set? Was he indeed in the right college? Trinity,
by his account, seemed a huge featureless place--and might he not
conceivably be LOST in it? In those big crowds one had to insist upon
oneself. Poff never insisted upon himself--except quite at the wrong
moment. And there was this Billy Prothero. BILLY! Like a goat or
something. People called William don't get their Christian name insisted
upon unless they are vulnerable somewhere. Any form of William stamps
a weakness, Willie, Willy, Will, Billy, Bill; it's a fearful handle for
one's friends. At any rate Poff had escaped that. But this Prothero!

"But who IS this Billy Prothero?" she asked one evening in the walled
garden.

"He was at Minchinghampton."

"But who IS he? Who is his father? Where does he come from?"

Benham sought in his mind for a space. "I don't know," he said at last.
Billy had always been rather reticent about his people. She demanded
descriptions. She demanded an account of Billy's furniture, Billy's
clothes, Billy's form of exercise. It dawned upon Benham that for some
inexplicable reason she was hostile to Billy. It was like the unmasking
of an ambuscade. He had talked a lot about Prothero's ideas and the
discussions of social reform and social service that went on in his
rooms, for Billy read at unknown times, and was open at all hours to any
argumentative caller. To Lady Marayne all ideas were obnoxious, a form
of fogging; all ideas, she held, were queer ideas. "And does he call
himself a Socialist?" she asked. "I THOUGHT he would."

"Poff," she cried suddenly, "you're not a SOCIALIST?"

"Such a vague term."

"But these friends of yours--they seem to be ALL Socialists. Red ties
and everything complete."

"They have ideas," he evaded. He tried to express it better. "They give
one something to take hold of."

She sat up stiffly on the garden-seat. She lifted her finger at him,
very seriously. "I hope," she said with all her heart, "that you will
have nothing to do with such ideas. Nothing. SOCIALISM!"

"They make a case."

"Pooh! Any one can make a case."

"But--"

"There's no sense in them. What is the good of talking about upsetting
everything? Just disorder. How can one do anything then? You mustn't.
You mustn't. No. It's nonsense, little Poff. It's absurd. And you may
spoil so much.... I HATE the way you talk of it.... As if it wasn't
all--absolutely--RUBBISH...."

She was earnest almost to the intonation of tears.

Why couldn't her son go straight for his ends, clear tangible ends,
as she had always done? This thinking about everything! She had never
thought about anything in all her life for more than half an hour--and
it had always turned out remarkably well.

Benham felt baffled. There was a pause. How on earth could he go on
telling her his ideas if this was how they were to be taken?

"I wish sometimes," his mother said abruptly, with an unusually sharp
note in her voice, "that you wouldn't look quite so like your father."

"But I'm NOT like my father!" said Benham puzzled.

"No," she insisted, and with an air of appealing to his soberer reason,
"so why should you go LOOKING like him? That CONCERNED expression...."

She jumped to her feet. "Poff," she said, "I want to go and see the
evening primroses pop. You and I are talking nonsense. THEY don't have
ideas anyhow. They just pop--as God meant them to do. What stupid things
we human beings are!"

Her philosophical moments were perhaps the most baffling of all.



6


Billy Prothero became the symbol in the mind of Lady Marayne for all
that disappointed her in Benham. He had to become the symbol, because
she could not think of complicated or abstract things, she had to make
things personal, and he was the only personality available. She fretted
over his existence for some days therefore (once she awakened and
thought about him in the night), and then suddenly she determined to
grasp her nettle. She decided to seize and obliterate this Prothero.
He must come to Chexington and be thoroughly and conclusively led on,
examined, ransacked, shown up, and disposed of for ever. At once. She
was not quite clear how she meant to do this, but she was quite resolved
that it had to be done. Anything is better than inaction.

There was a little difficulty about dates and engagements, but he came,
and through the season of expectation Benham, who was now for the first
time in contact with the feminine nature, was delighted at the apparent
change to cordiality. So that he talked of Billy to his mother much more
than he had ever done before.

Billy had been his particular friend at Minchinghampton, at least
during the closing two years of his school life. Billy had fallen into
friendship with Benham, as some of us fall in love, quite suddenly, when
he saw Benham get down from the fence and be sick after his encounter
with the bull. Already Billy was excited by admiration, but it was the
incongruity of the sickness conquered him. He went back to the school
with his hands more than usually in his pockets, and no eyes for
anything but this remarkable strung-up fellow-creature. He felt he had
never observed Benham before, and he was astonished that he had not done
so.

Billy Prothero was a sturdy sort of boy, generously wanting in good
looks. His hair was rough, and his complexion muddy, and he walked
about with his hands in his pockets, long flexible lips protruded in
a whistle, and a rather shapeless nose well up to show he didn't care.
Providence had sought to console him by giving him a keen eye for the
absurdity of other people. He had a suggestive tongue, and he professed
and practised cowardice to the scandal of all his acquaintances. He was
said never to wash behind his ears, but this report wronged him. There
had been a time when he did not do so, but his mother had won him to a
promise, and now that operation was often the sum of his simple hasty
toilet. His desire to associate himself with Benham was so strong
that it triumphed over a defensive reserve. It enabled him to detect
accessible moments, do inobtrusive friendly services, and above all
amuse his quarry. He not only amused Benham, he stimulated him. They
came to do quite a number of things together. In the language of
schoolboy stories they became "inseparables."

Prothero's first desire, so soon as they were on a footing that enabled
him to formulate desires, was to know exactly what Benham thought he was
up to in crossing a field with a bull in it instead of going round, and
by the time he began to understand that, he had conceived an affection
for him that was to last a lifetime.

"I wasn't going to be bullied by a beast," said Benham.

"Suppose it had been an elephant?" Prothero cried.... "A mad
elephant?... A pack of wolves?"

Benham was too honest not to see that he was entangled. "Well,
suppose in YOUR case it had been a wild cat?... A fierce mastiff?... A
mastiff?... A terrier?... A lap dog?"

"Yes, but my case is that there are limits."

Benham was impatient at the idea of limits. With a faintly malicious
pleasure Prothero lugged him back to that idea.

"We both admit there are limits," Prothero concluded. "But between the
absolutely impossible and the altogether possible there's the region
of risk. You think a man ought to take that risk--" He reflected. "I
think--no--I think NOT."

"If he feels afraid," cried Benham, seeing his one point. "If he feels
afraid. Then he ought to take it...."

After a digestive interval, Prothero asked, "WHY? Why should he?"

The discussion of that momentous question, that Why? which Benham
perhaps might never have dared ask himself, and which Prothero perhaps
might never have attempted to answer if it had not been for the clash of
their minds, was the chief topic of their conversation for many months.
From Why be brave? it spread readily enough to Why be honest? Why be
clean?--all the great whys of life.... Because one believes.... But why
believe it? Left to himself Benham would have felt the mere asking of
this question was a thing ignoble, not to be tolerated. It was, as it
were, treason to nobility. But Prothero put it one afternoon in a way
that permitted no high dismissal of their doubts. "You can't build your
honour on fudge, Benham. Like committing sacrilege--in order to buy a
cloth for the altar."

By that Benham was slipped from the recognized code and launched upon
speculations which became the magnificent research.

It was not only in complexion and stature and ways of thinking that
Billy and Benham contrasted. Benham inclined a little to eloquence, he
liked very clean hands, he had a dread of ridiculous outlines. Prothero
lapsed readily into ostentatious slovenliness, when his hands were dirty
he pitied them sooner than scrubbed them, he would have worn an overcoat
with one tail torn off rather than have gone cold. Moreover, Prothero
had an earthy liking for animals, he could stroke and tickle strange
cats until they wanted to leave father and mother and all earthly
possessions and follow after him, and he mortgaged a term's pocket money
and bought and kept a small terrier in the school house against all law
and tradition, under the baseless pretence that it was a stray animal
of unknown origin. Benham, on the other hand, was shy with small animals
and faintly hostile to big ones. Beasts he thought were just beasts.
And Prothero had a gift for caricature, while Benham's aptitude was for
music.

It was Prothero's eyes and pencil that first directed Benham to the
poor indolences and evasions and insincerities of the masters. It was
Prothero's wicked pictures that made him see the shrivelled absurdity
of the vulgar theology. But it was Benham who stood between Prothero
and that rather coarsely conceived epicureanism that seemed his logical
destiny. When quite early in their Cambridge days Prothero's
revolt against foppery reached a nadir of personal neglect, and two
philanthropists from the rooms below him, goaded beyond the normal
tolerance of Trinity, and assisted by two sportsmen from Trinity Hall,
burnt his misshapen straw hat (after partly filling it with gunpowder
and iron filings) and sought to duck him in the fountain in the court,
it was Benham, in a state between distress and madness, and armed with
a horn-handled cane of exceptional size, who intervened, turned the
business into a blend of wrangle and scuffle, introduced the degrading
topic of duelling into a simple wholesome rag of four against one,
carried him off under the cloud of horror created by this impropriety
and so saved him, still only slightly wetted, not only from this
indignity but from the experiment in rationalism that had provoked it.

Because Benham made it perfectly clear what he had thought and felt
about this hat.

Such was the illuminating young man whom Lady Marayne decided to invite
to Chexington, into the neighbourhood of herself, Sir Godfrey, and her
circle of friends.



7


He was quite anxious to satisfy the requirements of Benham's people and
to do his friend credit. He was still in the phase of being a penitent
pig, and he inquired carefully into the needs and duties of a summer
guest in a country house. He knew it was quite a considerable country
house, and that Sir Godfrey wasn't Benham's father, but like most
people, he was persuaded that Lady Marayne had divorced the parental
Benham. He arrived dressed very neatly in a brown suit that had only one
fault, it had not the remotest suggestion of having been made for him.
It fitted his body fairly well, it did annex his body with only a few
slight incompatibilities, but it repudiated his hands and face. He had
a conspicuously old Gladstone bag and a conspicuously new despatch case,
and he had forgotten black ties and dress socks and a hair brush. He
arrived in the late afternoon, was met by Benham, in tennis flannels,
looking smartened up and a little unfamiliar, and taken off in a
spirited dog-cart driven by a typical groom. He met his host and hostess
at dinner.

Sir Godfrey was a rationalist and a residuum. Very much of him, too much
perhaps, had gone into the acquirement and perfect performance of the
caecal operation; the man one met in the social world was what was
left over. It had the effect of being quiet, but in its unobtrusive way
knobby. He had a knobby brow, with an air about it of having recently
been intent, and his conversation was curiously spotted with little
knobby arrested anecdotes. If any one of any distinction was named, he
would reflect and say, "Of course,--ah, yes, I know him, I know him.
Yes, I did him a little service--in '96."

And something in his manner would suggest a satisfaction, or a
dissatisfaction with confidential mysteries.

He welcomed Billy Prothero in a colourless manner, and made conversation
about Cambridge. He had known one or two of the higher dons. One he had
done at Cambridge quite recently. "The inns are better than they are at
Oxford, which is not saying very much, but the place struck me as being
changed. The men seemed younger...."

The burden of the conversation fell upon Lady Marayne. She looked
extraordinarily like a flower to Billy, a little diamond buckle on a
black velvet band glittered between the two masses of butter-coloured
hair that flowed back from her forehead, her head was poised on the
prettiest neck conceivable, and her shapely little shoulders and her
shapely little arms came decidedly but pleasantly out of a softness and
sparkle of white and silver and old rose. She talked what sounded like
innocent commonplaces a little spiced by whim, though indeed each remark
had an exploratory quality, and her soft blue eyes rested ever and again
upon Billy's white tie. It seemed she did so by the merest inadvertency,
but it made the young man wish he had after all borrowed a black one
from Benham. But the manservant who had put his things out had put it
out, and he hadn't been quite sure. Also she noted all the little things
he did with fork and spoon and glass. She gave him an unusual sense of
being brightly, accurately and completely visible.

Chexington, it seemed to Billy, was done with a large and costly and
easy completeness. The table with its silver and flowers was much more
beautifully done than any table he had sat at before, and in the dimness
beyond the brightness there were two men to wait on the four of them.
The old grey butler was really wonderfully good....

"You shoot, Mr. Prothero?"

"You hunt, Mr. Prothero?"

"You know Scotland well, Mr. Prothero?"

These questions disturbed Prothero. He did not shoot, he did not hunt,
he did not go to Scotland for the grouse, he did not belong, and Lady
Marayne ought to have seen that he did not belong to the class that does
these things.

"You ride much, Mr. Prothero?"

Billy conceived a suspicion that these innocent inquiries were designed
to emphasize a contrast in his social quality. But he could not be sure.
One never could be sure with Lady Marayne. It might be just that she
did not understand the sort of man he was. And in that case ought he
to maintain the smooth social surface unbroken by pretending as far as
possible to be this kind of person, or ought he to make a sudden gap in
it by telling his realities. He evaded the shooting question anyhow. He
left it open for Lady Marayne and the venerable butler and Sir Godfrey
and every one to suppose he just happened to be the sort of gentleman
of leisure who doesn't shoot. He disavowed hunting, he made it appear he
travelled when he travelled in directions other than Scotland. But the
fourth question brought him to bay. He regarded his questioner with his
small rufous eye.

"I have never been across a horse in my life, Lady Marayne."

"Tut, tut," said Sir Godfrey. "Why!--it's the best of exercise.
Every man ought to ride. Good for the health. Keeps him fit. Prevents
lodgments. Most trouble due to lodgments."

"I've never had a chance of riding. And I think I'm afraid of horses."

"That's only an excuse," said Lady Marayne. "Everybody's afraid of
horses and nobody's really afraid of horses."

"But I'm not used to horses. You see--I live on my mother. And she can't
afford to keep a stable."

His hostess did not see his expression of discomfort. Her pretty eyes
were intent upon the peas with which she was being served.

"Does your mother live in the country?" she asked, and took her peas
with fastidious exactness.

Prothero coloured brightly. "She lives in London."

"All the year?"

"All the year."

"But isn't it dreadfully hot in town in the summer?"

Prothero had an uncomfortable sense of being very red in the face. This
kept him red. "We're suburban people," he said.

"But I thought--isn't there the seaside?"

"My mother has a business," said Prothero, redder than ever.

"O-oh!" said Lady Marayne. "What fun that must be for her?"

"It's a real business, and she has to live by it. Sometimes it's a
worry."

"But a business of her own!" She surveyed the confusion of his visage
with a sweet intelligence. "Is it an amusing sort of business, Mr.
Prothero?"

Prothero looked mulish. "My mother is a dressmaker," he said. "In
Brixton. She doesn't do particularly badly--or well. I live on my
scholarship. I have lived on scholarships since I was thirteen. And you
see, Lady Marayne, Brixton is a poor hunting country."

Lady Marayne felt she had unmasked Prothero almost indecently. Whatever
happened there must be no pause. There must be no sign of a hitch.

"But it's good at tennis," she said. "You DO play tennis, Mr. Prothero?"

"I--I gesticulate," said Prothero.

Lady Marayne, still in flight from that pause, went off at a tangent.

"Poff, my dear," she said, "I've had a diving-board put at the deep end
of the pond."

The remark hung unanswered for a moment. The transition had been too
quick for Benham's state of mind.

"Do you swim, Mr. Prothero?" the lady asked, though a moment before she
had determined that she would never ask him a question again. But this
time it was a lucky question.

"Prothero mopped up the lot of us at Minchinghampton with his diving and
swimming," Benham explained, and the tension was relaxed.

Lady Marayne spoke of her own swimming, and became daring and amusing at
her difficulties with local feeling when first she swam in the pond.
The high road ran along the far side of the pond--"And it didn't wear a
hedge or anything," said Lady Marayne. "That was what they didn't quite
like. Swimming in an undraped pond...."

Prothero had been examined enough. Now he must be entertained. She told
stories about the village people in her brightest manner. The third
story she regretted as soon as she was fairly launched upon it; it
was how she had interviewed the village dressmaker, when Sir Godfrey
insisted upon her supporting local industries. It was very amusing but
technical. The devil had put it into her head. She had to go through
with it. She infused an extreme innocence into her eyes and fixed them
on Prothero, although she felt a certain deepening pinkness in her
cheeks was betraying her, and she did not look at Benham until her
unhappy, but otherwise quite amusing anecdote, was dead and gone and
safely buried under another....

But people ought not to go about having dressmakers for mothers....

And coming into other people's houses and influencing their sons....



8


That night when everything was over Billy sat at the writing-table of
his sumptuous bedroom--the bed was gilt wood, the curtains of the three
great windows were tremendous, and there was a cheval glass that showed
the full length of him and seemed to look over his head for more,--and
meditated upon this visit of his. It was more than he had been prepared
for. It was going to be a great strain. The sleek young manservant in
an alpaca jacket, who said "Sir" whenever you looked at him, and who had
seized upon and unpacked Billy's most private Gladstone bag without even
asking if he might do so, and put away and displayed Billy's things in
a way that struck Billy as faintly ironical, was unexpected. And it was
unexpected that the brown suit, with its pockets stuffed with Billy's
personal and confidential sundries, had vanished. And apparently a
bath in a bathroom far down the corridor was prescribed for him in
the morning; he hadn't thought of a dressing-gown. And after one had
dressed, what did one do? Did one go down and wander about the house
looking for the breakfast-room or wait for a gong? Would Sir Godfrey
read Family Prayers? And afterwards did one go out or hang about to be
entertained? He knew now quite clearly that those wicked blue eyes would
mark his every slip. She did not like him. She did not like him, he
supposed, because he was common stuff. He didn't play up to her world
and her. He was a discord in this rich, cleverly elaborate household.
You could see it in the servants' attitudes. And he was committed to a
week of this.

Billy puffed out his cheeks to blow a sigh, and then decided to be angry
and say "Damn!"

This way of living which made him uncomfortable was clearly an
irrational and objectionable way of living. It was, in a cumbersome way,
luxurious. But the waste of life of it, the servants, the observances,
all concentrated on the mere detail of existence? There came a rap at
the door. Benham appeared, wearing an expensive-looking dressing-jacket
which Lady Marayne had bought for him. He asked if he might talk for
a bit and smoke. He sat down in a capacious chintz-covered easy chair
beside Prothero, lit a cigarette, and came to the point after only a
trivial hesitation.

"Prothero," he said, "you know what my father is."

"I thought he ran a preparatory school."

There was the profoundest resentment in Prothero's voice.

"And, all the same, I'm going to be a rich man."

"I don't understand," said Prothero, without any shadow of
congratulation.

Benham told Prothero as much as his mother had conveyed to him of the
resources of his wealth. Her version had been adapted to his tender
years and the delicacies of her position. The departed Nolan had become
an eccentric godfather. Benham's manner was apologetic, and he made
it clear that only recently had these facts come to him. He had never
suspected that he had had this eccentric godfather. It altered the
outlook tremendously. It was one of the reasons that made Benham glad to
have Prothero there, one wanted a man of one's own age, who understood
things a little, to try over one's new ideas. Prothero listened with an
unamiable expression.

"What would you do, Prothero, if you found yourself saddled with some
thousands a year?"

"Godfathers don't grow in Brixton," said Prothero concisely.

"Well, what am I to do, Prothero?"

"Does all THIS belong to you?"

"No, this is my mother's."

"Godfather too?"

"I've not thought.... I suppose so. Or her own."

Prothero meditated.

"THIS life," he said at last, "this large expensiveness--..."

He left his criticism unfinished.

"I agree. It suits my mother somehow. I can't understand her living in
any other way. But--for me...."

"What can one do with several thousands a year?"

Prothero's interest in this question presently swamped his petty
personal resentments. "I suppose," he said, "one might have rather a
lark with money like that. One would be free to go anywhere. To set all
sorts of things going.... It's clear you can't sell all you have and
give it to the poor. That is pauperization nowadays. You might run
a tremendously revolutionary paper. A real upsetting paper. How many
thousands is it?"

"I don't know. SOME."

Prothero's interest was growing as he faced the possibilities.

"I've dreamt of a paper," he said, "a paper that should tell the brute
truth about things."

"I don't know that I'm particularly built to be a journalist," Benham
objected.

"You're not," said Billy.... "You might go into Parliament as a
perfectly independent member.... Only you wouldn't get in...."

"I'm not a speaker," said Benham.

"Of course," said Billy, "if you don't decide on a game, you'll just go
on like this. You'll fall into a groove, you'll--you'll hunt. You'll go
to Scotland for the grouse."

For the moment Prothero had no further suggestions.

Benham waited for a second or so before he broached his own idea.

"Why, first of all, at any rate, Billy, shouldn't one use one's money
to make the best of oneself? To learn things that men without money and
leisure find it difficult to learn? By an accident, however unjust it
is, one is in the position of a leader and a privileged person. Why not
do one's best to give value as that?"

"Benham, that's the thin end of aristocracy!"

"Why not?"

"I hate aristocracy. For you it means doing what you like. While you are
energetic you will kick about and then you will come back to this."

"That's one's own look-out," said Benham, after reflection.

"No, it's bound to happen."

Benham retreated a little from the immediate question.

"Well, we can't suddenly at a blow change the world. If it isn't to be
plutocracy to-day it has to be aristocracy."

Prothero frowned over this, and then he made a sweeping proposition.

"YOU CANNOT HAVE ARISTOCRACY," he said, "BECAUSE, YOU SEE--ALL MEN ARE
RIDICULOUS. Democracy has to fight its way out from under plutocracy.
There is nothing else to be done."

"But a man in my position--?"

"It's a ridiculous position. You may try to escape being ridiculous. You
won't succeed."

It seemed to Benham for a moment as though Prothero had got to the
bottom of the question, and then he perceived that he had only got to
the bottom of himself. Benham was pacing the floor.

He turned at the open window, held out a long forefinger, and uttered
his countervailing faith.

"Even if he is ridiculous, Prothero, a man may still be an aristocrat. A
man may anyhow be as much of an aristocrat as he can be."

Prothero reflected. "No," he said, "it sounds all right, but it's wrong.
I hate all these advantages and differences and distinctions. A man's a
man. What you say sounds well, but it's the beginning of pretension, of
pride--"

He stopped short.

"Better, pride than dishonour," said Benham, "better the pretentious
life than the sordid life. What else is there?"

"A life isn't necessarily sordid because it isn't pretentious," said
Prothero, his voice betraying a defensive disposition.

"But a life with a large income MUST be sordid unless it makes some sort
of attempt to be fine...."



9


By transitions that were as natural as they were complicated and
untraceable Prothero found his visit to Chexington developing into a
tangle of discussions that all ultimately resolved themselves into an
antagonism of the democratic and the aristocratic idea. And his part
was, he found, to be the exponent of the democratic idea. The next day
he came down early, his talk with Benham still running through his head,
and after a turn or so in the garden he was attracted to the front door
by a sound of voices, and found Lady Marayne had been up still earlier
and was dismounting from a large effective black horse. This extorted an
unwilling admiration from him. She greeted him very pleasantly and made
a kind of introduction of her steed. There had been trouble at a gate,
he was a young horse and fidgeted at gates; the dispute was still bright
in her. Benham she declared was still in bed. "Wait till I have a mount
for him." She reappeared fitfully in the breakfast-room, and then he was
left to Benham until just before lunch. They read and afterwards, as the
summer day grew hot, they swam in the nude pond. She joined them in the
water, splashing about in a costume of some elaboration and being very
careful not to wet her hair. Then she came and sat with them on the
seat under the big cedar and talked with them in a wrap that was pretty
rather than prudish and entirely unmotherly. And she began a fresh
attack upon him by asking him if he wasn't a Socialist and whether he
didn't want to pull down Chexington and grow potatoes all over the park.

This struck Prothero as an inadequate statement of the Socialist project
and he made an unsuccessful attempt to get it amended.

The engagement thus opened was renewed with great energy at lunch.
Sir Godfrey had returned to London and the inmost aspect of his
fellow-creatures, but the party of three was supplemented by a vague
young lady from the village and an alert agent from the neighbouring
Tentington estate who had intentions about a cottage. Lady Marayne
insisted upon regarding Socialism as a proposal to reinaugurate the
first French Revolution, as an inversion of society so that it would be
bottom upward, as an attack upon rule, order, direction. "And what good
are all these proposals? If you had the poor dear king beheaded,
you'd only get a Napoleon. If you divided all the property up between
everybody, you'd have rich and poor again in a year."

Billy perceived no way of explaining away this version of his Socialism
that would not involve uncivil contradictions--and nobody ever
contradicted Lady Marayne.

"But, Lady Marayne, don't you think there is a lot of disorder and
injustice in the world?" he protested.

"There would be ever so much more if your Socialists had their way."

"But still, don't you think--..."

It is unnecessary even to recapitulate these universal controversies of
our time. The lunch-table and the dinner-table and the general talk of
the house drifted more and more definitely at its own level in the
same direction as the private talk of Prothero and Benham, towards
the antagonism of the privileged few and the many, of the trained
and traditioned against the natural and undisciplined, of aristocracy
against democracy. At the week-end Sir Godfrey returned to bring fresh
elements. He said that democracy was unscientific. "To deny aristocracy
is to deny the existence of the fittest. It is on the existence of the
fittest that progress depends."

"But do our social conditions exalt the fittest?" asked Prothero.

"That is another question," said Benham.

"Exactly," said Sir Godfrey. "That is another question. But speaking
with some special knowledge, I should say that on the whole the people
who are on the top of things OUGHT to be on the top of things. I agree
with Aristotle that there is such a thing as a natural inferior."

"So far as I can understand Mr. Prothero," said Lady Marayne, "he thinks
that all the inferiors are the superiors and all the superiors inferior.
It's quite simple...."

It made Prothero none the less indignant with this, that there
was indeed a grain of truth in it. He hated superiors, he felt for
inferiors.



10


At last came the hour of tipping. An embarrassed and miserable Prothero
went slinking about the house distributing unexpected gold.

It was stupid, it was damnable; he had had to borrow the money from his
mother....

Lady Marayne felt he had escaped her. The controversy that should have
split these two young men apart had given them a new interest in each
other. When afterwards she sounded her son, very delicately, to see
if indeed he was aware of the clumsiness, the social ignorance and
uneasiness, the complete unsuitability of his friend, she could get no
more from him than that exasperating phrase, "He has ideas!"

What are ideas? England may yet be ruined by ideas.

He ought never to have gone to Trinity, that monster packet of
everything. He ought to have gone to some little GOOD college, good all
through. She ought to have asked some one who KNEW.



11


One glowing afternoon in October, as these two young men came over
Magdalen Bridge after a long disputatious and rather tiring walk to
Drayton--they had been talking of Eugenics and the "family"--Benham was
almost knocked down by an American trotter driven by Lord Breeze. "Whup
there!" said Lord Breeze in a voice deliberately brutal, and Benham,
roused from that abstraction which is partly fatigue, had to jump aside
and stumbled against the parapet as the gaunt pacer went pounding by.

Lord Breeze grinned the sort of grin a man remembers. And passed.

"Damnation!" said Benham with a face that had become suddenly very
white.

Then presently. "Any fool can do that who cares to go to the trouble."

"That," said Prothero, taking up their unquenchable issue, "that is the
feeling of democracy."

"I walk because I choose to," said Benham.

The thing rankled.

"This equestrianism," he began, "is a matter of time and money--time
even more than money. I want to read. I want to deal with ideas....

"Any fool can drive...."

"Exactly," said Prothero.

"As for riding, it means no more than the elaborate study and
cultivation of your horse. You have to know him. All horses are
individuals. A made horse perhaps goes its round like an omnibus, but
for the rest...."

Prothero made a noise of sympathetic assent.

"In a country where equestrianism is assertion I suppose one must be
equestrian...."

That night some malignant spirit kept Benham awake, and great
American trotters with vast wide-striding feet and long yellow teeth,
uncontrollable, hard-mouthed American trotters, pounded over his angry
soul.

"Prothero," he said in hall next day, "we are going to drive to-morrow."

Next day, so soon as they had lunched, he led the way towards Maltby's,
in Crosshampton Lane. Something in his bearing put a question into
Prothero's mind. "Benham," he asked, "have you ever driven before?"

"NEVER," said Benham.

"Well?"

"I'm going to now."

Something between pleasure and alarm came into Prothero's eyes. He
quickened his pace so as to get alongside his friend and scrutinize his
pale determination. "Why are you doing this?" he asked.

"I want to do it."

"Benham, is it--EQUESTRIAN?"

Benham made no audible reply. They proceeded resolutely in silence.

An air of expectation prevailed in Maltby's yard. In the shafts of a
high, bleak-looking vehicle with vast side wheels, a throne-like vehicle
that impressed Billy Prothero as being a gig, a very large angular black
horse was being harnessed.

"This is mine," said Benham compactly.

"This is yours, sir," said an ostler.

"He looks--QUIET."

"You'll find him fresh enough, sir."

Benham made a complicated ascent to the driver's seat and was handed the
reins. "Come on," he said, and Prothero followed to a less exalted seat
at Benham's side. They seemed to be at a very great height indeed. The
horse was then led out into Crosshampton Lane, faced towards Trinity
Street and discharged. "Check," said Benham, and touched the steed with
his whip. They started quite well, and the ostlers went back into the
yard, visibly unanxious. It struck Prothero that perhaps driving was
less difficult than he had supposed.

They went along Crosshampton Lane, that high-walled gulley, with
dignity, with only a slight suggestion of the inaccuracy that was
presently to become apparent, until they met a little old bearded don
on a bicycle. Then some misunderstanding arose between Benham and the
horse, and the little bearded don was driven into the narrow pavement
and had to get off hastily. He made no comment, but his face became like
a gargoyle. "Sorry," said Benham, and gave his mind to the corner. There
was some difficulty about whether they were to turn to the right or the
left, but at last Benham, it seemed, carried his point, and they went
along the narrow street, past the grey splendours of King's, and rather
in the middle of the way.

Prothero considered the beast in front of him, and how proud and
disrespectful a horse in a dogcart can seem to those behind it!
Moreover, unaccustomed as he was to horses, he was struck by the strong
resemblance a bird's-eye view of a horse bears to a fiddle, a fiddle
with devil's ears.

"Of course," said Prothero, "this isn't a trotter."

"I couldn't get a trotter," said Benham.

"I thought I would try this sort of thing before I tried a trotter," he
added.

And then suddenly came disaster.

There was a butcher's cart on the right, and Benham, mistrusting the
intelligence of his steed, insisted upon an excessive amplitude of
clearance. He did not reckon with the hand-barrow on his left, piled
up with dirty plates from the lunch of Trinity Hall. It had been left
there; its custodian was away upon some mysterious errand. Heaven knows
why Trinity Hall exhibited the treasures of its crockery thus stained
and deified in the Cambridge streets. But it did--for Benham's and
Prothero's undoing. Prothero saw the great wheel over which he was
poised entangle itself with the little wheel of the barrow. "God!"
he whispered, and craned, fascinated. The little wheel was manifestly
intrigued beyond all self-control by the great wheel; it clung to it, it
went before it, heedless of the barrow, of which it was an inseparable
part. The barrow came about with an appearance of unwillingness, it
locked against the great wheel; it reared itself towards Prothero and
began, smash, smash, smash, to shed its higher plates. It was clear
that Benham was grappling with a crisis upon a basis of inadequate
experience. A number of people shouted haphazard things. Then, too late,
the barrow had persuaded the little wheel to give up its fancy for the
great wheel, and there was an enormous crash.

"Whoa!" cried Benham. "Whoa!" but also, unfortunately, he sawed hard at
the horse's mouth.

The animal, being in some perplexity, danced a little in the narrow
street, and then it had come about and it was backing, backing, on
the narrow pavement and towards the plate-glass window of a book and
newspaper shop. Benham tugged at its mouth much harder than ever.
Prothero saw the window bending under the pressure of the wheel. A sense
of the profound seriousness of life and of the folly of this expedition
came upon him. With extreme nimbleness he got down just as the window
burst. It went with an explosion like a pistol shot, and then a clatter
of falling glass. People sprang, it seemed, from nowhere, and jostled
about Prothero, so that he became a peripheral figure in the discussion.
He perceived that a man in a green apron was holding the horse, and that
various people were engaged in simultaneous conversation with Benham,
who with a pale serenity of face and an awful calm of manner, dealt with
each of them in turn.

"I'm sorry," he was saying. "Somebody ought to have been in charge of
the barrow. Here are my cards. I am ready to pay for any damage....

"The barrow ought not to have been there....

"Yes, I am going on. Of course I'm going on. Thank you."

He beckoned to the man who had held the horse and handed him
half-a-crown. He glanced at Prothero as one might glance at a stranger.
"Check!" he said. The horse went on gravely. Benham lifted out his whip.
He appeared to have clean forgotten Prothero. Perhaps presently he would
miss him. He went on past Trinity, past the ruddy brick of St. John's.
The curve of the street hid him from Prothero's eyes.

Prothero started in pursuit. He glimpsed the dog-cart turning into
Bridge Street. He had an impression that Benham used the whip at the
corner, and that the dog-cart went forward out of sight with a startled
jerk. Prothero quickened his pace.

But when he got to the fork between the Huntingdon Road and the
Cottenham Road, both roads were clear.

He spent some time in hesitation. Then he went along the Huntingdon Road
until he came upon a road-mender, and learnt that Benham had passed that
way. "Going pretty fast 'e was," said the road-mender, "and whipping 'is
'orse. Else you might 'a thought 'e was a boltin' with 'im." Prothero
decided that if Benham came back at all he would return by way of
Cottenham, and it was on the Cottenham Road that at last he encountered
his friend again.

Benham was coming along at that good pace which all experienced horses
when they are fairly turned back towards Cambridge display. And there
was something odd about Benham, as though he had a large circular
halo with a thick rim. This, it seemed, had replaced his hat. He was
certainly hatless. The warm light of the sinking sun shone upon the
horse and upon Benham's erect figure and upon his face, and gleams of
fire kept flashing from his head to this rim, like the gleam of drawn
swords seen from afar. As he drew nearer this halo detached itself from
him and became a wheel sticking up behind him. A large, clumsy-looking
bicycle was attached to the dog-cart behind. The expression of Benham's
golden face was still a stony expression; he regarded his friend with
hard eyes.

"You all right, Benham?" cried Prothero, advancing into the road.

His eye examined the horse. It looked all right, if anything it was a
trifle subdued; there was a little foam about its mouth, but not very
much.

"Whoa!" said Benham, and the horse stopped. "Are you coming up,
Prothero?"

Prothero clambered up beside him. "I was anxious," he said.

"There was no need to be."

"You've broken your whip."

"Yes. It broke.... GET up!"

They proceeded on their way to Cambridge.

"Something has happened to the wheel," said Prothero, trying to be at
his ease.

"Merely a splinter or so. And a spoke perhaps."

"And what is this behind?"

Benham made a half-turn of the head. "It's a motor-bicycle."

Prothero took in details.

"Some of it is missing."

"No, the front wheel is under the seat."

"Oh!"

"Did you find it?" Prothero asked, after an interval.

"You mean?"

"He ran into a motor-car--as I was passing. I was perhaps a little to
blame. He asked me to bring his machine to Cambridge. He went on in the
car.... It is all perfectly simple."

Prothero glanced at the splinters in the wheel with a renewed interest.

"Did your wheel get into it?" he asked. Benham affected not to hear. He
was evidently in no mood for story-telling.

"Why did you get down, Prothero?" he asked abruptly, with the note of
suppressed anger thickening his voice.

Prothero became vividly red. "I don't know," he said, after an interval.

"I DO," said Benham, and they went on in a rich and active silence to
Cambridge, and the bicycle repair shop in Bridge Street, and Trinity
College. At the gate of Trinity Benham stopped, and conveyed rather by
acts than words that Prothero was to descend. He got down meekly enough,
although he felt that the return to Maltby's yard might have many points
of interest. But the spirit had gone out of him.



12


For three days the two friends avoided each other, and then Prothero
went to Benham's room. Benham was smoking cigarettes--Lady Marayne, in
the first warmth of his filial devotion, had prohibited his pipe--and
reading Webb's INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY. "Hello!" he said coldly, scarcely
looking up, and continued to read that absorbing work.

"I keep on thinking how I jumped down from that damned dog-cart," said
Prothero, without any preface.

"It didn't matter in the least," said Benham distantly.

"Oh! ROT," said Prothero. "I behaved like a coward."

Benham shut his book.

"Benham," said Prothero. "You are right about aristocracy, and I am
wrong. I've been thinking about it night and day."

Benham betrayed no emotion. But his tone changed. "Billy," he said,
"there are cigarettes and whiskey in the corner. Don't make a fuss about
a trifle."

"No whiskey," said Billy, and lit a cigarette. "And it isn't a trifle."

He came to Benham's hearthrug. "That business," he said, "has changed
all my views. No--don't say something polite! I see that if one hasn't
the habit of pride one is bound to get off a dogcart when it seems
likely to smash. You have the habit of pride, and I haven't. So far as
the habit of pride goes, I come over to the theory of aristocracy."

Benham said nothing, but he put down Sidney and Beatrice Webb, and
reached out for and got and lit a cigarette.

"I give up 'Go as you please.' I give up the natural man. I admit
training. I perceive I am lax and flabby, unguarded, I funk too much, I
eat too much, and I drink too much. And, yet, what I have always liked
in you, Benham, is just this--that you don't."

"I do," said Benham.

"Do what?"

"Funk."

"Benham, I believe that naturally you funk as much as I do. You're more
a thing of nerves than I am, far more. But you keep yourself up to
the mark, and I have let myself get flabby. You're so right. You're
so utterly right. These last nights I've confessed it--aloud. I had
an inkling of it--after that rag. But now it's as clear as daylight.
I don't know if you mean to go on with me, after what's happened, but
anyhow I want you to know, whether you end our friendship or not--"

"Billy, don't be an old ass," said Benham.

Both young men paused for a moment. They made no demonstrations. But the
strain was at an end between them.

"I've thought it all out," Billy went on with a sudden buoyancy. "We
two are both of the same kind of men. Only you see, Benham, you have
a natural pride and I haven't. You have pride. But we are both
intellectuals. We both belong to what the Russians call the
Intelligentsia. We have ideas, we have imagination, that is our
strength. And that is our weakness. That makes us moral light-weights.
We are flimsy and uncertain people. All intellectuals are flimsy and
uncertain people. It's not only that they are critical and fastidious;
they are weak-handed. They look about them; their attention wanders.
Unless they have got a habit of controlling themselves and forcing
themselves and holding themselves together."

"The habit of pride."

"Yes. And then--then we are lords of the world."

"All this, Billy," said Benham, "I steadfastly believe."

"I've seen it all now," said Prothero. "Lord! how clearly I see it!
The intellectual is either a prince or he is a Greek slave in a Roman
household. He's got to hold his chin up or else he becomes--even as
these dons we see about us--a thing that talks appointments, a toady, a
port-wine bibber, a mass of detail, a conscious maker of neat sayings,
a growing belly under a dwindling brain. Their gladness is drink or
gratified vanity or gratified malice, their sorrow is indigestion
or--old maid's melancholy. They are the lords of the world who will not
take the sceptre.... And what I want to say to you, Benham, more than
anything else is, YOU go on--YOU make yourself equestrian. You drive
your horse against Breeze's, and go through the fire and swim in the
ice-cold water and climb the precipice and drink little and sleep hard.
And--I wish I could do so too."

"But why not?"

"Because I can't. Now I admit I've got shame in my heart and pride in
my head, and I'm strung up. I might do something--this afternoon. But it
won't last. YOU--you have pride in your bones. My pride will vanish at
a laugh. My honour will go at a laugh. I'm just exalted by a crisis.
That's all. I'm an animal of intelligence. Soul and pride are weak in
me. My mouth waters, my cheek brightens, at the sight of good things.
And I've got a lickerish tail, Benham. You don't know. You don't begin
to imagine. I'm secretive. But I quiver with hot and stirring desires.
And I'm indolent--dirty indolent. Benham, there are days when I splash
my bath about without getting into it. There are days when I turn back
from a walk because there's a cow in the field.... But, I spare you the
viler details.... And it's that makes me hate fine people and try so
earnestly to persuade myself that any man is as good as any man, if not
a trifle better. Because I know it isn't so...."

"Billy," said Benham, "you've the boldest mind that ever I met."

Prothero's face lit with satisfaction. Then his countenance fell again.
"I know I'm better there," he said, "and yet, see how I let in a whole
system of lies to cover my secret humiliations. There, at least, I will
cling to pride. I will at least THINK free and clean and high. But you
can climb higher than I can. You've got the grit to try and LIVE high.
There you are, Benham."

Benham stuck one leg over the arm of his chair. "Billy," he said, "come
and be--equestrian and stop this nonsense."

"No."

"Damn it--you DIVE!"

"You'd go in before me if a woman was drowning."

"Nonsense. I'm going to ride. Come and ride too. You've a cleverer way
with animals than I have. Why! that horse I was driving the other day
would have gone better alone. I didn't drive it. I just fussed it. I
interfered. If I ride for ever, I shall never have decent hands, I shall
always hang on my horse's mouth at a gallop, I shall never be sure at a
jump. But at any rate I shall get hard. Come and get hard too."

"You can," said Billy, "you can. But not I! Heavens, the TROUBLE of it!
The riding-school! The getting up early! No!--for me the Trumpington
Road on foot in the afternoon. Four miles an hour and panting. And my
fellowship and the combination-room port. And, besides, Benham, there's
the expense. I can't afford the equestrian order."

"It's not so great."

"Not so great! I don't mean the essential expense. But--the incidentals.
I don't know whether any one can realize how a poor man is hampered by
the dread of minor catastrophes. It isn't so much that he is afraid of
breaking his neck, Benham, as that he is afraid of breaking something he
will have to pay for. For instance--. Benham! how much did your little
expedition the other day--?"

He stopped short and regarded his friend with round eyes and raised
eyebrows.

A reluctant grin overspread Benham's face. He was beginning to see the
humour of the affair.

"The claim for the motor-bicycle isn't sent in yet. The repair of
the mudguards of the car is in dispute. Trinity Hall's crockery, the
plate-glass window, the whip-lash and wheel and so forth, the hire of
the horse and trap, sundry gratuities.... I doubt if the total will come
very much under fifty pounds. And I seem to have lost a hat somewhere."

Billy regarded his toes and cleared his throat.

"Depending as I do on a widowed mother in Brixton for all the
expenditure that isn't covered by my pot-hunting--"

"Of course," said Benham, "it wasn't a fair sample afternoon."

"Still--"

"There's footer," said Benham, "we might both play footer."

"Or boxing."

"And, anyhow, you must come with me when I drive again. I'm going to
start a trotter."

"If I miss another drive may I be--lost for ever," said Billy, with the
utmost sincerity. "Never more will I get down, Benham, wherever you may
take me. Short of muffing my fellowship I'm with you always.... Will it
be an American trotter?"

"It will be the rawest, gauntest, ungainliest brute that ever scared the
motor-bicycles on the Northampton Road. It will have the legs and stride
of an ostrich. It will throw its feet out like dealing cards. It will
lift its head and look the sun in the eye like a vulture. It will have
teeth like the English spinster in a French comic paper.... And we will
fly...."

"I shall enjoy it very much," said Prothero in a small voice after an
interval for reflection. "I wonder where we shall fly. It will do us
both a lot of good. And I shall insure my life for a small amount in
my mother's interest.... Benham, I think I will, after all, take a
whiskey.... Life is short...."

He did so and Benham strolled to the window and stood looking out upon
the great court.

"We might do something this afternoon," said Benham.

"Splendid idea," reflected Billy over his whiskey. "Living hard and
thinking hard. A sort of Intelligentsia that is BLOODED.... I shall, of
course, come as far as I can with you."



13


In one of the bureau drawers that White in this capacity of literary
executor was examining, there were two documents that carried back
right to these early days. They were both products of this long wide
undergraduate argumentation that had played so large a part in the
making of Benham. One recorded the phase of maximum opposition, and one
was the outcome of the concluding approach of the antagonists. They were
debating club essays. One had been read to a club in Pembroke, a club
called the ENQUIRERS, of which White also had been a member, and as he
turned it over he found the circumstances of its reading coming back to
his memory. He had been present, and Carnac's share in the discussion
with his shrill voice and stumpy gestures would alone have sufficed to
have made it a memorable occasion. The later one had been read to the
daughter club of the ENQUIRERS, the SOCIAL ENQUIRERS, in the year after
White had gone down, and it was new to him.

Both these papers were folded flat and neatly docketed; they were rather
yellow and a little dog-eared, and with the outer sheet pencilled over
with puzzling or illegible scribblings, Benham's memoranda for his
reply. White took the earlier essay in his hand. At the head of the
first page was written in large letters, "Go slowly, speak to the man
at the back." It brought up memories of his own experiences, of rows of
gaslit faces, and of a friendly helpful voice that said, "Speak up?"

Of course this was what happened to every intelligent contemporary, this
encounter with ideas, this restatement and ventilation of the old truths
and the old heresies. Only in this way does a man make a view his own,
only so does he incorporate it. These are our real turning points.
The significant, the essential moments in the life of any one worth
consideration are surely these moments when for the first time he faces
towards certain broad ideas and certain broad facts. Life nowadays
consists of adventures among generalizations. In class-rooms after the
lecture, in studies in the small hours, among books or during solitary
walks, the drama of the modern career begins. Suddenly a man sees
his line, his intention. Yet though we are all of us writing long
novels--White's world was the literary world, and that is how it looked
to him--which profess to set out the lives of men, this part of the
journey, this crucial passage among the Sphinxes, is still done--when it
is done at all--slightly, evasively. Why?

White fell back on his professionalism. "It does not make a book. It
makes a novel into a treatise, it turns it into a dissertation."

But even as White said this to himself he knew it was wrong, and it slid
out of his thoughts again. Was not this objection to the play of ideas
merely the expression of that conservative instinct which fights for
every old convention? The traditional novel is a love story and takes
ideas for granted, it professes a hero but presents a heroine. And to
begin with at least, novels were written for the reading of heroines.
Miss Lydia Languish sets no great store upon the contents of a man's
head. That is just the stuffing of the doll. Eyes and heart are her
game. And so there is never any more sphinx in the story than a lady may
impersonate. And as inevitably the heroine meets a man. In his own first
success, White reflected, the hero, before he had gone a dozen pages,
met a very pleasant young woman very pleasantly in a sunlit thicket;
the second opened at once with a bicycle accident that brought two young
people together so that they were never afterwards disentangled;
the third, failing to produce its heroine in thirty pages, had to be
rearranged. The next--

White returned from an unprofitable digression to the matter before him.



14


The first of Benham's early essays was written in an almost boyish hand,
it was youthfully amateurish in its nervous disposition to definitions
and distinctions, and in the elaborate linking of part to part. It was
called TRUE DEMOCRACY. Manifestly it was written before the incident of
the Trinity Hall plates, and most of it had been done after Prothero's
visit to Chexington. White could feel that now inaudible interlocutor.
And there were even traces of Sir Godfrey Marayne's assertion that
democracy was contrary to biology. From the outset it was clear that
whatever else it meant, True Democracy, following the analogy of True
Politeness, True Courage, True Honesty and True Marriage, did not mean
democracy at all. Benham was, in fact, taking Prothero's word, and
trying to impose upon it his own solidifying and crystallizing opinion
of life.

They were not as yet very large or well-formed crystals. The proposition
he struggled to develop was this, that True Democracy did not mean an
equal share in the government, it meant an equal opportunity to share in
the government. Men were by nature and in the most various ways unequal.
True Democracy aimed only at the removal of artificial inequalities....

It was on the truth of this statement, that men were by nature unequal,
that the debate had turned. Prothero was passionately against the idea
at that time. It was, he felt, separating himself from Benham more and
more. He spoke with a personal bitterness. And he found his chief ally
in a rigorous and voluble Frenchman named Carnac, an aggressive Roman
Catholic, who opened his speech by saying that the first aristocrat was
the devil, and shocked Prothero by claiming him as probably the only
other sound Christian in the room. Several biologists were present, and
one tall, fair youth with a wearisome forefinger tried to pin Carnac
with questions.

"But you must admit some men are taller than others?"

"Then the others are broader."

"Some are smaller altogether."

"Nimbler--it's notorious."

"Some of the smaller are less nimble than the others."

"Then they have better nightmares. How can you tell?"

The biologist was temporarily incapacitated, and the talk went on over
his prostrate attempts to rally and protest.

A second biologist seemed to Benham to come nearer the gist of the
dispute when he said that they were not discussing the importance of
men, but their relative inequalities. Nobody was denying the equal
importance of everybody. But there was a virtue of this man and a virtue
of that. Nobody could dispute the equal importance of every wheel in a
machine, of every atom in the universe. Prothero and Carnac were angry
because they thought the denial of absolute equality was a denial of
equal importance. That was not so. Every man mattered in his place. But
politically, or economically, or intellectually that might be a lowly
place....

At this point Carnac interrupted with a whooping and great violence, and
a volley of obscure French colloquialisms.

He was understood to convey that the speaker was a Jew, and did not in
the least mean what he was saying....


15


The second paper was an altogether maturer and more characteristic
production. It was no longer necessary to answer Prothero. Prothero had
been incorporated. And Benham had fairly got away with his great idea.
It was evident to White that this paper had been worked over on several
occasions since its first composition and that Benham had intended
to make it a part of his book. There were corrections in pencil and
corrections in a different shade of ink, and there was an unfinished
new peroration, that was clearly the latest addition of all. Yet
its substance had been there always. It gave the youth just grown
to manhood, but anyhow fully grown. It presented the far-dreaming
intellectualist shaped.

Benham had called it ARISTOCRACY. But he was far away by now from
political aristocracy.

This time he had not begun with definitions and generalizations,
but with a curiously subjective appeal. He had not pretended to be
theorizing at large any longer, he was manifestly thinking of his own
life and as manifestly he was thinking of life as a matter of difficulty
and unexpected thwartings.

"We see life," he wrote, "not only life in the world outside us, but
life in our own selves, as an immense choice of possibilities; indeed,
for us in particular who have come up here, who are not under any urgent
necessity to take this line or that, life is apparently pure choice. It
is quite easy to think we are all going to choose the pattern of life we
like best and work it out in our own way.... And, meanwhile, there is no
great hurry....

"I want to begin by saying that choice isn't so easy and so necessary as
it seems. We think we are going to choose presently, and in the end we
may never choose at all. Choice needs perhaps more energy than we think.
The great multitude of older people we can observe in the world outside
there, haven't chosen either in the matter of the world outside, where
they shall go, what they shall do, what part they shall play, or in
the matter of the world within, what they will be and what they are
determined they will never be. They are still in much the same state of
suspended choice as we seem to be in, but in the meanwhile THINGS HAPPEN
TO THEM. And things are happening to us, things will happen to us, while
we still suppose ourselves in the wings waiting to be consulted about
the casting of the piece....

"Nevertheless this immense appearance of choice which we get in the
undergraduate community here, is not altogether illusion; it is more
reality than illusion even if it has not the stable and complete reality
it appears to have. And it is more a reality for us than it was for our
fathers, and much more a reality now than it was a few centuries ago.
The world is more confused and multitudinous than ever it was, the
practicable world far wider, and ourselves far less under the pressure
of inflexible moulding forces and inevitable necessities than any
preceding generations. I want to put very clearly how I see the new
world, the present world, the world of novel choice to which our youth
and inexperience faces, and I want to define to you a certain selection
of choices which I am going to call aristocratic, and to which it is our
manifest duty and destiny as the elect and favoured sons of our race to
direct ourselves.

"It isn't any choice of Hercules I mean, any mere alternative whether
we will be, how shall I put it?--the bridegrooms of pleasure or the
bridegrooms of duty. It is infinitely vaster and more subtly moral than
that. There are a thousand good lives possible, of which we may have
one, lives which are soundly good, or a thousand bad lives, if you like,
lives which are thoroughly bad--that's the old and perpetual choice,
that has always been--but what is more evident to me and more remarkable
and disconcerting is that there are nowadays ten thousand muddled lives
lacking even so much moral definition, even so much consistency as is
necessary for us to call them either good or bad, there are planless
indeterminate lives, more and more of them, opening out as the possible
lives before us, a perfect wilderness between salvation and damnation,
a wilderness so vast and crowded that at last it seems as though the
way to either hell or heaven would be lost in its interminable futility.
Such planless indeterminate lives, plebeian lives, mere lives, fill the
world, and the spectacle of whole nations, our whole civilization, seems
to me to re-echo this planlessness, this indeterminate confusion of
purpose. Plain issues are harder and harder to find, it is as if they
had disappeared. Simple living is the countryman come to town. We are
deafened and jostled and perplexed. There are so many things afoot that
we get nothing....

"That is what is in my mind when I tell you that we have to gather
ourselves together much more than we think. We have to clench ourselves
upon a chosen end. We have to gather ourselves together out of the swill
of this brimming world.

"Or--we are lost...."

("Swill of this brimming world," said White. "Some of this sounds
uncommonly like Prothero." He mused for a moment and then resumed his
reading.)

"That is what I was getting at when, three years ago, I made an attack
upon Democracy to the mother society of this society, an attack that I
expressed ill and failed to drive home. That is what I have come down
now to do my best to make plainer. This age of confusion is Democracy;
it is all that Democracy can ever give us. Democracy, if it means
anything, means the rule of the planless man, the rule of the unkempt
mind. It means as a necessary consequence this vast boiling up of
collectively meaningless things.

"What is the quality of the common man, I mean of the man that is common
to all of us, the man who is the Standard for such men as Carnac,
the man who seems to be the ideal of the Catholic Democrat? He is the
creature of a few fundamental impulses. He begins in blind imitation of
the life about him. He lusts and takes a wife, he hungers and tills
a field or toils in some other way to earn a living, a mere aimless
living, he fears and so he does not wander, he is jealous and stays by
his wife and his job, is fiercely yet often stupidly and injuriously
defensive of his children and his possessions, and so until he wearies.
Then he dies and needs a cemetery. He needs a cemetery because he is so
afraid of dissolution that even when he has ceased to be, he still wants
a place and a grave to hold him together and prevent his returning to
the All that made him. Our chief impression of long ages of mankind
comes from its cemeteries. And this is the life of man, as the common
man conceives and lives it. Beyond that he does not go, he never
comprehends himself collectively at all, the state happens about him;
his passion for security, his gregarious self-defensiveness, makes him
accumulate upon himself until he congests in cities that have no
sense of citizenship and states that have no structure; the clumsy,
inconsecutive lying and chatter of his newspapers, his hoardings and
music-halls gives the measure of his congested intelligences, the
confusion of ugly, half empty churches and chapels and meeting-halls
gauge the intensity of his congested souls, the tricks and slow
blundering dishonesties of Diet and Congress and Parliament are his
statecraft and his wisdom....

"I do not care if this instant I am stricken dead for pride. I say here
now to you and to High Heaven that THIS LIFE IS NOT GOOD ENOUGH FOR ME.
I know there is a better life than this muddle about us, a better life
possible now. I know it. A better individual life and a better public
life. If I had no other assurances, if I were blind to the glorious
intimations of art, to the perpetually widening promise of science,
to the mysterious beckonings of beauty in form and colour and the
inaccessible mockery of the stars, I should still know this from the
insurgent spirit within me....

"Now this better life is what I mean when I talk of Aristocracy. This
idea of a life breaking away from the common life to something better,
is the consuming idea in my mind.

"Constantly, recurrently, struggling out of the life of the farm and
the shop, the inn and the market, the street and the crowd, is something
that is not of the common life. Its way of thinking is Science, its
dreaming is Art, its will is the purpose of mankind. It is not the
common thing. But also it is not an unnatural thing. It is not as common
as a rat, but it is no less natural than a panther.

"For it is as natural to be an explorer as it is to be a potato grower,
it is rarer but it is as natural; it is as natural to seek explanations
and arrange facts as it is to make love, or adorn a hut, or show
kindness to a child. It is a folly I will not even dispute about, that
man's only natural implement is the spade. Imagination, pride, exalted
desire are just as much Man, as are hunger and thirst and sexual
curiosities and the panic dread of unknown things....

"Now you see better what I mean about choice. Now you see what I am
driving at. We have to choose each one for himself and also each one for
the race, whether we will accept the muddle of the common life, whether
we ourselves will be muddled, weakly nothings, children of luck,
steering our artful courses for mean success and tawdry honours, or
whether we will be aristocrats, for that is what it amounts to, each
one in the measure of his personal quality an aristocrat, refusing to be
restrained by fear, refusing to be restrained by pain, resolved to
know and understand up to the hilt of his understanding, resolved to
sacrifice all the common stuff of his life to the perfection of his
peculiar gift, a purged man, a trained, selected, artificial man, not
simply free, but lordly free, filled and sustained by pride. Whether
you or I make that choice and whether you or I succeed in realizing
ourselves, though a great matter to ourselves, is, I admit, a small
matter to the world. But the great matter is this, that THE CHOICE IS
BEING MADE, that it will continue to be made, and that all around us, so
that it can never be arrested and darkened again, is the dawn of human
possibility...."

(White could also see his dead friend's face with its enthusiastic
paleness, its disordered hair and the glowing darknesses in the eyes.
On such occasions Benham always had an expression of ESCAPE. Temporary
escape. And thus would his hand have clutched the reading-desk; thus
would his long fingers have rustled these dry papers.)

"Man has reached a point when a new life opens before him....

"The old habitual life of man is breaking up all about us, and for the
new life our minds, our imaginations, our habits and customs are all
unprepared....

"It is only now, after some years of study and living, that I begin to
realize what this tremendous beginning we call Science means to mankind.
Every condition that once justified the rules and imperatives, the
manners and customs, the sentiments, the morality, the laws and
limitations which make up the common life, has been or is being
destroyed.... Two or three hundred years more and all that life will be
as much a thing past and done with as the life that was lived in the age
of unpolished stone....

"Man is leaving his ancestral shelters and going out upon the greatest
adventure that ever was in space or time, he is doing it now, he is
doing it in us as I stand here and read to you."




CHAPTER THE SECOND ~~ THE YOUNG MAN ABOUT TOWN



1


The oldest novel in the world at any rate, White reflected, was a story
with a hero and no love interest worth talking about. It was the story
of Tobias and how he came out from the shelters of his youth into this
magic and intricate world. Its heroine was incidental, part of the
spoil, a seven times relict....

White had not read the book of Tobit for many years, and what he was
really thinking of was not that ancient story at all, but Botticelli's
picture, that picture of the sunlit morning of life. When you say
"Tobias" that is what most intelligent people will recall. Perhaps you
will remember how gaily and confidently the young man strides along with
the armoured angel by his side. Absurdly enough, Benham and his dream of
high aristocracy reminded White of that....

"We have all been Tobias in our time," said White.

If White had been writing this chapter he would have in all probability
called it THE TOBIAS STAGE, forgetful that there was no Tobit behind
Benham and an entirely different Sara in front of him.



2


From Cambridge Benham came to London. For the first time he was to live
in London. Never before had he been in London for more than a few days
at a time. But now, guided by his mother's advice, he was to have a flat
in Finacue street, just round the corner from Desborough Street, a flat
very completely and delightfully furnished under her supervision. It had
an admirable study, in which she had arranged not only his books, but
a number of others in beautiful old leather bindings that it had
amused her extremely to buy; it had a splendid bureau and business-like
letter-filing cabinets, a neat little drawing-room and a dining-room,
well-placed abundant electric lights, and a man called Merkle whom
she had selected very carefully and who she felt would not only see to
Benham's comfort but keep him, if necessary, up to the mark.

This man Merkle seemed quite unaware that humanity "here and now"--even
as he was engaged in meticulously putting out Benham's clothes--was
"leaving its ancestral shelters and going out upon the greatest
adventure that ever was in space or time." If he had been told as much
by Benham he would probably have said, "Indeed, sir," and proceeded
accurately with his duties. And if Benham's voice had seemed to call for
any additional remark, he would probably have added, "It's 'igh time,
sir, something of the sort was done. Will you have the white wesket as
before, sir, or a fresh one this evening?... Unless it's a very special
occasion, sir.... Exactly, sir. THANK you, sir."

And when her son was properly installed in his apartments Lady Marayne
came round one morning with a large experienced-looking portfolio and
rendered an account of her stewardship of his estate that was already
some months overdue. It was all very confused and confusing, and there
were inexplicable incidents, a heavy overdraft at the bank for example,
but this was Sir Godfrey's fault, she explained. "He never would help
me with any of this business," she said. "I've had to add sometimes for
HOURS. But, of course, you are a man, and when you've looked through it
all, I know you'll understand."

He did look through it enough to see that it was undesirable that he
should understand too explicitly, and, anyhow, he was manifestly
very well off indeed, and the circumstances of the case, even as
he understood them, would have made any businesslike book-keeping
ungracious. The bankers submitted the corroborating account of
securities, and he found himself possessed of his unconditional six
thousand a year, with, as she put it, "the world at his feet." On the
whole it seemed more wonderful to him now than when he had first heard
of it. He kissed her and thanked her, and left the portfolio open for
Merkle's entirely honest and respectful but very exact inspection, and
walked back with her to Desborough Street, and all the while he was
craving to ask the one tremendous question he knew he would never ask,
which was just how exactly this beneficent Nolan came in....

Once or twice in the small hours, and on a number of other occasions,
this unspeakable riddle assumed a portentous predominance in his mind.
He was forced back upon his inner consciousness for its consideration.
He could discuss it with nobody else, because that would have been
discussing his mother.

Probably most young men who find themselves with riches at large in the
world have some such perplexity as this mixed in with the gift. Such men
as the Cecils perhaps not, because they are in the order of things, the
rich young Jews perhaps not, because acquisition is their principle,
but for most other intelligent inheritors there must be this twinge of
conscientious doubt. "Why particularly am I picked out for so tremendous
an advantage?" If the riddle is not Nolan, then it is rent, or it is the
social mischief of the business, or the particular speculative COUP that
established their fortune.

"PECUNIA NON OLET," Benham wrote, "and it is just as well. Or the
west-ends of the world would reek with deodorizers. Restitution is
inconceivable; how and to whom? And in the meanwhile here we are lifted
up by our advantage to a fantastic appearance of opportunity. Whether
the world looks to us or not to do tremendous things, it ought to look
to us. And above all we ought to look to ourselves. RICHESSE OBLIGE."



3


It is not to be supposed that Benham came to town only with a general
theory of aristocracy. He had made plans for a career. Indeed, he had
plans for several careers. None of them when brought into contrast with
the great spectacle of London retained all the attractiveness that had
saturated them at their inception.

They were all more or less political careers. Whatever a democratic man
may be, Prothero and he had decided that an aristocratic man is a public
man. He is made and protected in what he is by laws and the state and
his honour goes out to the state. The aristocrat has no right to be
a voluptuary or a mere artist or a respectable nonentity, or any such
purely personal things. Responsibility for the aim and ordering of the
world is demanded from him as imperatively as courage.

Benham's deliberate assumption of the equestrian role brought him
into contact with a new set of acquaintances, conscious of political
destinies. They were amiable, hard young men, almost affectedly
unaffected; they breakfasted before dawn to get in a day's hunting, and
they saw to it that Benham's manifest determination not to discredit
himself did not lead to his breaking his neck. Their bodies were
beautifully tempered, and their minds were as flabby as Prothero's body.
Among them were such men as Lord Breeze and Peter Westerton, and that
current set of Corinthians who supposed themselves to be resuscitating
the Young England movement and Tory Democracy. Poor movements which
indeed have never so much lived as suffered chronic resuscitation. These
were days when Tariff Reform was only an inglorious possibility for the
Tory Party, and Young England had yet to demonstrate its mental quality
in an anti-socialist campaign. Seen from the perspectives of Cambridge
and Chexington, the Tory party was still a credible basis for the
adventure of a young man with an aristocratic theory in his mind.

These were the days when the strain and extremity of a dangerous
colonial war were fresh in people's minds, when the quality of
the public consciousness was braced up by its recent response to
unanticipated demands. The conflict of stupidities that had caused
the war was overlaid and forgotten by a hundred thousand devotions,
by countless heroic deaths and sufferings, by a pacification largely
conceived and broadly handled. The nation had displayed a belated regard
for its honour and a sustained passion for great unities. It was still
possible for Benham to regard the empire as a splendid opportunity,
and London as the conceivable heart of the world. He could think of
Parliament as a career, and of a mingling of aristocratic socialism
based on universal service with a civilizing imperialism as a
purpose....

But his thoughts had gone wider and deeper than that....

Already when Benham came to London he had begun to dream of
possibilities that went beyond the accidental states and empires of
to-day. Prothero's mind, replete with historical detail, could find
nothing but absurdity in the alliances and dynasties and loyalties of
our time. "Patched up things, Benham, temporary, pretentious. All very
well for the undignified man, the democratic man, to take shelter under,
all very well for the humourist to grin and bear, all very well for the
crowd and the quack, but not for the aristocrat--No!--his mind cuts like
steel and burns like fire. Lousy sheds they are, plastered hoardings...
and such a damned nuisance too! For any one who wants to do honourable
things! With their wars and their diplomacies, their tariffs and
their encroachments; all their humbugging struggles, their bloody and
monstrous struggles, that finally work out to no end at all.... If you
are going for the handsome thing in life then the world has to be a
united world, Benham, as a matter of course. That was settled when
the railways and the telegraph came. Telephones, wireless telegraphy,
aeroplanes insist on it. We've got to mediatise all this stuff, all
these little crowns and boundaries and creeds, and so on, that stand
in the way. Just as Italy had to be united in spite of all the rotten
little dukes and princes and republics, just as Germany had to be united
in spite of its scores of kingdoms and duchies and liberties, so now
the world. Things as they are may be fun for lawyers and politicians
and court people and--douaniers; they may suit the loan-mongers and
the armaments shareholders, they may even be more comfortable for the
middle-aged, but what, except as an inconvenience, does that matter to
you or me?"

Prothero always pleased Benham when he swept away empires. There was
always a point when the rhetoric broke into gesture.

"We've got to sweep them away, Benham," he said, with a wide gesture of
his arm. "We've got to sweep them all away."

Prothero helped himself to some more whiskey, and spoke hastily,
because he was afraid some one else might begin. He was never safe from
interruption in his own room. The other young men present sucked at
their pipes and regarded him doubtfully. They were never quite certain
whether Prothero was a prophet or a fool. They could not understand a
mixed type, and he was so manifestly both.

"The only sane political work for an intelligent man is to get the
world-state ready. For that we have to prepare an aristocracy--"

"Your world-state will be aristocratic?" some one interpolated.

"Of course it will be aristocratic. How can uninformed men think all
round the globe? Democracy dies five miles from the parish pump. It will
be an aristocratic republic of all the capable men in the world...."

"Of course," he added, pipe in mouth, as he poured out his whiskey,
"it's a big undertaking. It's an affair of centuries...."

And then, as a further afterthought: "All the more reason for getting to
work at it...."

In his moods of inspiration Prothero would discourse through the tobacco
smoke until that great world-state seemed imminent--and Part Two in the
Tripos a thing relatively remote. He would talk until the dimly-lit room
about him became impalpable, and the young men squatting about it in
elaborately careless attitudes caught glimpses of cities that are still
to be, bridges in wild places, deserts tamed and oceans conquered,
mankind no longer wasted by bickerings, going forward to the conquest of
the stars....

An aristocratic world-state; this political dream had already taken
hold of Benham's imagination when he came to town. But it was a dream,
something that had never existed, something that indeed may never
materialize, and such dreams, though they are vivid enough in a study at
night, fade and vanish at the rustle of a daily newspaper or the
sound of a passing band. To come back again.... So it was with Benham.
Sometimes he was set clearly towards this world-state that Prothero
had talked into possibility. Sometimes he was simply abreast of the
patriotic and socially constructive British Imperialism of Breeze and
Westerton. And there were moods when the two things were confused in his
mind, and the glamour of world dominion rested wonderfully on the slack
and straggling British Empire of Edward the Seventh--and Mr. Rudyard
Kipling and Mr. Chamberlain. He did go on for a time honestly
entertaining both these projects in his mind, each at its different
level, the greater impalpable one and the lesser concrete one within it.
In some unimaginable way he could suppose that the one by some miracle
of ennoblement--and neglecting the Frenchman, the Russian, the German,
the American, the Indian, the Chinaman, and, indeed, the greater part of
mankind from the problem--might become the other....

All of which is recorded here, without excess of comment, as it
happened, and as, in a mood of astonished reminiscences, he came finally
to perceive it, and set it down for White's meditative perusal.



4


But to the enthusiasm of the young, dreams have something of the
substance of reality and realities, something of the magic of dreams.
The London to which Benham came from Cambridge and the disquisitions of
Prothero was not the London of a mature and disillusioned vision. It was
London seen magnified and distorted through the young man's crystalline
intentions. It had for him a quality of multitudinous, unquenchable
activity. Himself filled with an immense appetite for life, he was
unable to conceive of London as fatigued. He could not suspect these
statesmen he now began to meet and watch, of jaded wills and petty
spites, he imagined that all the important and influential persons in
this large world of affairs were as frank in their private lives and as
unembarrassed in their financial relationships as his untainted self.
And he had still to reckon with stupidity. He believed in the statecraft
of leader-writers and the sincerity of political programmes. And so
regarded, what an avenue to Empire was Whitehall! How momentous was the
sunrise in St. James's Park, and how significant the clustering knot of
listeners and speakers beneath the tall column that lifts our Nelson to
the windy sky!

For a time Benham was in love with the idea of London. He got maps of
London and books about London. He made plans to explore its various
regions. He tried to grasp it all, from the conscious picturesqueness of
its garden suburbs to the factories of Croydon, from the clerk-villadoms
of Ealing to the inky streams of Bow. In those days there were passenger
steamboats that would take one from the meadows of Hampton Court past
the whole spectacle of London out to the shipping at Greenwich and the
towed liners, the incessant tugs, the heaving portals of the sea....
His time was far too occupied for him to carry out a tithe of these
expeditions he had planned, but he had many walks that bristled with
impressions. Northward and southward, eastward and westward a dreaming
young man could wander into a wilderness of population, polite or
sombre, poor, rich, or middle-class, but all ceaselessly active, all
urgently pressing, as it seemed, to their part in the drama of the
coming years. He loved the late afternoon, when every artery is injected
and gorged with the multitudinous home-going of the daily workers, he
loved the time of lighting up, and the clustering excitements of the
late hours. And he went out southward and eastward into gaunt regions of
reeking toil. As yet he knew nothing of the realities of industrialism.
He saw only the beauty of the great chimneys that rose against the
sullen smoke-barred sunsets, and he felt only the romance of the lurid
shuddering flares that burst out from squat stacks of brickwork and lit
the emptiness of strange and slovenly streets....

And this London was only the foreground of the great scene upon which
he, as a prosperous, well-befriended young Englishman, was free to
play whatever part he could. This narrow turbid tidal river by which he
walked ran out under the bridges eastward beneath the grey-blue clouds
towards Germany, towards Russia, and towards Asia, which still seemed in
those days so largely the Englishman's Asia. And when you turned about
at Blackfriars Bridge this sense of the round world was so upon you
that you faced not merely Westminster, but the icy Atlantic and America,
which one could yet fancy was a land of Englishmen--Englishmen a little
estranged. At any rate they assimilated, they kept the tongue. The
shipping in the lower reaches below the Tower there carried the flags of
every country under the sky.... As he went along the riverside he met a
group of dusky students, Chinese or Japanese. Cambridge had abounded in
Indians; and beneath that tall clock tower at Westminster it seemed as
though the world might centre. The background of the Englishman's world
reached indeed to either pole, it went about the earth, his background
it was--for all that he was capable of doing. All this had awaited
him....

Is it any wonder if a young man with an excitable imagination came at
times to the pitch of audible threats? If the extreme indulgence of his
opportunity and his sense of ability and vigour lifted his vanity at
moments to the kingly pitch? If he ejaculated and made a gesture or so
as he went along the Embankment?



5


In the disquisition upon choice that opened Benham's paper on
ARISTOCRACY, he showed himself momentarily wiser than his day-dreams.
For in these day-dreams he did seem to himself to be choosing among
unlimited possibilities. Yet while he dreamt other influences were
directing his movements. There were for instance his mother, Lady
Marayne, who saw a very different London from what he did, and his
mother Dame Nature, who cannot see London at all. She was busy in his
blood as she is busy in the blood of most healthy young men; common
experience must fill the gaps for us; and patiently and thoroughly
she was preparing for the entrance of that heroine, whom not the most
self-centred of heroes can altogether avoid....

And then there was the power of every day. Benham imagined himself at
large on his liberating steed of property while indeed he was mounted
on the made horse of Civilization; while he was speculating whither he
should go, he was already starting out upon the round. One hesitates
upon the magnificent plan and devotion of one's lifetime and meanwhile
there is usage, there are engagements. Every morning came Merkle, the
embodiment of the established routine, the herald of all that the world
expected and required Benham to be and do. Usually he awakened Benham
with the opening of his door and the soft tinkle of the curtain rings as
he let in the morning light. He moved softly about the room, gathering
up and removing the crumpled hulls of yesterday; that done he reappeared
at the bedside with a cup of admirable tea and one thin slice of
bread-and-butter, reported on the day's weather, stood deferential for
instructions. "You will be going out for lunch, sir. Very good, sir.
White slips of course, sir. You will go down into the country in the
afternoon? Will that be the serge suit, sir, or the brown?"

These matters settled, the new aristocrat could yawn and stretch like
any aristocrat under the old dispensation, and then as the sound of
running water from the bathroom ceased, stick his toes out of bed.

The day was tremendously indicated. World-states and aristocracies of
steel and fire, things that were as real as coal-scuttles in Billy's
rooms away there at Cambridge, were now remoter than Sirius.

He was expected to shave, expected to bath, expected to go in to
the bright warmth and white linen and silver and china of his
breakfast-table. And there he found letters and invitations, loaded with
expectation. And beyond the coffee-pot, neatly folded, lay the TIMES,
and the DAILY NEWS and the TELEGRAPH all with an air of requiring his
attention. There had been more fighting in Thibet and Mr. Ritchie had
made a Free Trade speech at Croydon. The Japanese had torpedoed another
Russian ironclad and a British cruiser was ashore in the East Indies. A
man had been found murdered in an empty house in Hoxton and the King
had had a conversation with General Booth. Tadpole was in for North
Winchelsea, beating Taper by nine votes, and there had been a new cut
in the Atlantic passenger rates. He was expected to be interested and
excited by these things.

Presently the telephone bell would ring and he would hear the clear
little voice of his mother full of imperative expectations. He would be
round for lunch? Yes, he would be round to lunch. And the afternoon, had
he arranged to do anything with his afternoon? No!--put off Chexington
until tomorrow. There was this new pianist, it was really an EXPERIENCE,
and one might not get tickets again. And then tea at Panton's. It was
rather fun at Panton's.... Oh!--Weston Massinghay was coming to lunch.
He was a useful man to know. So CLEVER.... So long, my dear little Son,
till I see you....

So life puts out its Merkle threads, as the poacher puts his hair noose
about the pheasant's neck, and while we theorize takes hold of us....

It came presently home to Benham that he had been down from Cambridge
for ten months, and that he was still not a step forward with the
realization of the new aristocracy. His political career waited. He had
done a quantity of things, but their net effect was incoherence. He had
not been merely passive, but his efforts to break away into creative
realities had added to rather than diminished his accumulating sense of
futility.

The natural development of his position under the influence of Lady
Marayne had enormously enlarged the circle of his acquaintances. He had
taken part in all sorts of social occasions, and sat and listened to
a representative selection of political and literary and social
personages, he had been several times to the opera and to a great number
and variety of plays, he had been attentively inconspicuous in several
really good week-end parties. He had spent a golden October in North
Italy with his mother, and escaped from the glowing lassitude of
Venice for some days of climbing in the Eastern Alps. In January, in an
outbreak of enquiry, he had gone with Lionel Maxim to St. Petersburg and
had eaten zakuska, brightened his eyes with vodka, talked with a number
of charming people of the war that was then imminent, listened to
gipsy singers until dawn, careered in sledges about the most silent
and stately of capitals, and returned with Lionel, discoursing upon
autocracy and assassination, Japan, the Russian destiny, and the
government of Peter the Great. That excursion was the most after his
heart of all the dispersed employments of his first year. Through the
rest of the winter he kept himself very fit, and still further qualified
that nervous dislike for the horse that he had acquired from Prothero by
hunting once a week in Essex. He was incurably a bad horseman; he rode
without sympathy, he was unready and convulsive at hedges and ditches,
and he judged distances badly. His white face and rigid seat and a
certain joylessness of bearing in the saddle earned him the singular
nickname, which never reached his ears, of the "Galvanized Corpse."
He got through, however, at the cost of four quite trifling spills
and without damaging either of the horses he rode. And his physical
self-respect increased.

On his writing-desk appeared a few sheets of manuscript that increased
only very slowly. He was trying to express his Cambridge view of
aristocracy in terms of Finacue Street, West.

The artistic and intellectual movements of London had made their
various demands upon his time and energies. Art came to him with a
noble assumption of his interest and an intention that presently became
unpleasantly obvious to sell him pictures that he did not want to buy
and explain away pictures that he did. He bought one or two modern
achievements, and began to doubt if art and aristocracy had any
necessary connection. At first he had accepted the assumption that they
had. After all, he reflected, one lives rather for life and things than
for pictures of life and things or pictures arising out of life and
things. This Art had an air of saying something, but when one came to
grips with it what had it to say? Unless it was Yah! The drama, and more
particularly the intellectual drama, challenged his attention. In the
hands of Shaw, Barker, Masefield, Galsworthy, and Hankin, it, too, had
an air of saying something, but he found it extremely difficult to join
on to his own demands upon life anything whatever that the intellectual
drama had the air of having said. He would sit forward in the front row
of the dress-circle with his cheek on his hand and his brow slightly
knit. His intentness amused observant people. The drama that did not
profess to be intellectual he went to with Lady Marayne, and usually
on first nights. Lady Marayne loved a big first night at St. James's
Theatre or His Majesty's. Afterwards, perhaps, Sir Godfrey would join
them at a supper party, and all sorts of clever and amusing people would
be there saying keen intimate things about each other. He met Yeats, who
told amusing stories about George Moore, and afterwards he met George
Moore, who told amusing stories about Yeats, and it was all, he felt,
great fun for the people who were in it. But he was not in it, and he
had no very keen desire to be in it. It wasn't his stuff. He had,
though they were nowadays rather at the back of his mind, quite other
intentions. In the meanwhile all these things took up his time and
distracted his attention.

There was, as yet, no practicable aviation to beguile a young man of
spirit, but there were times when Benham found himself wondering whether
there might not be something rather creditable in the possession and
control of a motor-car of exceptional power. Only one might smash people
up. Should an aristocrat be deterred by the fear of smashing people up?
If it is a selfish fear of smashing people up, if it is nerves rather
than pity? At any rate it did not come to the car.



6


Among other things that delayed Benham very greatly in the development
of his aristocratic experiments was the advice that was coming to him
from every quarter. It came in extraordinary variety and volume, but
always it had one unvarying feature. It ignored and tacitly contradicted
his private intentions.

We are all of us disposed to be propagandists of our way of living, and
the spectacle of a wealthy young man quite at large is enough to excite
the most temperate of us without distinction of age or sex. "If I were
you," came to be a familiar phrase in his ear. This was particularly the
case with political people; and they did it not only from the natural
infirmity of humanity, but because, when they seemed reluctant or
satisfied with him as he was, Lady Marayne egged them on.

There was a general assumption that he was to go into Parliament, and
most of his counsellors assumed further that on the whole his natural
sympathies would take him into the Conservative party. But it was
pointed out to him that just at present the Liberal party was the party
of a young man's opportunity; sooner or later the swing of the pendulum
which would weed the Conservatives and proliferate Liberals was bound to
come, there was always more demand and opportunity for candidates on
the Liberal side, the Tariff Reformers were straining their ministerial
majority to the splitting point, and most of the old Liberal leaders had
died off during the years of exile. The party was no longer
dominated; it would tolerate ideas. A young man who took a distinctive
line--provided it was not from the party point of view a vexatious or
impossible line--might go very rapidly far and high. On the other hand,
it was urged upon him that the Tariff Reform adventure called also
for youth and energy. But there, perhaps, there was less scope for
the distinctive line--and already they had Garvin. Quite a number
of Benham's friends pointed out to him the value of working out some
special aspect of our national political interests. A very useful
speciality was the Balkans. Mr. Pope, the well-known publicist, whose
very sound and considerable reputation was based on the East Purblow
Labour Experiment, met Benham at lunch and proposed to go with him in
a spirit of instructive association to the Balkans, rub up their Greek
together, and settle the problem of Albania. He wanted, he said, a
foreign speciality to balance his East Purblow interest. But Lady Beach
Mandarin warned Benham against the Balkans; the Balkans were getting
to be too handy for Easter and summer holidays, and now that there were
several good hotels in Servia and Montenegro and Sofia, they were
being overdone. Everybody went to the Balkans and came back with a pet
nationality. She loathed pet nationalities. She believed most people
loathed them nowadays. It was stale: it was GLADSTONIAN. She was all for
specialization in social reform. She thought Benham ought to join the
Fabian Society and consult the Webbs. Quite a number of able young men
had been placed with the assistance of the Webbs. They were, she said,
"a perfect fount...." Two other people, independently of each other,
pointed out to Benham the helpfulness of a few articles in the
half-crown monthlies....

"What are the assumptions underlying all this?" Benham asked himself in
a phase of lucidity.

And after reflection. "Good God! The assumptions! What do they think
will satisfy me?..."

Everybody, however, did not point to Parliament. Several people seemed
to think Travel, with a large T, was indicated. One distant cousin of
Sir Godfrey's, the kind of man of the world who has long moustaches, was
for big game shooting. "Get right out of all this while you are young,"
he said. "There's nothing to compare with stopping a charging lion
at twenty yards. I've done it, my boy. You can come back for all this
pow-wow afterwards." He gave the diplomatic service as a second choice.
"There you are," he said, "first-rate social position, nothing to do,
theatres, operas, pretty women, colour, life. The best of good times.
Barring Washington, that is. But Washington, they say, isn't as bad as
it used to be--since Teddy has Europeanized 'em...."

Even the Reverend Harold Benham took a subdued but thoughtful share in
his son's admonition. He came up to the flat--due precautions were taken
to prevent a painful encounter--he lunched at his son's new club, and he
was visibly oppressed by the contrast between the young man's youthful
fortunes and his own. As visibly he bore up bravely. "There are few men,
Poff, who would not envy you your opportunities," he said. "You have the
Feast of Life spread out at your feet.... I hope you have had yourself
put up for the Athenaeum. They say it takes years. When I was a young
man--and ambitious--I thought that some day I might belong to the
Athenaeum.... One has to learn...."



7


And with an effect of detachment, just as though it didn't belong to
the rest of him at all, there was beginning a sort of backstairs and
underside to Benham's life. There is no need to discuss how inevitable
that may or may not be in the case of a young man of spirit and
large means, nor to embark upon the discussion of the temptations and
opportunities of large cities. Several ladies, of various positions and
qualities, had reflected upon his manifest need of education. There was
in particular Mrs. Skelmersdale, a very pretty little widow with hazel
eyes, black hair, a mobile mouth, and a pathetic history, who talked of
old music to him and took him to a Dolmetsch concert in Clifford's Inn,
and expanded that common interest to a general participation in
his indefinite outlook. She advised him about his probable
politics--everybody did that--but when he broke through his usual
reserve and suggested views of his own, she was extraordinarily
sympathetic. She was so sympathetic and in such a caressing way that
she created a temporary belief in her understanding, and it was quite
imperceptibly that he was drawn into the discussion of modern ethical
problems. She herself was a rather stimulating instance of modern
ethical problems. She told him something of her own story, and then
their common topics narrowed down very abruptly. He found he could help
her in several ways. There is, unhappily, a disposition on the part of
many people, who ought to know better, to regard a role played by Joseph
during his earlier days in Egypt as a ridiculous one. This point of view
became very inopportunely dominant in Benham's mind when he was lunching
TETE A TETE with Mrs. Skelmersdale at her flat....

The ensuing intimacy was of an entirely concealed and respectable
nature, but a certain increased preoccupation in his manner set Lady
Marayne thinking. He had as a matter of fact been taken by surprise.

Still he perceived that it is no excuse for a man that he has been taken
by surprise. Surprises in one's own conduct ought not to happen. When
they do happen then an aristocrat ought to stick to what he had done. He
was now in a subtle and complicated relationship to Mrs. Skelmersdale,
a relationship in which her pride had become suddenly a matter of
tremendous importance. Once he had launched himself upon this affair, it
was clear to him that he owed it to her never to humiliate her. And to
go back upon himself now would be a tremendous humiliation for her. You
see, he had helped her a little financially. And she looked to him, she
wanted him....

She wasn't, he knew, altogether respectable. Indeed, poor dear, her
ethical problems, already a little worn, made her seem at times anything
but respectable. He had met her first one evening at Jimmy Gluckstein's
when he was forming his opinion of Art. Her manifest want of interest
in pictures had attracted him. And that had led to music. And to the
mention of a Clementi piano, that short, gentle, sad, old, little sort
of piano people will insist upon calling a spinet, in her flat.

And so to this....

It was very wonderful and delicious, this first indulgence of sense.

It was shabby and underhand.

The great god Pan is a glorious god. (And so was Swinburne.) And what
can compare with the warmth of blood and the sheen of sunlit limbs?

But Priapus....

She was the most subtle, delightful and tender of created beings.

She had amazing streaks of vulgarity.

And some astonishing friends.

Once she had seemed to lead the talk deliberately to money matters.

She loved him and desired him. There was no doubt of it.

There was a curious effect about her as though when she went round the
corner she would become somebody else. And a curious recurrent feeling
that round the corner there was somebody else.

He had an extraordinary feeling that his mother knew about this
business. This feeling came from nothing in her words or acts, but from
some indefinable change in her eyes and bearing towards him. But how
could she know?

It was unlikely that she and Mrs. Skelmersdale would ever meet, and it
seemed to him that it would be a particularly offensive incident for
them to meet.

There were times now when life took on a grey and boring quality such
as it had never had before he met Mrs. Skelmersdale, and the only
remedy was to go to her. She could restore his nervous tranquillity, his
feeling of solidity and reality, his pride in himself. For a time, that
is.

Nevertheless his mind was as a whole pervaded by the feeling that he
ought not to have been taken by surprise.

And he had the clearest conviction in his mind that if now he could be
put back again to the day before that lunch....

No! he should not have gone there to lunch.

He had gone there to see her Clementi piano.

Had he or had he not thought beforehand of any other possibility?

On a point so vital his memory was curiously unsure.



8


The worry and disorganization of Benham's life and thoughts increased as
the spring advanced. His need in some way to pull things together became
overpowering. He began to think of Billy Prothero, more and more did it
seem desirable to have a big talk with Billy and place everything that
had got disturbed. Benham thought of going to Cambridge for a week of
exhaustive evenings. Small engagements delayed that expedition....

Then came a day in April when all the world seemed wrong to Benham. He
was irritable; his will was unstable; whatever presented itself to be
done presented itself as undesirable; he could settle to nothing. He had
been keeping away from Mrs. Skelmersdale and in the morning there came a
little note from her designed to correct this abstention. She understood
the art of the attractive note. But he would not decide to go to her. He
left the note unanswered.

Then came his mother at the telephone and it became instantly certain to
Benham that he could not play the dutiful son that evening. He answered
her that he could not come to dinner. He had engaged himself. "Where?"

"With some men."

There was a pause and then his mother's voice came, flattened by
disappointment. "Very well then, little Poff. Perhaps I shall see you
to-morrow."

He replaced the receiver and fretted back into his study, where the
notes on aristocracy lay upon his desk, the notes he had been pretending
to work over all the morning.

"Damned liar!" he said, and then, "Dirty liar!" He decided to lunch at
the club, and in the afternoon he was moved to telephone an appointment
with his siren. And having done that he was bound to keep it.

About one o'clock in the morning he found himself walking back to
Finacue Street. He was no longer a fretful conflict of nerves, but if
anything he was less happy than he had been before. It seemed to him
that London was a desolate and inglorious growth.

London ten years ago was much less nocturnal than it is now. And not so
brightly lit. Down the long streets came no traffic but an occasional
hansom. Here and there a cat halted or bolted in the road. Near
Piccadilly a policeman hovered artfully in a doorway, and then came a
few belated prostitutes waylaying the passers-by, and a few youths and
men, wearily lust driven.

As he turned up New Bond Street he saw a figure that struck him
as familiar. Surely!--it was Billy Prothero! Or at any rate it was
astonishingly like Billy Prothero. He glanced again and the likeness
was more doubtful. The man had his back to Benham, he was halting and
looking back at a woman.

By some queer flash of intuition it came to Benham that even if this
was not Prothero, still Prothero did these things. It might very well
be Prothero even, though, as he now saw, it wasn't. Everybody did these
things....

It came into Benham's head for the first time that life could be
tiresome.

This Bond Street was a tiresome place; with its shops all shut and
muffled, its shops where in the crowded daytime one bought costly
furniture, costly clothes, costly scent, sweets, bibelots, pictures,
jewellery, presents of all sorts, clothes for Mrs. Skelmersdale, sweets
for Mrs. Skelmersdale, presents for Mrs. Skelmersdale, all the elaborate
fittings and equipage of--THAT!

"Good night, dear," a woman drifted by him.

"I've SAID good night," he cried, "I've SAID good night," and so went
on to his flat. The unquenchable demand, the wearisome insatiability
of sex! When everything else has gone, then it shows itself bare in the
bleak small hours. And at first it had seemed so light a matter! He went
to bed, feeling dog-tired, he went to bed at an hour and with a finished
completeness that Merkle would have regarded as entirely becoming in a
young gentleman of his position.

And a little past three o'clock in the morning he awoke to a mood of
indescribable desolation. He awoke with a start to an agony of remorse
and self-reproach.



9


For a time he lay quite still staring at the darkness, then he groaned
and turned over. Then, suddenly, like one who fancies he hears a strange
noise, he sat up in bed and listened. "Oh, God!" he said at last.

And then: "Oh! The DIRTINESS of life! The dirty muddle of life!

"What are we doing with life? What are we all doing with life?

"It isn't only this poor Milly business. This only brings it to a head.
Of course she wants money...."

His thoughts came on again.

"But the ugliness!

"Why did I begin it?"

He put his hands upon his knees and pressed his eyes against the backs
of his hands and so remained very still, a blankness beneath his own
question.

After a long interval his mind moved again.

And now it was as if he looked upon his whole existence, he seemed to
see in a large, clear, cold comprehensiveness, all the wasted days, the
fruitless activities, the futilities, the perpetual postponements
that had followed his coming to London. He saw it all as a joyless
indulgence, as a confusion of playthings and undisciplined desires, as
a succession of days that began amiably and weakly, that became steadily
more crowded with ignoble and trivial occupations, that had sunken now
to indignity and uncleanness. He was overwhelmed by that persuasion,
which only freshly soiled youth can feel in its extreme intensity, that
life was slipping away from him, that the sands were running out, that
in a little while his existence would be irretrievably lost.

By some trick of the imagination he saw life as an interminable Bond
Street, lit up by night lamps, desolate, full of rubbish, full of the
very best rubbish, trappings, temptations, and down it all he drove, as
the damned drive, wearily, inexplicably.

WHAT ARE WE UP TO WITH LIFE! WHAT ARE WE MAKING OF LIFE!

But hadn't he intended to make something tremendous of life? Hadn't he
come to London trailing a glory?...

He began to remember it as a project. It was the project of a great
World-State sustained by an aristocracy of noble men. He was to have
been one of those men, too fine and far-reaching for the dull manoeuvers
of such politics as rule the world to-day. The project seemed still
large, still whitely noble, but now it was unlit and dead, and in the
foreground he sat in the flat of Mrs. Skelmersdale, feeling dissipated
and fumbling with his white tie. And she was looking tired. "God!" he
said. "How did I get there?"

And then suddenly he reached out his arms in the darkness and prayed
aloud to the silences.

"Oh, God! Give me back my visions! Give me back my visions!"

He could have imagined he heard a voice calling upon him to come out
into life, to escape from the body of this death. But it was his own
voice that called to him....



10


The need for action became so urgent in him, that he got right out of
his bed and sat on the edge of it. Something had to be done at once. He
did not know what it was but he felt that there could be no more sleep,
no more rest, no dressing nor eating nor going forth before he came to
decisions. Christian before his pilgrimage began was not more certain of
this need of flight from the life of routine and vanities.

What was to be done?

In the first place he must get away and think about it all, think
himself clear of all these--these immediacies, these associations and
relations and holds and habits. He must get back to his vision, get back
to the God in his vision. And to do that he must go alone.

He was clear he must go alone. It was useless to go to Prothero, one
weak man going to a weaker. Prothero he was convinced could help him not
at all, and the strange thing is that this conviction had come to him
and had established itself incontestably because of that figure at the
street corner, which had for just one moment resembled Prothero. By some
fantastic intuition Benham knew that Prothero would not only participate
but excuse. And he knew that he himself could endure no excuses. He
must cut clear of any possibility of qualification. This thing had to be
stopped. He must get away, he must get free, he must get clean. In the
extravagance of his reaction Benham felt that he could endure nothing
but solitary places and to sleep under the open sky.

He wanted to get right away from London and everybody and lie in the
quiet darkness and stare up at the stars.

His plans grew so definite that presently he was in his dressing-gown
and turning out the maps in the lower drawer of his study bureau. He
would go down into Surrey with a knapsack, wander along the North Downs
until the Guildford gap was reached, strike across the Weald country to
the South Downs and then beat eastward. The very thought of it brought
a coolness to his mind. He knew that over those southern hills one could
be as lonely as in the wilderness and as free to talk to God. And there
he would settle something. He would make a plan for his life and end
this torment.

When Merkle came in to him in the morning he was fast asleep.

The familiar curtain rings awakened Benham. He turned his head over,
stared for a moment and then remembered.

"Merkle," he said, "I am going for a walking tour. I am going off this
morning. Haven't I a rucksack?"

"You 'ave a sort of canvas bag, sir, with pockets to it," said Merkle.
"Will you be needing the VERY 'eavy boots with 'obnails--Swiss, I fancy,
sir--or your ordinary shooting boots?"

"And when may I expect you back, sir?" asked Merkle as the moment for
departure drew near.

"God knows," said Benham, "I don't."

"Then will there be any address for forwarding letters, sir?"

Benham hadn't thought of that. For a moment he regarded Merkle's
scrupulous respect with a transient perplexity.

"I'll let you know, Merkle," he said. "I'll let you know."

For some days at least, notes, telephone messages, engagements, all this
fuss and clamour about nothing, should clamour for him in vain....



11


"But how closely," cried White, in a mood of cultivated enthusiasm; "how
closely must all the poor little stories that we tell to-day follow
in the footsteps of the Great Exemplars! A little while ago and the
springtime freshness of Tobias irradiated the page. Now see! it is
Christian--."

Indeed it looked extremely like Christian as Benham went up across the
springy turf from Epsom Downs station towards the crest of the hill.
Was he not also fleeing in the morning sunlight from the City of
Destruction? Was he not also seeking that better city whose name is
Peace? And there was a bundle on his back. It was the bundle, I think,
that seized most firmly upon the too literary imagination of White.

But the analogy of the bundle was a superficial one. Benham had not
the slightest desire to lose it from his shoulders. It would have
inconvenienced him very greatly if he had done so. It did not contain
his sins. Our sins nowadays are not so easily separated. It contained a
light, warm cape-coat he had bought in Switzerland and which he intended
to wrap about him when he slept under the stars, and in addition
Merkle had packed it with his silk pyjamas, an extra pair of stockings,
tooth-brush, brush and comb, a safety razor.... And there were several
sheets of the Ordnance map.



12


The urgency of getting away from something dominated Benham to the
exclusion of any thought of what he might be getting to. That muddle of
his London life had to be left behind. First, escape....

Over the downs great numbers of larks were singing. It was warm April
that year and early. All the cloud stuff in the sky was gathered
into great towering slow-sailing masses, and the rest was blue of
the intensest. The air was so clean that Benham felt it clean in the
substance of his body. The chestnuts down the hill to the right were
flowering, the beeches were luminously green, and the oaks in the
valley foaming gold. And sometimes it was one lark filled his ears, and
sometimes he seemed to be hearing all the larks for miles about him.
Presently over the crest he would be out of sight of the grand stand and
the men exercising horses, and that brace of red-jacketed golfers....

What was he to do?

For a time he could think of nothing to do except to keep up and out of
the valley. His whole being seemed to have come to his surfaces to look
out at the budding of the year and hear the noise of the birds. And then
he got into a long road from which he had to escape, and trespassing
southward through plantations he reached the steep edge of the hills
and sat down over above a great chalk pit somewhere near Dorking and
surveyed all the tumbled wooded spaces of the Weald.... It is after all
not so great a country this Sussex, nor so hilly, from deepest valley to
highest crest is not six hundred feet, yet what a greatness of effect it
can achieve! There is something in those downland views which, like sea
views, lifts a mind out to the skies. All England it seemed was there to
Benham's vision, and the purpose of the English, and his own purpose in
the world. For a long time he surveyed the large delicacy of the detail
before him, the crests, the tree-protected houses, the fields and
farmsteads, the distant gleams of water. And then he became interested
in the men who were working in the chalk pit down below.

They at any rate were not troubled with the problem of what to do with
their lives.



13


Benham found his mind was now running clear, and so abundantly that he
could scarcely, he felt, keep pace with it. As he thought his flow of
ideas was tinged with a fear that he might forget what he was thinking.
In an instant, for the first time in his mental existence, he could have
imagined he had discovered Labour and seen it plain. A little while ago
and he had seemed a lonely man among the hills, but indeed he was not
lonely, these men had been with him all the time, and he was free to
wander, to sit here, to think and choose simply because those men down
there were not free. HE WAS SPENDING THEIR LEISURE.... Not once but
many times with Prothero had he used the phrase RICHESSE OBLIGE. Now
he remembered it. He began to remember a mass of ideas that had been
overlaid and stifling within him. This was what Merkle and the club
servants and the entertainments and engagements and his mother and
the artistic touts and the theatrical touts and the hunting and the
elaboration of games and--Mrs. Skelmersdale and all that had clustered
thickly round him in London had been hiding from him. Those men below
there had not been trusted to choose their work; they had been given it.
And he had been trusted....

And now to grapple with it! Now to get it clear! What work was he going
to do? That settled, he would deal with his distractions readily enough.
Until that was settled he was lax and exposed to every passing breeze of
invitation.

"What work am I going to do? What work am I going to do?" He repeated
it.

It is the only question for the aristocrat. What amusement? That for
a footman on holiday. That for a silly child, for any creature that is
kept or led or driven. That perhaps for a tired invalid, for a
toiler worked to a rag. But able-bodied amusement! The arms of Mrs.
Skelmersdale were no worse than the solemn aimlessness of hunting, and
an evening of dalliance not an atom more reprehensible than an evening
of chatter. It was the waste of him that made the sin. His life in
London had been of a piece together. It was well that his intrigue had
set a light on it, put a point to it, given him this saving crisis of
the nerves. That, indeed, is the chief superiority of idle love-making
over other more prevalent forms of idleness and self-indulgence; it
does at least bear its proper label. It is reprehensible. It brings your
careless honour to the challenge of concealment and shabby evasions and
lies....

But in this pellucid air things took their proper proportions again.

And now what was he to do?

"Politics," he said aloud to the turf and the sky.

Is there any other work for an aristocratic man?... Science? One
could admit science in that larger sense that sweeps in History, or
Philosophy. Beyond that whatever work there is is work for which men
are paid. Art? Art is nothing aristocratic except when it is a means
of scientific or philosophical expression. Art that does not argue nor
demonstrate nor discover is merely the craftsman's impudence.

He pulled up at this and reflected for a time with some distinguished
instances in his mind. They were so distinguished, so dignified, they
took their various arts with so admirable a gravity that the soul of
this young man recoiled from the verdicts to which his reasoning drove
him. "It's not for me to judge them," he decided, "except in relation
to myself. For them there may be tremendous significances in Art. But
if these do not appear to me, then so far as I am concerned they do not
exist for me. They are not in my world. So far as they attempt to invade
me and control my attitudes or my outlook, or to judge me in any way,
there is no question of their impudence. Impudence is the word for it.
My world is real. I want to be really aristocratic, really brave, really
paying for the privilege of not being a driven worker. The things
the artist makes are like the things my private dream-artist makes,
relaxing, distracting. What can Art at its greatest be, pure Art that
is, but a more splendid, more permanent, transmissible reverie! The very
essence of what I am after is NOT to be an artist...."

After a large and serious movement through his mind he came back to
Science, Philosophy or Politics as the sole three justifications for the
usurpation of leisure.

So far as devotion to science went, he knew he had no specific aptitude
for any departmentalized subject, and equally he felt no natural call to
philosophy. He was left with politics....

"Or else, why shouldn't I go down there and pick up a shovel and set to
work? To make leisure for my betters...."

And now it was that he could take up the real trouble that more than
anything else had been keeping him ineffective and the prey of every
chance demand and temptation during the last ten months. He had not been
able to get himself into politics, and the reason why he had not been
able to do so was that he could not induce himself to fit in. Statecraft
was a remote and faded thing in the political life of the time; politics
was a choice of two sides in a game, and either side he found equally
unattractive. Since he had come down from Cambridge the Tariff Reform
people had gone far to capture the Conservative party. There was little
chance of a candidature for him without an adhesion to that. And
he could find nothing he could imagine himself working for in the
declarations of the Tariff Reform people. He distrusted them, he
disliked them. They took all the light and pride out of imperialism,
they reduced it to a shabby conspiracy of the British and their colonies
against foreign industrialism. They were violent for armaments and
hostile to education. They could give him no assurance of any scheme of
growth and unification, and no guarantees against the manifest dangers
of economic disturbance and political corruption a tariff involves.
Imperialism without noble imaginations, it seemed to him, was simply
nationalism with megalomania. It was swaggering, it was greed, it was
German; its enthusiasm was forced, its nobility a vulgar lie. No. And
when he turned to the opposite party he found little that was more
attractive. They were prepared, it seemed, if they came into office, to
pull the legislature of the British Isles to pieces in obedience to the
Irish demand for Home Rule, and they were totally unprepared with any
scheme for doing this that had even a chance of success. In the twenty
years that had elapsed since Gladstone's hasty and disastrous essay in
political surgery they had studied nothing, learnt nothing, produced no
ideas whatever in the matter. They had not had the time. They had just
negotiated, like the mere politicians they were, for the Nationalist
vote. They seemed to hope that by a marvel God would pacify Ulster. Lord
Dunraven, Plunkett, were voices crying in the wilderness. The sides in
the party game would as soon have heeded a poet.... But unless Benham
was prepared to subscribe either to Home Rule or Tariff Reform there was
no way whatever open to him into public life. He had had some decisive
conversations. He had no illusions left upon that score....

Here was the real barrier that had kept him inactive for ten months.
Here was the problem he had to solve. This was how he had been left
out of active things, a prey to distractions, excitements, idle
temptations--and Mrs. Skelmersdale.

Running away to shoot big game or explore wildernesses was no remedy.
That was just running away. Aristocrats do not run away. What of his
debt to those men down there in the quarry? What of his debt to the
unseen men in the mines away in the north? What of his debt to the
stokers on the liners, and to the clerks in the city? He reiterated the
cardinal article of his creed: The aristocrat is a privileged man in
order that he may be a public and political man.

But how is one to be a political man when one is not in politics?

Benham frowned at the Weald. His ideas were running thin.

He might hammer at politics from the outside. And then again how? He
would make a list of all the things that he might do. For example he
might write. He rested one hand on his knee and lifted one finger and
regarded it. COULD he write? There were one or two men who ran papers
and seemed to have a sort of independent influence. Strachey, for
example, with his SPECTATOR; Maxse, with his NATIONAL REVIEW. But they
were grown up, they had formed their ideas. He had to learn first.

He lifted a second finger. How to learn? For it was learning that he had
to do.

When one comes down from Oxford or Cambridge one falls into the mistake
of thinking that learning is over and action must begin. But until one
perceives clearly just where one stands action is impossible.

How is one with no experience of affairs to get an experience of affairs
when the door of affairs is closed to one by one's own convictions?
Outside of affairs how can one escape being flimsy? How can one escape
becoming merely an intellectual like those wordy Fabians, those writers,
poseurs, and sham publicists whose wrangles he had attended? And,
moreover, there is danger in the leisure of your intellectual. One
cannot be always reading and thinking and discussing and inquiring....
WOULD IT NOT BE BETTER AFTER ALL TO MAKE A CONCESSION, SWALLOW HOME RULE
OR TARIFF REFORM, AND SO AT LEAST GET HIS HANDS ON THINGS?

And then in a little while the party conflict would swallow him up?

Still it would engage him, it would hold him. If, perhaps, he did not
let it swallow him up. If he worked with an eye open for opportunities
of self-assertion....

The party game had not altogether swallowed "Mr. Arthur."...

But every one is not a Balfour....

He reflected profoundly. On his left knee his left hand rested with
two fingers held up. By some rapid mental alchemy these fingers had now
become Home Rule and Tariff Reform. His right hand which had hitherto
taken no part in the controversy, had raised its index finger by
imperceptible degrees. It had been raised almost subconsciously. And by
still obscurer processes this finger had become Mrs. Skelmersdale. He
recognized her sudden reappearance above the threshold of consciousness
with mild surprise. He had almost forgotten her share in these problems.
He had supposed her dismissed to an entirely subordinate position....

Then he perceived that the workmen in the chalk pit far below had
knocked off and were engaged upon their midday meal. He understood why
his mind was no longer moving forward with any alacrity.

Food?

The question where he should eat arose abruptly and dismissed all other
problems from his mind. He unfolded a map. Here must be the chalk pit,
here was Dorking. That village was Brockham Green. Should he go down to
Dorking or this way over Box Hill to the little inn at Burford Bridge.
He would try the latter.



14


The April sunset found our young man talking to himself for greater
emphasis, and wandering along a turfy cart-track through a wilderness
mysteriously planted with great bushes of rhododendra on the Downs above
Shere. He had eaten a belated lunch at Burford Bridge, he had got some
tea at a little inn near a church with a splendid yew tree, and for the
rest of the time he had wandered and thought. He had travelled perhaps a
dozen or fifteen miles, and a good way from his first meditations above
the Dorking chalk pit.

He had recovered long ago from that remarkable conception of an active
if dishonest political career as a means of escaping Mrs. Skelmersdale
and all that Mrs. Skelmersdale symbolized. That would be just louting
from one bad thing to another. He had to settle Mrs. Skelmersdale clean
and right, and he had to do as exquisitely right in politics as he could
devise. If the public life of the country had got itself into a stupid
antagonism of two undesirable things, the only course for a sane man of
honour was to stand out from the parties and try and get them back to
sound issues again. There must be endless people of a mind with himself
in this matter. And even if there were not, if he was the only man in
the world, he still had to follow his lights and do the right. And his
business was to find out the right....

He came back from these imaginative excursions into contemporary
politics with one idea confirmed in his mind, an idea that had been
indeed already in his mind during his Cambridge days. This was the
idea of working out for himself, thoroughly and completely, a political
scheme, a theory of his work and duty in the world, a plan of the
world's future that should give a rule for his life. The Research
Magnificent was emerging. It was an alarmingly vast proposal, but he
could see no alternative but submission, a plebeian's submission to the
currents of life about him.

Little pictures began to flit before his imagination of the way in which
he might build up this tremendous inquiry. He would begin by hunting up
people, everybody who seemed to have ideas and promise ideas he would
get at. He would travel far--and exhaustively. He would, so soon as
the ideas seemed to indicate it, hunt out facts. He would learn how the
world was governed. He would learn how it did its thinking. He would
live sparingly. ("Not TOO sparingly," something interpolated.) He would
work ten or twelve hours a day. Such a course of investigation must
pass almost of its own accord into action and realization. He need not
trouble now how it would bring him into politics. Inevitably somewhere
it would bring him into politics. And he would travel. Almost at once
he would travel. It is the manifest duty of every young aristocrat to
travel. Here he was, ruling India. At any rate, passively, through the
mere fact of being English, he was ruling India. And he knew nothing of
India. He knew nothing indeed of Asia. So soon as he returned to London
his preparations for this travel must begin, he must plot out the men to
whom he would go, and so contrive that also he would go round the world.
Perhaps he would get Lionel Maxim to go with him. Or if Maxim could not
come, then possibly Prothero. Some one surely could be found, some one
thinking and talking of statecraft and the larger idea of life. All the
world is not swallowed up in every day....



15


His mind shifted very suddenly from these large proposals to an entirely
different theme. These mental landslips are not unusual when men are
thinking hard and wandering. He found himself holding a trial upon
himself for Presumptuousness, for setting himself up against the wisdom
of the ages, and the decisions of all the established men in the world,
for being in short a Presumptuous Sort of Ass. He was judge and jury
and prosecutor, but rather inexplicably the defence was conducted in an
irregular and undignified way by some inferior stratum of his being.

At first the defence contented itself with arguments that did at least
aim to rebut the indictment. The decisions of all the established men
in the world were notoriously in conflict. However great was the gross
wisdom of the ages the net wisdom was remarkably small. Was it after all
so very immodest to believe that the Liberals were right in what they
said about Tariff Reform, and the Tories right in their criticism of
Home Rule?

And then suddenly the defence threw aside its mask and insisted that
Benham had to take this presumptuous line because there was no other
tolerable line possible for him.

"Better die with the Excelsior chap up the mountains," the defence
interjected.

Than what?

Consider the quality Benham had already betrayed. He was manifestly
incapable of a decent modest mediocre existence. Already he had ceased
to be--if one may use so fine a word for genteel abstinence--virtuous.
He didn't ride well, he hadn't good hands, and he hadn't good hands for
life. He must go hard and harsh, high or low. He was a man who needed
BITE in his life. He was exceptionally capable of boredom. He had been
bored by London. Social occasions irritated him, several times he had
come near to gross incivilities, art annoyed him, sport was an effort,
wholesome perhaps, but unattractive, music he loved, but it excited him.
The defendant broke the sunset calm by uttering amazing and improper
phrases.

"I can't smug about in a state of falsified righteousness like these
Crampton chaps.

"I shall roll in women. I shall rollick in women. If, that is, I stay in
London with nothing more to do than I have had this year past.

"I've been sliding fast to it....

"NO! I'M DAMNED IF I DO!..."



16


For some time he had been bothered by a sense of something, something
else, awaiting his attention. Now it came swimming up into his
consciousness. He had forgotten. He was, of course, going to sleep out
under the stars.

He had settled that overnight, that was why he had this cloak in his
rucksack, but he had settled none of the details. Now he must find some
place where he could lie down. Here, perhaps, in this strange forgotten
wilderness of rhododendra.

He turned off from the track and wandered among the bushes. One might
lie down anywhere here. But not yet; it was as yet barely twilight. He
consulted his watch. HALF-PAST SEVEN.

Nearly dinner-time....

No doubt Christian during the earlier stages of his pilgrimage noticed
the recurrence of the old familiar hours of his life of emptiness
and vanity. Or rather of vanity--simply. Why drag in the thought of
emptiness just at this point?...

It was very early to go to bed.

He might perhaps sit and think for a time. Here for example was a mossy
bank, a seat, and presently a bed. So far there were only three stars
visible but more would come. He dropped into a reclining attitude. DAMP!

When one thinks of sleeping out under the stars one is apt to forget the
dew.

He spread his Swiss cloak out on the soft thick carpeting of herbs
and moss, and arranged his knapsack as a pillow. Here he would lie and
recapitulate the thoughts of the day. (That squealing might be a
young fox.) At the club at present men would be sitting about holding
themselves back from dinner. Excellent the clear soup always was at the
club! Then perhaps a Chateaubriand. That--what was that? Soft and large
and quite near and noiseless. An owl!

The damp feeling was coming through his cloak. And this April night air
had a knife edge. Early ice coming down the Atlantic perhaps. It was
wonderful to be here on the top of the round world and feel the icebergs
away there. Or did this wind come from Russia? He wasn't quite clear
just how he was oriented, he had turned about so much. Which was east?
Anyhow it was an extremely cold wind.

What had he been thinking? Suppose after all that ending with Mrs.
Skelmersdale was simply a beginning. So far he had never looked sex in
the face....

He sat up and sneezed violently.

It would be ridiculous to start out seeking the clue to one's life and
be driven home by rheumatic fever. One should not therefore incur the
risk of rheumatic fever.

Something squealed in the bushes.

It was impossible to collect one's thoughts in this place. He stood up.
The night was going to be bitterly cold, savagely, cruelly cold....

No. There was no thinking to be done here, no thinking at all. He would
go on along the track and presently he would strike a road and so come
to an inn. One can solve no problems when one is engaged in a struggle
with the elements. The thing to do now was to find that track again....

It took Benham two hours of stumbling and walking, with a little fence
climbing and some barbed wire thrown in, before he got down into Shere
to the shelter of a friendly little inn. And then he negotiated a
satisfying meal, with beef-steak as its central fact, and stipulated for
a fire in his bedroom.

The landlord was a pleasant-faced man; he attended to Benham himself and
displayed a fine sense of comfort. He could produce wine, a half-bottle
of Australian hock, Big Tree brand No. 8, a virile wine, he thought of
sardines to precede the meal, he provided a substantial Welsh rarebit
by way of a savoury, he did not mind in the least that it was nearly ten
o'clock. He ended by suggesting coffee. "And a liqueur?"

Benham had some Benedictine!

One could not slight such sympathetic helpfulness. The Benedictine was
genuine. And then came the coffee.

The cup of coffee was generously conceived and honestly made.

A night of clear melancholy ensued....



17


Hitherto Benham had not faced in any detail the problem of how to break
with Mrs. Skelmersdale. Now he faced it pessimistically. She would, he
knew, be difficult to break with. (He ought never to have gone there
to lunch.) There would be something ridiculous in breaking off. In all
sorts of ways she might resist. And face to face with her he might
find himself a man divided against himself. That opened preposterous
possibilities. On the other hand it was out of the question to do the
business by letter. A letter hits too hard; it lies too heavy on the
wound it has made. And in money matters he could be generous. He must be
generous. At least financial worries need not complicate her distresses
of desertion. But to suggest such generosities on paper, in cold ink,
would be outrageous. And, in brief--he ought not to have gone there
to lunch. After that he began composing letters at a great rate.
Delicate--explanatory. Was it on the whole best to be explanatory?...

It was going to be a tremendous job, this breaking with her. And it had
begun so easily....

There was, he remembered with amazing vividness, a little hollow he had
found under her ear, and how when he kissed her there it always made her
forget her worries and ethical problems for a time and turn to him....

"No," he said grimly, "it must end," and rolled over and stared at the
black....

Like an insidious pedlar, that old rascal whom young literary gentlemen
call the Great God Pan, began to spread his wares in the young man's
memory....

After long and feverish wanderings of the mind, and some talking to
himself and walking about the room, he did at last get a little away
from Mrs. Skelmersdale.

He perceived that when he came to tell his mother about this journey
around the world there would be great difficulties. She would object
very strongly, and if that did not do then she would become extremely
abusive, compare him to his father, cry bitterly, and banish him
suddenly and heartbrokenly from her presence for ever. She had done that
twice already--once about going to the opera instead of listening to
a lecture on Indian ethnology and once about a week-end in Kent.... He
hated hurting his mother, and he was beginning to know now how easily
she was hurt. It is an abominable thing to hurt one's mother--whether
one has a justification or whether one hasn't.

Recoiling from this, he was at once resumed by Mrs. Skelmersdale. Who
had in fact an effect of really never having been out of the room. But
now he became penitent about her. His penitence expanded until it was on
a nightmare scale. At last it blotted out the heavens. He felt like one
of those unfortunate victims of religious mania who are convinced they
have committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost. (Why had he gone there
to lunch? That was the key to it. WHY had he gone there to lunch?)... He
began to have remorse for everything, for everything he had ever done,
for everything he had ever not done, for everything in the world. In a
moment of lucidity he even had remorse for drinking that stout honest
cup of black coffee....

And so on and so on and so on....

When daylight came it found Benham still wide awake. Things crept
mournfully out of the darkness into a reproachful clearness. The sound
of birds that had been so delightful on the yesterday was now no longer
agreeable. The thrushes, he thought, repeated themselves a great deal.

He fell asleep as it seemed only a few minutes before the landlord,
accompanied by a great smell of frying bacon, came to call him.



18


The second day opened rather dully for Benham. There was not an idea
left in his head about anything in the world. It was--SOLID. He walked
through Bramley and Godalming and Witley and so came out upon the purple
waste of Hindhead. He strayed away from the road and found a sunny place
of turf amidst the heather and lay down and slept for an hour or so. He
arose refreshed. He got some food at the Huts Inn on the Hindhead crest
and went on across sunlit heathery wildernesses variegated by patches of
spruce and fir and silver birch. And then suddenly his mental inanition
was at an end and his thoughts were wide and brave again. He was
astonished that for a moment he could have forgotten that he was vowed
to the splendid life.

"Continence by preoccupation;" he tried the phrase....

"A man must not give in to fear; neither must he give in to sex. It's
the same thing really. The misleading of instinct."

This set the key of his thought throughout the afternoon--until Amanda
happened to him.




CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ AMANDA



1


Amanda happened to Benham very suddenly.

From Haslemere he had gone on to further heaths and gorse beyond
Liphook, and thence he had wandered into a pretty district beset
with Hartings. He had found himself upon a sandy ridge looking very
beautifully into a sudden steep valley that he learnt was Harting
Coombe; he had been through a West Harting and a South Harting and read
finger-posts pointing to others of the clan; and in the evening, at
the foot of a steep hill where two roads met, he sat down to consider
whether he should go back and spend the night in one of the two
kindly-looking inns of the latter place or push on over the South Downs
towards the unknown luck of Singleton or Chichester. As he sat down two
big retrievers, black and brown, came headlong down the road. The black
carried a stick, the brown disputed and pursued. As they came abreast of
him the foremost a little relaxed his hold, the pursuer grabbed at
it, and in an instant the rivalry had flared to rage and a first-class
dogfight was in progress.

Benham detested dog-fights. He stood up, pale and distressed. "Lie
down!" he cried. "Shut up, you brutes!" and was at a loss for further
action.

Then it was Amanda leapt into his world, a light, tall figure of a girl,
fluttering a short petticoat. Hatless she was, brown, flushed, and her
dark hair tossing loose, and in a moment she had the snarling furious
dogs apart, each gripped firmly by its collar. Then with a wriggle
black was loose and had closed again. Inspired by the best traditions of
chivalry Benham came to her assistance. He was not expert with dogs. He
grasped the black dog under its ear. He was bitten in the wrist, rather
in excitement than malice, and with a certain excess of zeal he was
strangling the brute before you could count ten.

Amanda seized the fallen stick and whacked the dog she held, reasonably
but effectively until its yelps satisfied her. "There!" she said
pitching her victim from her, and stood erect again. She surveyed the
proceedings of her helper for the first time.

"You needn't," she said, "choke Sultan anymore."

"Ugh!" she said, as though that was enough for Sultan. And peace was
restored.

"I'm obliged to you. But--... I say! He didn't bite you, did he? Oh,
SULTAN!"

Sultan tried to express his disgust at the affair. Rotten business.
When a fellow is fighting one can't be meticulous. And if people come
interfering. Still--SORRY! So Sultan by his code of eye and tail.

"May I see?... Something ought to be done to this...."

She took his wrist in her hand, and her cheek and eyelashes came within
a foot of his face.

Some observant element in his composition guessed, and guessed quite
accurately, that she was nineteen....



2


She had an eyebrow like a quick stroke of a camel's-hair brush, she
had a glowing face, half childish imp, half woman, she had honest hazel
eyes, a voice all music, a manifest decision of character. And he must
have this bite seen to at once. She lived not five minutes away. He must
come with her.

She had an aunt who behaved like a mother and a mother who behaved like
a genteel visitor, and they both agreed with Amanda that although Mr.
Walter Long and his dreadful muzzles and everything did seem to have
stamped out rabies, yet you couldn't be too careful with a dog bite. A
dog bite might be injurious in all sorts of ways--particularly
Sultan's bite. He was, they had to confess, a dog without refinement,
a coarse-minded omnivorous dog. Both the elder ladies insisted upon
regarding Benham's wound as clear evidence of some gallant rescue of
Amanda from imminent danger--"she's always so RECKLESS with those dogs,"
as though Amanda was not manifestly capable of taking care of herself;
and when he had been Listerined and bandaged, they would have it that he
should join them at their supper-dinner, which was already prepared and
waiting. They treated him as if he were still an undergraduate, they
took his arrangements in hand as though he was a favourite nephew. He
must stay in Harting that night. Both the Ship and the Coach and Horses
were excellent inns, and over the Downs there would be nothing for miles
and miles....

The house was a little long house with a verandah and a garden in front
of it with flint-edged paths; the room in which they sat and ate was
long and low and equipped with pieces of misfitting good furniture, an
accidental-looking gilt tarnished mirror, and a sprinkling of old and
middle-aged books. Some one had lit a fire, which cracked and spurted
about cheerfully in a motherly fireplace, and a lamp and some candles
got lit. Mrs. Wilder, Amanda's aunt, a comfortable dark broad-browed
woman, directed things, and sat at the end of the table and placed
Benham on her right hand between herself and Amanda. Amanda's mother
remained undeveloped, a watchful little woman with at least an eyebrow
like her daughter's. Her name, it seemed, was Morris. No servant
appeared, but two cousins of a vague dark picturesqueness and with a
stamp of thirty upon them, the first young women Benham had ever seen
dressed in djibbahs, sat at the table or moved about and attended to the
simple needs of the service. The reconciled dogs were in the room and
shifted inquiring noses from one human being to another.

Amanda's people were so easy and intelligent and friendly, and
Benham after his thirty hours of silence so freshly ready for human
association, that in a very little while he could have imagined he had
known and trusted this household for years. He had never met such people
before, and yet there was something about them that seemed familiar--and
then it occurred to him that something of their easy-going freedom was
to be found in Russian novels. A photographic enlargement of somebody
with a vegetarian expression of face and a special kind of slouch hat
gave the atmosphere a flavour of Socialism, and a press and tools and
stamps and pigments on an oak table in the corner suggested some such
socialistic art as bookbinding. They were clearly 'advanced' people. And
Amanda was tremendously important to them, she was their light, their
pride, their most living thing. They focussed on her. When he talked to
them all in general he talked to her in particular. He felt that some
introduction of himself was due to these welcoming people. He tried
to give it mixed with an itinerary and a sketch of his experiences. He
praised the heather country and Harting Coombe and the Hartings. He
told them that London had suddenly become intolerable--"In the spring
sunshine."

"You live in London?" said Mrs. Wilder.

Yes. And he had wanted to think things out. In London one could do no
thinking--

"Here we do nothing else," said Amanda.

"Except dog-fights," said the elder cousin.

"I thought I would just wander and think and sleep in the open air. Have
you ever tried to sleep in the open air?"

"In the summer we all do," said the younger cousin. "Amanda makes us. We
go out on to the little lawn at the back."

"You see Amanda has some friends at Limpsfield. And there they all go
out and camp and sleep in the woods."

"Of course," reflected Mrs. Wilder, "in April it must be different."

"It IS different," said Benham with feeling; "the night comes five hours
too soon. And it comes wet." He described his experiences and his flight
to Shere and the kindly landlord and the cup of coffee. "And after that
I thought with a vengeance."

"Do you write things?" asked Amanda abruptly, and it seemed to him with
a note of hope.

"No. No, it was just a private puzzle. It was something I couldn't get
straight."

"And you have got it straight?" asked Amanda.

"I think so."

"You were making up your mind about something?"

"Amanda DEAR!" cried her mother.

"Oh! I don't mind telling you," said Benham.

They seemed such unusual people that he was moved to unusual
confidences. They had that effect one gets at times with strangers
freshly met as though they were not really in the world. And there was
something about Amanda that made him want to explain himself to her
completely.

"What I wanted to think about was what I should do with my life."

"Haven't you any WORK--?" asked the elder cousin.

"None that I'm obliged to do."

"That's where a man has the advantage," said Amanda with the tone of
profound reflection. "You can choose. And what are you going to do with
your life?"

"Amanda," her mother protested, "really you mustn't!"

"I'm going round the world to think about it," Benham told her.

"I'd give my soul to travel," said Amanda.

She addressed her remark to the salad in front of her.

"But have you no ties?" asked Mrs. Wilder.

"None that hold me," said Benham. "I'm one of those unfortunates who
needn't do anything at all. I'm independent. You see my riddles. East
and west and north and south, it's all my way for the taking. There's
not an indication."

"If I were you," said Amanda, and reflected. Then she half turned
herself to him. "I should go first to India," she said, "and I should
shoot, one, two, three, yes, three tigers. And then I would see
Farukhabad Sikri--I was reading in a book about it yesterday--where the
jungle grows in the palaces; and then I would go right up the Himalayas,
and then, then I would have a walking tour in Japan, and then I would
sail in a sailing ship down to Borneo and Java and set myself up as a
Ranee--... And then I would think what I would do next."

"All alone, Amanda?" asked Mrs. Wilder.

"Only when I shoot tigers. You and mother should certainly come to
Japan."

"But Mr. Benham perhaps doesn't intend to shoot tigers, Amanda?" said
Amanda's mother.

"Not at once. My way will be a little different. I think I shall go
first through Germany. And then down to Constantinople. And then I've
some idea of getting across Asia Minor and Persia to India. That would
take some time. One must ride."

"Asia Minor ought to be fun," said Amanda. "But I should prefer India
because of the tigers. It would be so jolly to begin with the tigers
right away."

"It is the towns and governments and peoples I want to see rather than
tigers," said Benham. "Tigers if they are in the programme. But I want
to find out about--other things."

"Don't you think there's something to be found out at home?" said the
elder cousin, blushing very brightly and speaking with the effort of one
who speaks for conscience' sake.

"Betty's a Socialist," Amanda said to Benham with a suspicion of
apology.

"Well, we're all rather that," Mrs. Wilder protested.

"If you are free, if you are independent, then don't you owe something
to the workers?" Betty went on, getting graver and redder with each
word.

"It's just because of that," said Benham, "that I am going round the
world."



3


He was as free with these odd people as if he had been talking to
Prothero. They were--alert. And he had been alone and silent and full of
thinking for two clear days. He tried to explain why he found Socialism
at once obvious and inadequate....

Presently the supper things got themselves put away and the talk moved
into a smaller room with several armchairs and a fire. Mrs. Wilder and
the cousins and Amanda each smoked a cigarette as if it were symbolical,
and they were joined by a grave grey-bearded man with a hyphenated name
and slightly Socratic manner, dressed in a very blue linen shirt
and collar, a very woolly mustard-coloured suit and loose tie, and
manifestly devoted to one of those branches of exemplary domestic
decoration that grow upon Socialist soil in England. He joined Betty in
the opinion that the duty of a free and wealthy young man was to remain
in England and give himself to democratic Socialism and the abolition
of "profiteering." "Consider that chair," he said. But Benham had little
feeling for the craftsmanship of chairs.

Under cross-examination Mr. Rathbone-Sanders became entangled and
prophetic. It was evident he had never thought out his "democratic," he
had rested in some vague tangle of idealism from which Benham now set
himself with the zeal of a specialist to rout him. Such an argument
sprang up as one meets with rarely beyond the happy undergraduate's
range. Everybody lived in the discussion, even Amanda's mother listened
visibly. Betty said she herself was certainly democratic and Mrs. Wilder
had always thought herself to be so, and outside the circle round the
fire Amanda hovered impatiently, not quite sure of her side as yet, but
eager to come down with emphasis at the first flash of intimation.

She came down vehemently on Benham's.

And being a very clear-cutting personality with an instinct for the
material rendering of things, she also came and sat beside him on the
little square-cornered sofa.

"Of course, Mr. Rathbone-Sanders," she said, "of course the world must
belong to the people who dare. Of course people aren't all alike, and
dull people, as Mr. Benham says, and spiteful people, and narrow people
have no right to any voice at all in things...."



4


In saying this she did but echo Benham's very words, and all she
said and did that evening was in quick response to Benham's earnest
expression of his views. She found Benham a delightful novelty. She
liked to argue because there was no other talk so lively, and she had
perhaps a lurking intellectual grudge against Mr. Rathbone-Sanders
that made her welcome an ally. Everything from her that night that even
verges upon the notable has been told, and yet it sufficed, together
with something in the clear, long line of her limbs, in her voice,
in her general physical quality, to convince Benham that she was the
freest, finest, bravest spirit that he had ever encountered.

In the papers he left behind him was to be found his perplexed
endeavours to explain this mental leap, that after all his efforts still
remained unexplained. He had been vividly impressed by the decision and
courage of her treatment of the dogs; it was just the sort of thing
he could not do. And there was a certain contagiousness in the petting
admiration with which her family treated her. But she was young and
healthy and so was he, and in a second mystery lies the key of the
first. He had fallen in love with her, and that being so whatever he
needed that instantly she was. He needed a companion, clean and brave
and understanding....

In his bed in the Ship that night he thought of nothing but her before
he went to sleep, and when next morning he walked on his way over
the South Downs to Chichester his mind was full of her image and of a
hundred pleasant things about her. In his confessions he wrote, "I felt
there was a sword in her spirit. I felt she was as clean as the wind."

Love is the most chastening of powers, and he did not even remember now
that two days before he had told the wind and the twilight that he would
certainly "roll and rollick in women" unless there was work for him to
do. She had a peculiarly swift and easy stride that went with him in his
thoughts along the turf by the wayside halfway and more to Chichester.
He thought always of the two of them as being side by side. His
imagination became childishly romantic. The open down about him with its
scrub of thorn and yew became the wilderness of the world, and through
it they went--in armour, weightless armour--and they wore long swords.
There was a breeze blowing and larks were singing and something,
something dark and tortuous dashed suddenly in headlong flight from
before their feet. It was an ethical problem such as those Mrs.
Skelmersdale nursed in her bosom. But at the sight of Amanda it had
straightened out--and fled....

And interweaving with such imaginings, he was some day to record, there
were others. She had brought back to his memory the fancies that had
been aroused in his first reading of Plato's REPUBLIC; she made him
think of those women Guardians, who were the friends and mates of men.
He wanted now to re-read that book and the LAWS. He could not remember
if the Guardians were done in the LAWS as well as in the REPUBLIC. He
wished he had both these books in his rucksack, but as he had not, he
decided he would hunt for them in Chichester. When would he see Amanda
again? He would ask his mother to make the acquaintance of these very
interesting people, but as they did not come to London very much it
might be some time before he had a chance of seeing her again.
And, besides, he was going to America and India. The prospect of an
exploration of the world was still noble and attractive; but he realized
it would stand very much in the way of his seeing more of Amanda. Would
it be a startling and unforgivable thing if presently he began to write
to her? Girls of that age and spirit living in out-of-the-way villages
have been known to marry....

Marriage didn't at this stage strike Benham as an agreeable aspect of
Amanda's possibilities; it was an inconvenience; his mind was running
in the direction of pedestrian tours in armour of no particular weight,
amidst scenery of a romantic wildness....

When he had gone to the house and taken his leave that morning it had
seemed quite in the vein of the establishment that he should be received
by Amanda alone and taken up the long garden before anybody else
appeared, to see the daffodils and the early apple-trees in blossom and
the pear-trees white and delicious.

Then he had taken his leave of them all and made his social tentatives.
Did they ever come to London? When they did they must let his people
know. He would so like them to know his mother, Lady Marayne. And so on
with much gratitude.

Amanda had said that she and the dogs would come with him up the hill,
she had said it exactly as a boy might have said it, she had brought him
up to the corner of Up Park and had sat down there on a heap of stones
and watched him until he was out of sight, waving to him when he looked
back. "Come back again," she had cried.

In Chichester he found a little green-bound REPUBLIC in a second-hand
book-shop near the Cathedral, but there was no copy of the LAWS to
be found in the place. Then he was taken with the brilliant idea of
sleeping the night in Chichester and going back next day via Harting to
Petersfield station and London. He carried out this scheme and got to
South Harting neatly about four o'clock in the afternoon. He found
Mrs. Wilder and Mrs. Morris and Amanda and the dogs entertaining Mr.
Rathbone-Sanders at tea, and they all seemed a little surprised, and,
except Mr. Rathbone-Sanders, they all seemed pleased to see him again
so soon. His explanation of why he hadn't gone back to London from
Chichester struck him as a little unconvincing in the cold light of Mr.
Rathbone-Sanders' eye. But Amanda was manifestly excited by his return,
and he told them his impressions of Chichester and described the
entertainment of the evening guest at a country inn and suddenly
produced his copy of the REPUBLIC. "I found this in a book-shop," he
said, "and I brought it for you, because it describes one of the best
dreams of aristocracy there has ever been dreamt."

At first she praised it as a pretty book in the dearest little binding,
and then realized that there were deeper implications, and became
grave and said she would read it through and through, she loved such
speculative reading.

She came to the door with the others and stayed at the door after they
had gone in again. When he looked back at the corner of the road to
Petersfield she was still at the door and waved farewell to him.

He only saw a light slender figure, but when she came back into the
sitting-room Mr. Rathbone-Sanders noted the faint flush in her cheek and
an unwonted abstraction in her eye.

And in the evening she tucked her feet up in the armchair by the lamp
and read the REPUBLIC very intently and very thoughtfully, occasionally
turning over a page.



5


When Benham got back to London he experienced an unwonted desire to
perform his social obligations to the utmost.

So soon as he had had some dinner at his club he wrote his South Harting
friends a most agreeable letter of thanks for their kindness to him. In
a little while he hoped he should see them again. His mother, too, was
most desirous to meet them.... That done, he went on to his flat and to
various aspects of life for which he was quite unprepared.

But here we may note that Amanda answered him. Her reply came some four
days later. It was written in a square schoolgirl hand, it covered
three sheets of notepaper, and it was a very intelligent essay upon the
REPUBLIC of Plato. "Of course," she wrote, "the Guardians are inhuman,
but it was a glorious sort of inhumanity. They had a spirit--like sharp
knives cutting through life."

It was her best bit of phrasing and it pleased Benham very much.
But, indeed, it was not her own phrasing, she had culled it from a
disquisition into which she had led Mr. Rathbone-Sanders, and she had
sent it to Benham as she might have sent him a flower.



6


Benham re-entered the flat from which he had fled so precipitately with
three very definite plans in his mind. The first was to set out upon
his grand tour of the world with as little delay as possible, to shut
up this Finacue Street establishment for a long time, and get rid of
the soul-destroying perfections of Merkle. The second was to end his
ill-advised intimacy with little Mrs. Skelmersdale as generously and
cheerfully as possible. The third was to bring Lady Marayne into social
relations with the Wilder and Morris MENAGE at South Harting. It did not
strike him that there was any incompatibility among these projects or
any insurmountable difficulty in any of them until he was back in his
flat.

The accumulation of letters, packages and telephone memoranda upon his
desk included a number of notes and slips to remind him that both Mrs.
Skelmersdale and his mother were ladies of some determination. Even as
he stood turning over the pile of documents the mechanical vehemence of
the telephone filled him with a restored sense of the adverse will in
things. "Yes, mam," he heard Merkle's voice, "yes, mam. I will tell
him, mam. Will you keep possession, mam." And then in the doorway of the
study, "Mrs. Skelmersdale, sir. Upon the telephone, sir."

Benham reflected with various notes in his hand. Then he went to the
telephone.

"You Wicked Boy, where have you been hiding?"

"I've been away. I may have to go away again."

"Not before you have seen me. Come round and tell me all about it."

Benham lied about an engagement.

"Then to-morrow in the morning."... Impossible.

"In the afternoon. You don't WANT to see me." Benham did want to see
her.

"Come round and have a jolly little evening to-morrow night. I've got
some more of that harpsichord music. And I'm dying to see you. Don't you
understand?"

Further lies. "Look here," said Benham, "can you come and have a talk
in Kensington Gardens? You know the place, near that Chinese garden.
Paddington Gate...."

The lady's voice fell to flatness. She agreed. "But why not come to see
me HERE?" she asked.

Benham hung up the receiver abruptly.

He walked slowly back to his study. "Phew!" he whispered to himself.
It was like hitting her in the face. He didn't want to be a brute,
but short of being a brute there was no way out for him from this
entanglement. Why, oh! why the devil had he gone there to lunch?...

He resumed his examination of the waiting letters with a ruffled mind.
The most urgent thing about them was the clear evidence of gathering
anger on the part of his mother. He had missed a lunch party at Sir
Godfrey's on Tuesday and a dinner engagement at Philip Magnet's, quite
an important dinner in its way, with various promising young Liberals,
on Wednesday evening. And she was furious at "this stupid mystery.
Of course you're bound to be found out, and of course there will be a
scandal."... He perceived that this last note was written on his own
paper. "Merkle!" he cried sharply.

"Yessir!"

Merkle had been just outside, on call.

"Did my mother write any of these notes here?" he asked.

"Two, sir. Her ladyship was round here three times, sir."

"Did she see all these letters?"

"Not the telephone calls, sir. I 'ad put them on one side. But.... It's
a little thing, sir."

He paused and came a step nearer. "You see, sir," he explained with the
faintest flavour of the confidential softening his mechanical respect,
"yesterday, when 'er ladyship was 'ere, sir, some one rang up on the
telephone--"

"But you, Merkle--"

"Exactly, sir. But 'er ladyship said 'I'LL go to that, Merkle,' and just
for a moment I couldn't exactly think 'ow I could manage it, sir, and
there 'er ladyship was, at the telephone. What passed, sir, I couldn't
'ear. I 'eard her say, 'Any message?' And I FANCY, sir, I 'eard 'er say,
'I'm the 'ousemaid,' but that, sir, I think must have been a mistake,
sir."

"Must have been," said Benham. "Certainly--must have been. And the call
you think came from--?"

"There again, sir, I'm quite in the dark. But of course, sir, it's
usually Mrs. Skelmersdale, sir. Just about her time in the afternoon. On
an average, sir...."



7


"I went out of London to think about my life."

It was manifest that Lady Marayne did not believe him.

"Alone?" she asked.

"Of course alone."

"STUFF!" said Lady Marayne.

She had taken him into her own little sitting-room, she had thrown aside
gloves and fan and theatre wrap, curled herself comfortably into the
abundantly cushioned corner by the fire, and proceeded to a mixture of
cross-examination and tirade that he found it difficult to make head
against. She was vibrating between distressed solicitude and resentful
anger. She was infuriated at his going away and deeply concerned at
what could have taken him away. "I was worried," he said. "London is too
crowded to think in. I wanted to get myself alone."

"And there I was while you were getting yourself alone, as you call it,
wearing my poor little brains out to think of some story to tell people.
I had to stuff them up you had a sprained knee at Chexington, and for
all I knew any of them might have been seeing you that morning. Besides
what has a boy like you to worry about? It's all nonsense, Poff."

She awaited his explanations. Benham looked for a moment like his
father.

"I'm not getting on, mother," he said. "I'm scattering myself. I'm
getting no grip. I want to get a better hold upon life, or else I do not
see what is to keep me from going to pieces--and wasting existence. It's
rather difficult sometimes to tell what one thinks and feels--"

She had not really listened to him.

"Who is that woman," she interrupted suddenly, "Mrs. Fly-by-Night, or
some such name, who rings you up on the telephone?"

Benham hesitated, blushed, and regretted it.

"Mrs. Skelmersdale," he said after a little pause.

"It's all the same. Who is she?"

"She's a woman I met at a studio somewhere, and I went with her to one
of those Dolmetsch concerts."

He stopped.

Lady Marayne considered him in silence for a little while. "All men,"
she said at last, "are alike. Husbands, sons and brothers, they are all
alike. Sons! One expects them to be different. They aren't different.
Why should they be? I suppose I ought to be shocked, Poff. But I'm not.
She seems to be very fond of you."

"She's--she's very good--in her way. She's had a difficult life...."

"You can't leave a man about for a moment," Lady Marayne reflected.
"Poff, I wish you'd fetch me a glass of water."

When he returned she was looking very fixedly into the fire. "Put it
down," she said, "anywhere. Poff! is this Mrs. Helter-Skelter a discreet
sort of woman? Do you like her?" She asked a few additional particulars
and Benham made his grudging admission of facts. "What I still don't
understand, Poff, is why you have been away."

"I went away," said Benham, "because I want to clear things up."

"But why? Is there some one else?"

"No."

"You went alone? All the time?"

"I've told you I went alone. Do you think I tell you lies, mother?"

"Everybody tells lies somehow," said Lady Marayne. "Easy lies or stiff
ones. Don't FLOURISH, Poff. Don't start saying things like a moral
windmill in a whirlwind. It's all a muddle. I suppose every one in
London is getting in or out of these entanglements--or something of
the sort. And this seems a comparatively slight one. I wish it hadn't
happened. They do happen."

An expression of perplexity came into her face. She looked at him. "Why
do you want to throw her over?"

"I WANT to throw her over," said Benham.

He stood up and went to the hearthrug, and his mother reflected that
this was exactly what all men did at just this phase of a discussion.
Then things ceased to be sensible.

From overhead he said to her: "I want to get away from this
complication, this servitude. I want to do some--some work. I want to
get my mind clear and my hands clear. I want to study government and the
big business of the world."

"And she's in the way?"

He assented.

"You men!" said Lady Marayne after a little pause. "What queer beasts
you are! Here is a woman who is kind to you. She's fond of you. I could
tell she's fond of you directly I heard her. And you amuse yourself with
her. And then it's Gobble, Gobble, Gobble, Great Work, Hands Clear, Big
Business of the World. Why couldn't you think of that before, Poff? Why
did you begin with her?"

"It was unexpected...."

"STUFF!" said Lady Marayne for a second time. "Well," she said, "well.
Your Mrs. Fly-by-Night,--oh it doesn't matter!--whatever she calls
herself, must look after herself. I can't do anything for her. I'm not
supposed even to know about her. I daresay she'll find her consolations.
I suppose you want to go out of London and get away from it all. I can
help you there, perhaps. I'm tired of London too. It's been a tiresome
season. Oh! tiresome and disappointing! I want to go over to Ireland and
travel about a little. The Pothercareys want us to come. They've asked
us twice...."

Benham braced himself to face fresh difficulties. It was amazing how
different the world could look from his mother's little parlour and from
the crest of the North Downs.

"But I want to start round the world," he cried with a note of acute
distress. "I want to go to Egypt and India and see what is happening in
the East, all this wonderful waking up of the East, I know nothing of
the way the world is going--..."

"India!" cried Lady Marayne. "The East. Poff, what is the MATTER with
you? Has something happened--something else? Have you been having a love
affair?--a REAL love affair?"

"Oh, DAMN love affairs!" cried Benham. "Mother!--I'm sorry, mother! But
don't you see there's other things in the world for a man than having
a good time and making love. I'm for something else than that. You've
given me the splendidest time--..."

"I see," cried Lady Marayne, "I see. I've bored you. I might have known
I should have bored you."

"You've NOT bored me!" cried Benham.

He threw himself on the rug at her feet. "Oh, mother!" he said, "little,
dear, gallant mother, don't make life too hard for me. I've got to do my
job, I've got to find my job."

"I've bored you," she wept.

Suddenly she was weeping with all the unconcealed distressing grief of
a disappointed child. She put her pretty be-ringed little hands in front
of her face and recited the accumulation of her woes.

"I've done all I can for you, planned for you, given all my time for you
and I've BORED you."

"Mother!"

"Don't come near me, Poff! Don't TOUCH me! All my plans. All my
ambitions. Friends--every one. You don't know all I've given up for
you...."

He had never seen his mother weep before. Her self-abandonment amazed
him. Her words were distorted by her tears. It was the most terrible and
distressing of crises....

"Go away from me! How can you help me? All I've done has been a failure!
Failure! Failure!"



8


That night the silences of Finacue Street heard Benham's voice again. "I
must do my job," he was repeating, "I must do my job. Anyhow...."

And then after a long pause, like a watchword and just a little
unsurely: "Aristocracy...."

The next day his resolution had to bear the brunt of a second ordeal.
Mrs. Skelmersdale behaved beautifully and this made everything
tormentingly touching and difficult. She convinced him she was really
in love with him, and indeed if he could have seen his freshness and
simplicity through her experienced eyes he would have known there was
sound reason why she should have found him exceptional. And when his
clumsy hints of compensation could no longer be ignored she treated him
with a soft indignation, a tender resentment, that left him soft and
tender. She looked at him with pained eyes and a quiver of the lips.
What did he think she was? And then a little less credibly, did he think
she would have given herself to him if she hadn't been in love with him?
Perhaps that was not altogether true, but at any rate it was altogether
true to her when she said it, and it was manifest that she did not for
a moment intend him to have the cheap consolation of giving her money.
But, and that seemed odd to Benham, she would not believe, just as Lady
Marayne would not believe, that there was not some other woman in the
case. He assured her and she seemed reassured, and then presently she
was back at exactly the same question. Would no woman ever understand
the call of Asia, the pride of duty, the desire for the world?

One sort of woman perhaps....

It was odd that for the first time now, in the sunshine of Kensington
Gardens, he saw the little gossamer lines that tell that thirty years
and more have passed over a face, a little wrinkling of the eyelids, a
little hardening of the mouth. How slight it is, how invisible it
has been, how suddenly it appears! And the sunshine of the warm April
afternoon, heightened it may be by her determined unmercenary pose,
betrayed too the faintest hint of shabbiness in her dress. He had never
noticed these shadows upon her or her setting before and their effect
was to fill him with a strange regretful tenderness....

Perhaps men only begin to love when they cease to be dazzled and admire.
He had thought she might reproach him, he had felt and feared she might
set herself to stir his senses, and both these expectations had been
unjust to her he saw, now that he saw her beside him, a brave, rather
ill-advised and unlucky little struggler, stung and shamed. He forgot
the particulars of that first lunch of theirs together and he remembered
his mother's second contemptuous "STUFF!"

Indeed he knew now it had not been unexpected. Why hadn't he left this
little sensitive soul and this little sensitive body alone? And since
he hadn't done so, what right had he now to back out of their common
adventure? He felt a sudden wild impulse to marry Mrs. Skelmersdale, in
a mood between remorse and love and self-immolation, and then a sunlit
young woman with a leaping stride in her paces, passed across his
heavens, pointing to Asia and Utopia and forbidding even another thought
of the banns....

"You will kiss me good-bye, dear, won't you?" said Mrs. Skelmersdale,
brimming over. "You will do that."

He couldn't keep his arm from her little shoulders. And as their lips
touched he suddenly found himself weeping also....

His spirit went limping from that interview. She chose to stay behind
in her chair and think, she said, and each time he turned back she was
sitting in the same attitude looking at him as he receded, and she had
one hand on the chair back and her arm drawn up to it. The third time he
waved his hat clumsily, and she started and then answered with her hand.
Then the trees hid her....

This sex business was a damnable business. If only because it made one
hurt women....

He had trampled on Mrs. Skelmersdale, he had hurt and disappointed
his mother. Was he a brute? Was he a cold-blooded prig? What was this
aristocracy? Was his belief anything more than a theory? Was he only
dreaming of a debt to the men in the quarry, to the miners, to the men
in the stokeholes, to the drudges on the fields? And while he dreamt he
wounded and distressed real living creatures in the sleep-walk of his
dreaming....

So long as he stuck to his dream he must at any rate set his face
absolutely against the establishment of any further relations with
women.

Unless they were women of an entirely different type, women hardened and
tempered, who would understand.



9


So Benham was able to convert the unfortunate Mrs. Skelmersdale into a
tender but for a long time an entirely painful memory. But mothers are
not so easily disposed of, and more particularly a mother whose conduct
is coloured deeply by an extraordinary persuasion of having paid for her
offspring twice over. Nolan was inexplicable; he was, Benham understood
quite clearly, never to be mentioned again; but somehow from the past
his shadow and his legacy cast a peculiar and perplexing shadow of
undefined obligation upon Benham's outlook. His resolution to go round
the world carried on his preparations rapidly and steadily, but at the
same time his mother's thwarted and angry bearing produced a torture
of remorse in him. It was constantly in his mind, like the suit of the
importunate widow, that he ought to devote his life to the little lady's
happiness and pride, and his reason told him that even if he wanted to
make this sacrifice he couldn't; the mere act of making it would produce
so entirely catastrophic a revulsion. He could as soon have become a
croquet champion or the curate of Chexington church, lines of endeavour
which for him would have led straightly and simply to sacrilegious
scandal or manslaughter with a mallet.

There is so little measure in the wild atonements of the young that it
was perhaps as well for the Research Magnificent that the remorses of
this period of Benham's life were too complicated and scattered for a
cumulative effect. In the background of his mind and less subdued
than its importance could seem to warrant was his promise to bring the
Wilder-Morris people into relations with Lady Marayne. They had been so
delightful to him that he felt quite acutely the slight he was putting
upon them by this delay. Lady Marayne's moods, however, had been so
uncertain that he had found no occasion to broach this trifling matter,
and when at last the occasion came he perceived in the same instant the
fullest reasons for regretting it.

"Ah!" she said, hanging only for a moment, and then: "you told me you
were alone!"...

Her mind leapt at once to the personification of these people as all
that had puzzled and baffled her in her son since his flight from
London. They were the enemy, they had got hold of him.

"When I asked you if you were alone you pretended to be angry," she
remembered with a flash. "You said, 'Do I tell lies?'"

"I WAS alone. Until-- It was an accident. On my walk I was alone."

But he flinched before her accusing, her almost triumphant, forefinger.

From the instant she heard of them she hated these South Harting people
unrestrainedly. She made no attempt to conceal it. Her valiant bantam
spirit caught at this quarrel as a refuge from the rare and uncongenial
ache of his secession. "And who are they? What are they? What sort of
people can they be to drag in a passing young man? I suppose this girl
of theirs goes out every evening--Was she painted, Poff?"

She whipped him with her questions as though she was slashing his face.
He became dead-white and grimly civil, answering every question as
though it was the sanest, most justifiable inquiry.

"Of course I don't know who they are. How should I know? What need is
there to know?"

"There are ways of finding out," she insisted. "If I am to go down and
make myself pleasant to these people because of you."

"But I implore you not to."

"And five minutes ago you were imploring me to! Of course I shall."

"Oh well!--well!"

"One has to know SOMETHING of the people to whom one commits oneself,
surely."

"They are decent people; they are well-behaved people."

"Oh!--I'll behave well. Don't think I'll disgrace your casual
acquaintances. But who they are, what they are, I WILL know...."

On that point Lady Marayne was to score beyond her utmost expectations.

"Come round," she said over the telephone, two mornings later. "I've
something to tell you."

She was so triumphant that she was sorry for him. When it came to
telling him, she failed from her fierceness.

"Poff, my little son," she said, "I'm so sorry I hardly know how to tell
you. Poff, I'm sorry. I have to tell you--and it's utterly beastly."

"But what?" he asked.

"These people are dreadful people."

"But how?"

"You've heard of the great Kent and Eastern Bank smash and the
Marlborough Building Society frauds eight or nine years ago?"

"Vaguely. But what has that to do with them?"

"That man Morris."

She stopped short, and Benham nodded for her to go on.

"Her father," said Lady Marayne.

"But who was Morris? Really, mother, I don't remember."

"He was sentenced to seven years--ten years--I forget. He had done all
sorts of dreadful things. He was a swindler. And when he went out of the
dock into the waiting-room-- He had a signet ring with prussic acid in
it--..."

"I remember now," he said.

A silence fell between them.

Benham stood quite motionless on the hearthrug and stared very hard at
the little volume of Henley's poetry that lay upon the table.

He cleared his throat presently.

"You can't go and see them then," he said. "After all--since I am going
abroad so soon--... It doesn't so very much matter."



10


To Benham it did not seem to be of the slightest importance that
Amanda's father was a convicted swindler who had committed suicide.
Never was a resolved and conscious aristocrat so free from the
hereditary delusion. Good parents, he was convinced, are only an
advantage in so far as they have made you good stuff, and bad parents
are no discredit to a son or daughter of good quality. Conceivably he
had a bias against too close an examination of origins, and he held that
the honour of the children should atone for the sins of the fathers and
the questionable achievements of any intervening testator. Not half a
dozen rich and established families in all England could stand even the
most conventional inquiry into the foundations of their pride, and
only a universal amnesty could prevent ridiculous distinctions. But he
brought no accusation of inconsistency against his mother. She looked at
things with a lighter logic and a kind of genius for the acceptance
of superficial values. She was condoned and forgiven, a rescued lamb,
re-established, notoriously bright and nice, and the Morrises were
damned. That was their status, exclusion, damnation, as fixed as colour
in Georgia or caste in Bengal. But if his mother's mind worked in that
way there was no reason why his should. So far as he was concerned, he
told himself, it did not matter whether Amanda was the daughter of a
swindler or the daughter of a god. He had no doubt that she herself had
the spirit and quality of divinity. He had seen it.

So there was nothing for it in the failure of his mother's civilities
but to increase his own. He would go down to Harting and take his leave
of these amiable outcasts himself. With a certain effusion. He would do
this soon because he was now within sight of the beginning of his world
tour. He had made his plans and prepared most of his equipment. Little
remained to do but the release of Merkle, the wrappering and locking up
of Finacue Street, which could await him indefinitely, and the buying of
tickets. He decided to take the opportunity afforded by a visit of Sir
Godfrey and Lady Marayne to the Blights, big iron people in the North of
England of so austere a morality that even Benham was ignored by it. He
announced his invasion in a little note to Mrs. Wilder. He parted from
his mother on Friday afternoon; she was already, he perceived, a little
reconciled to his project of going abroad; and contrived his arrival
at South Harting for that sunset hour which was for his imagination the
natural halo of Amanda.

"I'm going round the world," he told them simply. "I may be away for
two years, and I thought I would like to see you all again before I
started."

That was quite the way they did things.

The supper-party included Mr. Rathbone-Sanders, who displayed a curious
tendency to drift in between Benham and Amanda, a literary youth with
a Byronic visage, very dark curly hair, and a number of extraordinarily
mature chins, a girl-friend of Betty's who had cycled down from London,
and who it appeared maintained herself at large in London by drawing for
advertisements, and a silent colourless friend of Mr. Rathbone-Sanders.
The talk lit by Amanda's enthusiasm circled actively round Benham's
expedition. It was clear that the idea of giving some years to thinking
out one's possible work in the world was for some reason that remained
obscure highly irritating to both Mr. Rathbone-Sanders and the Byronic
youth. Betty too regarded it as levity when there was "so much to be
done," and the topic whacked about and rose to something like a
wrangle, and sat down and rested and got up again reinvigorated, with
a continuity of interest that Benham had never yet encountered in any
London gathering. He made a good case for his modern version of the
Grand Tour, and he gave them something of his intellectual enthusiasm
for the distances and views, the cities and seas, the multitudinous wide
spectacle of the world he was to experience. He had been reading about
Benares and North China. As he talked Amanda, who had been animated at
first, fell thoughtful and silent. And then it was discovered that the
night was wonderfully warm and the moon shining. They drifted out into
the garden, but Mr. Rathbone-Sanders was suddenly entangled and drawn
back by Mrs. Wilder and the young woman from London upon some technical
point, and taken to the work-table in the corner of the dining-room to
explain. He was never able to get to the garden.

Benham found himself with Amanda upon a side path, a little isolated by
some swaggering artichokes and a couple of apple trees and so forth from
the general conversation. They cut themselves off from the continuation
of that by a little silence, and then she spoke abruptly and with the
quickness of a speaker who has thought out something to say and fears
interruption: "Why did you come down here?"

"I wanted to see you before I went."

"You disturb me. You fill me with envy."

"I didn't think of that. I wanted to see you again."

"And then you will go off round the world, you will see the Tropics, you
will see India, you will go into Chinese cities all hung with vermilion,
you will climb mountains. Oh! men can do all the splendid things. Why do
you come here to remind me of it? I have never been anywhere, anywhere
at all. I never shall go anywhere. Never in my life have I seen a
mountain. Those Downs there--look at them!--are my highest. And while
you are travelling I shall think of you--and think of you...."

"Would YOU like to travel?" he asked as though that was an extraordinary
idea.

"Do you think EVERY girl wants to sit at home and rock a cradle?"

"I never thought YOU did."

"Then what did you think I wanted?"

"What DO you want?"

She held her arms out widely, and the moonlight shone in her eyes as she
turned her face to him.

"Just what you want," she said; "--THE WHOLE WORLD!

"Life is like a feast," she went on; "it is spread before everybody and
nobody must touch it. What am I? Just a prisoner. In a cottage garden.
Looking for ever over a hedge. I should be happier if I couldn't look.
I remember once, only a little time ago, there was a cheap excursion to
London. Our only servant went. She had to get up at an unearthly hour,
and I--I got up too. I helped her to get off. And when she was gone I
went up to my bedroom again and cried. I cried with envy for any one,
any one who could go away. I've been nowhere--except to school at
Chichester and three or four times to Emsworth and Bognor--for eight
years. When you go"--the tears glittered in the moonlight--"I shall cry.
It will be worse than the excursion to London.... Ever since you were
here before I've been thinking of it."

It seemed to Benham that here indeed was the very sister of his spirit.
His words sprang into his mind as one thinks of a repartee. "But why
shouldn't you come too?" he said.

She stared at him in silence. The two white-lit faces examined each
other. Both she and Benham were trembling.

"COME TOO?" she repeated.

"Yes, with me."

"But--HOW?"

Then suddenly she was weeping like a child that is teased; her troubled
eyes looked out from under puckered brows. "You don't mean it," she
said. "You don't mean it."

And then indeed he meant it.

"Marry me," he said very quickly, glancing towards the dark group at the
end of the garden. "And we will go together."

He seized her arm and drew her to him. "I love you," he said. "I love
your spirit. You are not like any one else."

There was a moment's hesitation.

Both he and she looked to see how far they were still alone.

Then they turned their dusky faces to each other. He drew her still
closer.

"Oh!" she said, and yielded herself to be kissed. Their lips touched,
and for a moment he held her lithe body against his own.

"I want you," he whispered close to her. "You are my mate. From the
first sight of you I knew that...."

They embraced--alertly furtive.

Then they stood a little apart. Some one was coming towards them.
Amanda's bearing changed swiftly. She put up her little face to his,
confidently and intimately.

"Don't TELL any one," she whispered eagerly shaking his arm to emphasize
her words. "Don't tell any one--not yet. Not for a few days...."

She pushed him from her quickly as the shadowy form of Betty appeared in
a little path between the artichokes and raspberry canes.

"Listening to the nightingales?" cried Betty.

"Yes, aren't they?" said Amanda inconsecutively.

"That's our very own nightingale!" cried Betty advancing. "Do you hear
it, Mr. Benham? No, not that one. That is a quite inferior bird that
performs in the vicarage trees...."



11


When a man has found and won his mate then the best traditions demand
a lyrical interlude. It should be possible to tell, in that
ecstatic manner which melts words into moonshine, makes prose almost
uncomfortably rhythmic, and brings all the freshness of every spring
that ever was across the page, of the joyous exaltation of the happy
lover. This at any rate was what White had always done in his novels
hitherto, and what he would certainly have done at this point had he had
the telling of Benham's story uncontrolledly in his hands. But, indeed,
indeed, in real life, in very truth, the heart has not this simplicity.
Only the heroes of romance, and a few strong simple clean-shaven
Americans have that much emotional integrity. (And even the Americans do
at times seem to an observant eye to be putting in work at the job and
keeping up their gladness.) Benham was excited that night, but not
in the proper bright-eyed, red-cheeked way; he did not dance down the
village street of Harting to his harbour at the Ship, and the expression
in his eyes as he sat on the edge of his bed was not the deep elemental
wonder one could have wished there, but amazement. Do not suppose
that he did not love Amanda, that a rich majority of his being was not
triumphantly glad to have won her, that the image of the two armour-clad
lovers was not still striding and flourishing through the lit wilderness
of his imagination. For three weeks things had pointed him to this.
They would do everything together now, he and his mate, they would scale
mountains together and ride side by side towards ruined cities across
the deserts of the World. He could have wished no better thing. But at
the same time, even as he felt and admitted this and rejoiced at it, the
sky of his mind was black with consternation....

It is remarkable, White reflected, as he turned over the abundant but
confused notes upon this perplexing phase of Benham's development that
lay in the third drawer devoted to the Second Limitation, how dependent
human beings are upon statement. Man is the animal that states a case.
He lives not in things but in expressed ideas, and what was troubling
Benham inordinately that night, a night that should have been devoted to
purely blissful and exalted expectations, was the sheer impossibility of
stating what had happened in any terms that would be tolerable either
to Mrs. Skelmersdale or Lady Marayne. The thing had happened with the
suddenness of a revelation. Whatever had been going on in the less
illuminated parts of his mind, his manifest resolution had been
merely to bid South Harting good-bye-- And in short they would never
understand. They would accuse him of the meanest treachery. He could see
his mother's face, he could hear her voice saying, "And so because of
this sudden infatuation for a swindler's daughter, a girl who runs about
the roads with a couple of retrievers hunting for a man, you must
spoil all my plans, ruin my year, tell me a lot of pretentious stuffy
lies...." And Mrs. Skelmersdale too would say, "Of course he just talked
of the world and duty and all that rubbish to save my face...."

It wasn't so at all.

But it looked so frightfully like it!

Couldn't they realize that he had fled out of London before ever he had
seen Amanda? They might be able to do it perhaps, but they never would.
It just happened that in the very moment when the edifice of his noble
resolutions had been ready, she had stepped into it--out of nothingness
and nowhere. She wasn't an accident; that was just the point upon which
they were bound to misjudge her; she was an embodiment. If only he could
show her to them as she had first shown herself to him, swift, light, a
little flushed from running but not in the least out of breath, quick
as a leopard upon the dogs.... But even if the improbable opportunity
arose, he perceived it might still be impossible to produce the Amanda
he loved, the Amanda of the fluttering short skirt and the clear
enthusiastic voice. Because, already he knew she was not the only
Amanda. There was another, there might be others, there was this
perplexing person who had flashed into being at the very moment of their
mutual confession, who had produced the entirely disconcerting demand
that nobody must be told. Then Betty had intervened. But that sub-Amanda
and her carneying note had to be dealt with on the first occasion,
because when aristocrats love they don't care a rap who is told and who
is not told. They just step out into the light side by side....

"Don't tell any one," she had said, "not for a few days...."

This sub-Amanda was perceptible next morning again, flitting about in
the background of a glad and loving adventuress, a pre-occupied Amanda
who had put her head down while the real Amanda flung her chin up and
contemplated things on the Asiatic scale, and who was apparently engaged
in disentangling something obscure connected with Mr. Rathbone-Sanders
that ought never to have been entangled....

"A human being," White read, "the simplest human being, is a clustering
mass of aspects. No man will judge another justly who judges everything
about him. And of love in particular is this true. We love not persons
but revelations. The woman one loves is like a goddess hidden in a
shrine; for her sake we live on hope and suffer the kindred priestesses
that make up herself. The art of love is patience till the gleam
returns...."

Sunday and Monday did much to develop this idea of the intricate
complexity of humanity in Benham's mind. On Monday morning he went
up from the Ship again to get Amanda alone and deliver his ultimatum
against a further secrecy, so that he could own her openly and have no
more of the interventions and separations that had barred him from any
intimate talk with her throughout the whole of Sunday. The front door
stood open, the passage hall was empty, but as he hesitated whether he
should proclaim himself with the knocker or walk through, the door of
the little drawing-room flew open and a black-clad cylindrical clerical
person entirely unknown to Benham stumbled over the threshold, blundered
blindly against him, made a sound like "MOO" and a pitiful gesture with
his arm, and fled forth....

It was a curate and he was weeping bitterly....

Benham stood in the doorway and watched a clumsy broken-hearted flight
down the village street.

He had been partly told and partly left to infer, and anyhow he was
beginning to understand about Mr. Rathbone-Sanders. That he could
dismiss. But--why was the curate in tears?



12


He found Amanda standing alone in the room from which this young man
had fled. She had a handful of daffodils in her hand, and others were
scattered over the table. She had been arranging the big bowl of flowers
in the centre. He left the door open behind him and stopped short with
the table between them. She looked up at him--intelligently and calmly.
Her pose had a divine dignity.

"I want to tell them now," said Benham without a word of greeting.

"Yes," she said, "tell them now."

They heard steps in the passage outside. "Betty!" cried Amanda.

Her mother's voice answered, "Do you want Betty?"

"We want you all," answered Amanda. "We have something to tell you...."

"Carrie!" they heard Mrs. Morris call her sister after an interval, and
her voice sounded faint and flat and unusual. There was the soft hissing
of some whispered words outside and a muffled exclamation. Then Mrs.
Wilder and Mrs. Morris and Betty came into the room. Mrs. Wilder came
first, and Mrs. Morris with an alarmed face as if sheltering behind her.
"We want to tell you something," said Amanda.

"Amanda and I are going to marry each other," said Benham, standing in
front of her.

For an instant the others made no answer; they looked at each other.

"BUT DOES HE KNOW?" Mrs. Morris said in a low voice.

Amanda turned her eyes to her lover. She was about to speak, she seemed
to gather herself for an effort, and then he knew that he did not want
to hear her explanation. He checked her by a gesture.

"I KNOW," he said, and then, "I do not see that it matters to us in the
least."

He went to her holding out both his hands to her.

She took them and stood shyly for a moment, and then the watchful
gravity of her face broke into soft emotion. "Oh!" she cried and seized
his face between her hands in a passion of triumphant love and kissed
him.

And then he found himself being kissed by Mrs. Morris.

She kissed him thrice, with solemnity, with thankfulness, with relief,
as if in the act of kissing she transferred to him precious and entirely
incalculable treasures.




CHAPTER THE FOURTH ~~ THE SPIRITED HONEYMOON



1


It was a little after sunrise one bright morning in September that
Benham came up on to the deck of the sturdy Austrian steamboat that was
churning its way with a sedulous deliberation from Spalato to Cattaro,
and lit himself a cigarette and seated himself upon a deck chair. Save
for a yawning Greek sailor busy with a mop the first-class deck was
empty.

Benham surveyed the haggard beauty of the Illyrian coast. The mountains
rose gaunt and enormous and barren to a jagged fantastic silhouette
against the sun; their almost vertical slopes still plunged in blue
shadow, broke only into a little cold green and white edge of olive
terraces and vegetation and houses before they touched the clear blue
water. An occasional church or a house perched high upon some seemingly
inaccessible ledge did but accentuate the vast barrenness of the land.
It was a land desolated and destroyed. At Ragusa, at Salona, at Spalato
and Zara and Pola Benham had seen only variations upon one persistent
theme, a dwindled and uncreative human life living amidst the giant
ruins of preceding times, as worms live in the sockets of a skull.
Forward an unsavoury group of passengers still slumbered amidst
fruit-peel and expectorations, a few soldiers, some squalid brigands
armed with preposterous red umbrellas, a group of curled-up human lumps
brooded over by an aquiline individual caparisoned with brass like a
horse, his head wrapped picturesquely in a shawl. Benham surveyed these
last products of the "life force" and resumed his pensive survey of the
coast. The sea was deserted save for a couple of little lateen craft
with suns painted on their gaudy sails, sea butterflies that hung
motionless as if unawakened close inshore....

The travel of the last few weeks had impressed Benham's imagination
profoundly. For the first time in his life he had come face to face
with civilization in defeat. From Venice hitherward he had marked with
cumulative effect the clustering evidences of effort spent and power
crumbled to nothingness. He had landed upon the marble quay of Pola and
visited its deserted amphitheatre, he had seen a weak provincial life
going about ignoble ends under the walls of the great Venetian fortress
and the still more magnificent cathedral of Zara; he had visited
Spalato, clustered in sweltering grime within the ample compass of the
walls of Diocletian's villa, and a few troublesome sellers of coins and
iridescent glass and fragments of tessellated pavement and such-like
loot was all the population he had found amidst the fallen walls and
broken friezes and columns of Salona. Down this coast there ebbed and
flowed a mean residual life, a life of violence and dishonesty, peddling
trades, vendettas and war. For a while the unstable Austrian ruled
this land and made a sort of order that the incalculable chances of
international politics might at any time shatter. Benham was drawing
near now to the utmost limit of that extended peace. Ahead beyond the
mountain capes was Montenegro and, further, Albania and Macedonia,
lands of lawlessness and confusion. Amanda and he had been warned of the
impossibility of decent travel beyond Cattaro and Cettinje but this had
but whetted her adventurousness and challenged his spirit. They were
going to see Albania for themselves.

The three months of honeymoon they had been spending together had
developed many remarkable divergences of their minds that had not been
in the least apparent to Benham before their marriage. Then their
common resolve to be as spirited as possible had obliterated all minor
considerations. But that was the limit of their unanimity. Amanda loved
wild and picturesque things, and Benham strong and clear things; the
vines and brushwood amidst the ruins of Salona that had delighted her
had filled him with a sense of tragic retrogression. Salona had revived
again in the acutest form a dispute that had been smouldering between
them throughout a fitful and lengthy exploration of north and central
Italy. She could not understand his disgust with the mediaeval colour
and confusion that had swamped the pride and state of the Roman empire,
and he could not make her feel the ambition of the ruler, the essential
discipline and responsibilities of his aristocratic idea. While his
adventurousness was conquest, hers, it was only too manifest, was
brigandage. His thoughts ran now into the form of an imaginary
discourse, that he would never deliver to her, on the decay of states,
on the triumphs of barbarians over rulers who will not rule, on the
relaxation of patrician orders and the return of the robber and assassin
as lordship decays. This coast was no theatrical scenery for him; it was
a shattered empire. And it was shattered because no men had been found,
united enough, magnificent and steadfast enough, to hold the cities,
and maintain the roads, keep the peace and subdue the brutish hates and
suspicions and cruelties that devastated the world.

And as these thoughts came back into his mind, Amanda flickered up from
below, light and noiseless as a sunbeam, and stood behind his chair.

Freedom and the sight of the world had if possible brightened and
invigorated her. Her costume and bearing were subtly touched by the
romance of the Adriatic. There was a flavour of the pirate in the cloak
about her shoulders and the light knitted cap of scarlet she had stuck
upon her head. She surveyed his preoccupation for a moment, glanced
forward, and then covered his eyes with her hands. In almost the same
movement she had bent down and nipped the tip of his ear between her
teeth.

"Confound you, Amanda!"

"You'd forgotten my existence, you star-gazing Cheetah. And then, you
see, these things happen to you!"

"I was thinking."

"Well--DON'T.... I distrust your thinking. This coast is wilder and
grimmer than yesterday. It's glorious...."

She sat down on the chair he unfolded for her.

"Is there nothing to eat?" she asked abruptly.

"It is too early."



2


"This coast is magnificent," she said presently.

"It's hideous," he answered. "It's as ugly as a heap of slag."

"It's nature at its wildest."

"That's Amanda at her wildest."

"Well, isn't it?"

"No! This land isn't nature. It's waste. Not wilderness. It's the other
end. Those hills were covered with forests; this was a busy civilized
coast just a little thousand years ago. The Venetians wasted it.
They cut down the forests; they filled the cities with a mixed mud of
population, THAT stuff. Look at it"!--he indicated the sleepers forward
by a movement of his head.

"I suppose they WERE rather feeble people," said Amanda.

"Who?"

"The Venetians."

"They were traders--and nothing more. Just as we are. And when they were
rich they got splendid clothes and feasted and rested. Much as we do."

Amanda surveyed him. "We don't rest."

"We idle."

"We are seeing things."

"Don't be a humbug, Amanda. We are making love. Just as they did. And
it has been--ripping. In Salona they made love tremendously. They did
nothing else until the barbarians came over the mountains...."

"Well," said Amanda virtuously, "we will do something else."

He made no answer and her expression became profoundly thoughtful. Of
course this wandering must end. He had been growing impatient for some
time. But it was difficult, she perceived, to decide just what to do
with him....

Benham picked up the thread of his musing.

He was seeing more and more clearly that all civilization was an effort,
and so far always an inadequate and very partially successful effort.
Always it had been aristocratic, aristocratic in the sense that it was
the work of minorities, who took power, who had a common resolution
against the inertia, the indifference, the insubordination and
instinctive hostility of the mass of mankind. And always the set-backs,
the disasters of civilization, had been failures of the aristocratic
spirit. Why had the Roman purpose faltered and shrivelled? Every order,
every brotherhood, every organization carried with it the seeds of
its own destruction. Must the idea of statecraft and rule perpetually
reappear, reclothe itself in new forms, age, die, even as life
does--making each time its almost infinitesimal addition to human
achievement? Now the world is crying aloud for a renascence of the
spirit that orders and controls. Human affairs sway at a dizzy height of
opportunity. Will they keep their footing there, or stagger? We have
got back at last to a time as big with opportunity as the early empire.
Given only the will in men and it would be possible now to turn the
dazzling accidents of science, the chancy attainments of the nineteenth
century, into a sane and permanent possession, a new starting point....
What a magnificence might be made of life!

He was aroused by Amanda's voice.

"When we go back to London, old Cheetah," she said, "we must take a
house."

For some moments he stared at her, trying to get back to their point of
divergence.

"Why?" he asked at length.

"We must have a house," she said.

He looked at her face. Her expression was profoundly thoughtful, her
eyes were fixed on the slumbering ships poised upon the transparent
water under the mountain shadows.

"You see," she thought it out, "you've got to TELL in London. You can't
just sneak back there. You've got to strike a note of your own. With all
these things of yours."

"But how?"

"There's a sort of little house, I used to see them when I was a girl
and my father lived in London, about Brook Street and that part. Not
too far north.... You see going back to London for us is just another
adventure. We've got to capture London. We've got to scale it. We've
got advantages of all sorts. But at present we're outside. We've got to
march in."

Her clear hazel eyes contemplated conflicts and triumphs.

She was roused by Benham's voice.

"What the deuce are you thinking of, Amanda?"

She turned her level eyes to his. "London," she said. "For you."

"I don't want London," he said.

"I thought you did. You ought to. I do."

"But to take a house! Make an invasion of London!"

"You dear old Cheetah, you can't be always frisking about in the
wilderness, staring at the stars."

"But I'm not going back to live in London in the old way, theatres,
dinner-parties, chatter--"

"Oh no! We aren't going to do that sort of thing. We aren't going to
join the ruck. We'll go about in holiday times all over the world. I
want to see Fusiyama. I mean to swim in the South Seas. With you. We'll
dodge the sharks. But all the same we shall have to have a house in
London. We have to be FELT there."

She met his consternation fairly. She lifted her fine eyebrows. Her
little face conveyed a protesting reasonableness.

"Well, MUSTN'T we?"

She added, "If we want to alter the world we ought to live in the
world."

Since last they had disputed the question she had thought out these new
phrases.

"Amanda," he said, "I think sometimes you haven't the remotest idea of
what I am after. I don't believe you begin to suspect what I am up to."

She put her elbows on her knees, dropped her chin between her hands and
regarded him impudently. She had a characteristic trick of looking up
with her face downcast that never failed to soften his regard.

"Look here, Cheetah, don't you give way to your early morning habit of
calling your own true love a fool," she said.

"Simply I tell you I will not go back to London."

"You will go back with me, Cheetah."

"I will go back as far as my work calls me there."

"It calls you through the voice of your mate and slave and doormat to
just exactly the sort of house you ought to have.... It is the privilege
and duty of the female to choose the lair."

For a space Benham made no reply. This controversy had been gathering
for some time and he wanted to state his view as vividly as possible.
The Benham style of connubial conversation had long since decided for
emphasis rather than delicacy.

"I think," he said slowly, "that this wanting to take London by storm is
a beastly VULGAR thing to want to do."

Amanda compressed her lips.

"I want to work out things in my mind," he went on. "I do not want to
be distracted by social things, and I do not want to be distracted by
picturesque things. This life--it's all very well on the surface, but it
isn't real. I'm not getting hold of reality. Things slip away from me.
God! but how they slip away from me!"

He got up and walked to the side of the boat.

She surveyed his back for some moments. Then she went and leant over the
rail beside him.

"I want to go to London," she said.

"I don't."

"Where do you want to go?"

"Where I can see into the things that hold the world together."

"I have loved this wandering--I could wander always. But... Cheetah! I
tell you I WANT to go to London."

He looked over his shoulder into her warm face. "NO," he said.

"But, I ask you."

He shook his head.

She put her face closer and whispered. "Cheetah! big beast of my heart.
Do you hear your mate asking for something?"

He turned his eyes back to the mountains. "I must go my own way."

"Haven't I, so far, invented things, made life amusing, Cheetah? Can't
you trust the leopard's wisdom?"

He stared at the coast inexorably.

"I wonder," she whispered.

"What?"

"You ARE that, Cheetah, that lank, long, EAGER beast--."

Suddenly with a nimble hand she had unbuttoned and rolled up the sleeve
of her blouse. She stuck her pretty blue-veined arm before his eyes.
"Look here, sir, it was you, wasn't it? It was your powerful jaw
inflicted this bite upon the arm of a defenceless young leopardess--"

"Amanda!"

"Well." She wrinkled her brows.

He turned about and stood over her, he shook a finger in her face and
there was a restrained intensity in his voice as he spoke.

"Look here, Amanda!" he said, "if you think that you are going to
make me agree to any sort of project about London, to any sort of
complication of our lives with houses in smart streets and a campaign of
social assertion--by THAT, then may I be damned for an uxorious fool!"

Her eyes met his and there was mockery in her eyes.

"This, Cheetah, is the morning mood," she remarked.

"This is the essential mood. Listen, Amanda--"

He stopped short. He looked towards the gangway, they both looked. The
magic word "Breakfast" came simultaneously from them.

"Eggs," she said ravenously, and led the way.

A smell of coffee as insistent as an herald's trumpet had called a truce
between them.



3


Their marriage had been a comparatively inconspicuous one, but since
that time they had been engaged upon a honeymoon of great extent and
variety. Their wedding had taken place at South Harting church in the
marked absence of Lady Marayne, and it had been marred by only one
untoward event. The Reverend Amos Pugh who, in spite of the earnest
advice of several friends had insisted upon sharing in the ceremony, had
suddenly covered his face with the sleeves of his surplice and fled with
a swift rustle to the vestry, whence an uproar of inadequately smothered
sorrow came as an obligato accompaniment to the more crucial passages
of the service. Amanda appeared unaware of the incident at the time,
but afterwards she explained things to Benham. "Curates," she said, "are
such pent-up men. One ought, I suppose, to remember that. But he
never had anything to go upon at all--not anything--except his own
imaginations."

"I suppose when you met him you were nice to him."

"I was nice to him, of course...."

They drove away from Harting, as it were, over the weeping remains of
this infatuated divine. His sorrow made them thoughtful for a time, and
then Amanda nestled closer to her lover and they forgot about him, and
their honeymoon became so active and entertaining that only very rarely
and transitorily did they ever think of him again.

The original conception of their honeymoon had been identical with the
plans Benham had made for the survey and study of the world, and it was
through a series of modifications, replacements and additions that it
became at last a prolonged and very picturesque tour in Switzerland,
the Austrian Tyrol, North Italy, and down the Adriatic coast. Amanda
had never seen mountains, and longed, she said, to climb. This took them
first to Switzerland. Then, in spite of their exalted aims, the devotion
of their lives to noble purposes, it was evident that Amanda had no
intention of scamping the detail of love, and for that what background
is so richly beautiful as Italy? An important aspect of the grand tour
round the world as Benham had planned it, had been interviews, inquiries
and conversations with every sort of representative and understanding
person he could reach. An unembarrassed young man who wants to know and
does not promise to bore may reach almost any one in that way, he is as
impersonal as pure reason and as mobile as a letter, but the presence of
a lady in his train leaves him no longer unembarrassed. His approach has
become a social event. The wife of a great or significant personage must
take notice or decide not to take notice. Of course Amanda was prepared
to go anywhere, just as Benham's shadow; it was the world that was
unprepared. And a second leading aspect of his original scheme had been
the examination of the ways of government in cities and the shifting
and mixture of nations and races. It would have led to back streets, and
involved and complicated details, and there was something in the fine
flame of girlhood beside him that he felt was incompatible with those
shadows and that dust. And also they were lovers and very deeply
in love. It was amazing how swiftly that draggled shameful London
sparrow-gamin, Eros, took heart from Amanda, and became wonderful,
beautiful, glowing, life-giving, confident, clear-eyed; how he changed
from flesh to sweet fire, and grew until he filled the sky. So that you
see they went to Switzerland and Italy at last very like two ordinary
young people who were not aristocrats at all, had no theory about the
world or their destiny, but were simply just ardently delighted with the
discovery of one another.

Nevertheless Benham was for some time under a vague impression that in
a sort of way still he was going round the world and working out his
destinies.

It was part of the fascination of Amanda that she was never what he had
supposed her to be, and that nothing that he set out to do with her ever
turned out as they had planned it. Her appreciations marched before her
achievement, and when it came to climbing it seemed foolish to toil
to summits over which her spirit had flitted days before. Their Swiss
expeditions which she had foreseen as glorious wanderings amidst the
blue ice of crevasses and nights of exalted hardihood became a walking
tour of fitful vigour and abundant fun and delight. They spent a long
day on the ice of the Aletsch glacier, but they reached the inn on its
eastward side with magnificent appetites a little late for dinner.

Amanda had revealed an unexpected gift for nicknames and pretty fancies.
She named herself the Leopard, the spotless Leopard; in some obscure
way she intimated that the colour was black, but that was never to be
admitted openly, there was supposed to be some lurking traces of a rusty
brown but the word was spotless and the implication white, a dazzling
white, she would play a thousand variations on the theme; in moments of
despondency she was only a black cat, a common lean black cat, and
sacks and half-bricks almost too good for her. But Benham was always
a Cheetah. That had come to her as a revelation from heaven. But so
clearly he was a Cheetah. He was a Hunting Leopard; the only beast that
has an up-cast face and dreams and looks at you with absent-minded eyes
like a man. She laced their journeys with a fantastic monologue telling
in the third person what the Leopard and the Cheetah were thinking and
seeing and doing. And so they walked up mountains and over passes and
swam in the warm clear water of romantic lakes and loved each other
mightily always, in chestnut woods and olive orchards and flower-starred
alps and pine forests and awning-covered boats, and by sunset and
moonlight and starshine; and out of these agreeable solitudes they
came brown and dusty, striding side by side into sunlit entertaining
fruit-piled market-places and envious hotels. For days and weeks
together it did not seem to Benham that there was anything that mattered
in life but Amanda and the elemental joys of living. And then the
Research Magnificent began to stir in him again. He perceived that Italy
was not India, that the clue to the questions he must answer lay in the
crowded new towns that they avoided, in the packed bookshops and the
talk of men, and not in the picturesque and flowery solitudes to which
their lovemaking carried them.

Moods began in which he seemed to forget Amanda altogether.

This happened first in the Certosa di Pavia whither they had gone one
afternoon from Milan. That was quite soon after they were married. They
had a bumping journey thither in a motor-car, a little doubtful if
the excursion was worth while, and they found a great amazement in
the lavish beauty and decorative wealth of that vast church and its
associated cloisters, set far away from any population as it seemed in
a flat wilderness of reedy ditches and patchy cultivation. The
distilleries and outbuildings were deserted--their white walls were
covered by one monstrously great and old wisteria in flower--the soaring
marvellous church was in possession of a knot of unattractive guides.
One of these conducted them through the painted treasures of the gold
and marble chapels; he was an elderly but animated person who evidently
found Amanda more wonderful than any church. He poured out great
accumulations of information and compliments before her. Benham dropped
behind, went astray and was presently recovered dreaming in the great
cloister. The guide showed them over two of the cells that opened
thereupon, each a delightful house for a solitary, bookish and clean,
and each with a little secret walled garden of its own. He was covertly
tipped against all regulations and departed regretfully with a beaming
dismissal from Amanda. She found Benham wondering why the Carthusians
had failed to produce anything better in the world than a liqueur. "One
might have imagined that men would have done something in this beautiful
quiet; that there would have come thought from here or will from here."

"In these dear little nests they ought to have put lovers," said Amanda.

"Oh, of course, YOU would have made the place Thelema...."

But as they went shaking and bumping back along the evil road to Milan,
he fell into a deep musing. Suddenly he said, "Work has to be done.
Because this order or that has failed, there is no reason why we should
fail. And look at those ragged children in the road ahead of us, and
those dirty women sitting in the doorways, and the foul ugliness of
these gaunt nameless towns through which we go! They are what they are,
because we are what we are--idlers, excursionists. In a world we ought
to rule....

"Amanda, we've got to get to work...."

That was his first display of this new mood, which presently became a
common one. He was less and less content to let the happy hours slip
by, more and more sensitive to the reminders in giant ruin and deserted
cell, in a chance encounter with a string of guns and soldiers on their
way to manoeuvres or in the sight of a stale newspaper, of a great
world process going on in which he was now playing no part at all. And
a curious irritability manifested itself more and more plainly, whenever
human pettiness obtruded upon his attention, whenever some trivial
dishonesty, some manifest slovenliness, some spiritless failure, a
cheating waiter or a wayside beggar brought before him the shiftless,
selfish, aimless elements in humanity that war against the great dream
of life made glorious. "Accursed things," he would say, as he flung some
importunate cripple at a church door a ten-centime piece; "why were they
born? Why do they consent to live? They are no better than some chance
fungus that is because it must."

"It takes all sorts to make a world," said Amanda.

"Nonsense," said Benham. "Where is the megatherium? That sort of
creature has to go. Our sort of creature has to end it."

"Then why did you give it money?"

"Because-- I don't want the thing to be more wretched than it is. But if
I could prevent more of them--... What am I doing to prevent them?"

"These beggars annoy you," said Amanda after a pause. "They do me. Let
us go back into the mountains."

But he fretted in the mountains.

They made a ten days' tour from Macugnaga over the Monte Moro to Sass,
and thence to Zermatt and back by the Theodule to Macugnaga. The sudden
apparition of douaniers upon the Monte Moro annoyed Benham, and he was
also irritated by the solemn English mountain climbers at Saas Fee.
They were as bad as golfers, he said, and reflected momentarily upon
his father. Amanda fell in love with Monte Rosa, she wanted to kiss its
snowy forehead, she danced like a young goat down the path to Mattmark,
and rolled on the turf when she came to gentians and purple primulas.
Benham was tremendously in love with her most of the time, but one
day when they were sitting over the Findelen glacier his perceptions
blundered for the first time upon the fundamental antagonism of their
quality. She was sketching out jolly things that they were to do
together, expeditions, entertainments, amusements, and adventures, with
a voluble swiftness, and suddenly in a flash his eyes were opened, and
he saw that she would never for a moment feel the quality that made life
worth while for him. He saw it in a flash, and in that flash he made
his urgent resolve not to see it. From that moment forth his bearing was
poisoned by his secret determination not to think of this, not to admit
it to his mind. And forbidden to come into his presence in its proper
form, this conflict of intellectual temperaments took on strange
disguises, and the gathering tension of his mind sought to relieve
itself along grotesque irrelevant channels.

There was, for example, the remarkable affair of the drive from
Macugnaga to Piedimulera.

They had decided to walk down in a leisurely fashion, but with the
fatigues of the precipitous clamber down from Switzerland still upon
them they found the white road between rock above and gorge below
wearisome, and the valley hot in the late morning sunshine, and already
before they reached the inn they had marked for lunch Amanda had
suggested driving the rest of the way. The inn had a number of
brigand-like customers consuming such sustenance as garlic and salami
and wine; it received them with an indifference that bordered on
disrespect, until the landlord, who seemed to be something of a beauty
himself, discovered the merits of Amanda. Then he became markedly
attentive. He was a large, fat, curly-headed person with beautiful eyes,
a cherished moustache, and an air of great gentility, and when he had
welcomed his guests and driven off the slatternly waiting-maid, and
given them his best table, and consented, at Amanda's request, to open a
window, he went away and put on a tie and collar. It was an attention
so conspicuous that even the group of men in the far corner noticed and
commented on it, and then they commented on Amanda and Benham,
assuming an ignorance of Italian in the visitors that was only partly
justifiable. "Bellissima," "bravissima," "signorina," "Inglesa," one
need not be born in Italy to understand such words as these. Also they
addressed sly comments and encouragements to the landlord as he went to
and fro.

Benham was rather still and stiff during the meal, but it ill becomes
an English aristocrat to discuss the manners of an alien population, and
Amanda was amused by the effusion of the landlord and a little disposed
to experiment upon him. She sat radiating light amidst the shadows.

The question of the vehicle was broached. The landlord was doubtful,
then an idea, it was manifestly a questionable idea, occurred to him.
He went to consult an obscure brown-faced individual in the corner,
disappeared, and the world without became eloquent. Presently he
returned and announced that a carozza was practicable. It had been
difficult, but he had contrived it. And he remained hovering over the
conclusion of their meal, asking questions about Amanda's mountaineering
and expressing incredulous admiration.

His bill, which he presented with an uneasy flourish, was large and
included the carozza.

He ushered them out to the carriage with civilities and compliments. It
had manifestly been difficult and contrived. It was dusty and blistered,
there had been a hasty effort to conceal its recent use as a hen-roost,
the harness was mended with string. The horse was gaunt and scandalous,
a dirty white, and carried its head apprehensively. The driver had but
one eye, through which there gleamed a concentrated hatred of God and
man.

"No wonder he charged for it before we saw it," said Benham.

"It's better than walking," said Amanda.

The company in the inn gathered behind the landlord and scrutinized
Amanda and Benham intelligently. The young couple got in. "Avanti," said
Benham, and Amanda bestowed one last ineradicable memory on the bowing
landlord.

Benham did not speak until just after they turned the first corner, and
then something portentous happened, considering the precipitous position
of the road they were upon. A small boy appeared sitting in the grass
by the wayside, and at the sight of him the white horse shied
extravagantly. The driver rose in his seat ready to jump. But the crisis
passed without a smash. "Cheetah!" cried Amanda suddenly. "This isn't
safe." "Ah!" said Benham, and began to act with the vigour of one
who has long accumulated force. He rose in his place and gripped the
one-eyed driver by the collar. "ASPETTO," he said, but he meant "Stop!"
The driver understood that he meant "Stop," and obeyed.

Benham wasted no time in parleying with the driver. He indicated to him
and to Amanda by a comprehensive gesture that he had business with the
landlord, and with a gleaming appetite upon his face went running back
towards the inn.

The landlord was sitting down to a little game of dominoes with his
friends when Benham reappeared in the sunlight of the doorway. There was
no misunderstanding Benham's expression.

For a moment the landlord was disposed to be defiant. Then he changed
his mind. Benham's earnest face was within a yard of his own, and a
threatening forefinger was almost touching his nose.

"Albergo cattivissimo," said Benham. "Cattivissimo! Pranzo cattivissimo
'orrido. Cavallo cattivissimo, dangerousissimo. Gioco abominablissimo,
damnissimo. Capisce. Eh?" [*]

     * This is vile Italian. It may--with a certain charity to
     Benham--be rendered: "The beastliest inn! The beastliest!
     The beastliest, most awful lunch! The vilest horse! Most
     dangerous! Abominable trick! Understand?"


The landlord made deprecatory gestures.

"YOU understand all right," said Benham. "Da me il argento per il
carozzo. Subito?" [*]


     * "Give me back the money for the carriage. QUICKLY!"


The landlord was understood to ask whether the signor no longer wished
for the carriage.

"SUBITO!" cried Benham, and giving way to a long-restrained impulse
seized the padrone by the collar of his coat and shook him vigorously.

There were dissuasive noises from the company, but no attempt at rescue.
Benham released his hold.

"Adesso!" said Benham. [*]

     * "NOW!"

The landlord decided to disgorge. It was at any rate a comfort that the
beautiful lady was not seeing anything of this. And he could explain
afterwards to his friends that the Englishman was clearly a lunatic,
deserving pity rather than punishment. He made some sound of protest,
but attempted no delay in refunding the money Benham had prepaid.
Outside sounded the wheels of the returning carriage. They stopped.
Amanda appeared in the doorway and discovered Benham dominant.

He was a little short of breath, and as she came in he was addressing
the landlord with much earnestness in the following compact sentences.

"Attendez! Ecco! Adesso noi andiamo con questa cattivissimo cavallo a
Piedimulera. Si noi arrivero in safety, securo that is, pagaremo. Non
altro. Si noi abbiamo accidento Dio--Dio have mercy on your sinful soul.
See! Capisce? That's all." [*]

     * "Now we will go with this beastly horse to Piedimulera. If
     we get there safely I will pay. If we have an accident,
     then--"

He turned to Amanda. "Get back into the thing," he said. "We won't have
these stinking beasts think we are afraid of the job. I've just made
sure he won't have a profit by it if we smash up. That's all. I might
have known what he was up to when he wanted the money beforehand."
He came to the doorway and with a magnificent gesture commanded the
perplexed driver to turn the carriage.

While that was being done he discoursed upon his adjacent
fellow-creatures. "A man who pays beforehand for anything in this filthy
sort of life is a fool. You see the standards of the beast. They think
of nothing but their dirty little tricks to get profit, their garlic,
their sour wine, their games of dominoes, their moments of lust. They
crawl in this place like cockroaches in a warm corner of the fireplace
until they die. Look at the scabby frontage of the house. Look at the
men's faces.... Yes. So! Adequato. Aspettate.... Get back into the
carriage, Amanda."

"You know it's dangerous, Cheetah. The horse is a shier. That man is
blind in one eye."

"Get back into the carriage," said Benham, whitely angry. "I AM GOING TO
DRIVE!"

"But--!"

Just for a moment Amanda looked scared. Then with a queer little laugh
she jumped in again.

Amanda was never a coward when there was excitement afoot. "We'll
smash!" she cried, by no means woefully.

"Get up beside me," said Benham speaking in English to the driver but
with a gesture that translated him. Power over men radiated from
Benham in this angry mood. He took the driver's seat. The little driver
ascended and then with a grim calmness that brooked no resistance Benham
reached over, took and fastened the apron over their knees to prevent
any repetition of the jumping out tactics.

The recovering landlord became voluble in the doorway.

"In Piedimulera pagero," said Benham over his shoulder and brought the
whip across the white outstanding ribs. "Get up!" said Benham.

Amanda gripped the sides of the seat as the carriage started into
motion.

He laid the whip on again with such vigour that the horse forgot
altogether to shy at the urchin that had scared it before.

"Amanda," said Benham leaning back. "If we do happen to go over on THAT
side, jump out. It's all clear and wide for you. This side won't matter
so--"

"MIND!" screamed Amanda and recalled him to his duties. He was off the
road and he had narrowly missed an outstanding chestnut true.

"No, you don't," said Benham presently, and again their career became
erratic for a time as after a slight struggle he replaced the apron over
the knees of the deposed driver. It had been furtively released. After
that Benham kept an eye on it that might have been better devoted to the
road.

The road went down in a series of curves and corners. Now and then there
were pacific interludes when it might have been almost any road. Then,
again, it became specifically an Italian mountain road. Now and then
only a row of all too infrequent granite stumps separated them from a
sheer precipice. Some of the corners were miraculous, and once they had
a wheel in a ditch for a time, they shaved the parapet of a bridge over
a gorge and they drove a cyclist into a patch of maize, they narrowly
missed a goat and jumped three gullies, thrice the horse stumbled and
was jerked up in time, there were sickening moments, and withal they
got down to Piedimulera unbroken and unspilt. It helped perhaps that the
brake, with its handle like a barrel organ, had been screwed up before
Benham took control. And when they were fairly on the level outside the
town Benham suddenly pulled up, relinquished the driving into the proper
hands and came into the carriage with Amanda.

"Safe now," he said compactly.

The driver appeared to be murmuring prayers very softly as he examined
the brake.

Amanda was struggling with profound problems. "Why didn't you drive down
in the first place?" she asked. "Without going back."

"The landlord annoyed me," he said. "I had to go back.... I wish I had
kicked him. Hairy beast! If anything had happened, you see, he would
have had his mean money. I couldn't bear to leave him."

"And why didn't you let HIM drive?" She indicated the driver by a motion
of the head.

"I was angry," said Benham. "I was angry at the whole thing."

"Still--"

"You see I think I did that because he might have jumped off if I hadn't
been up there to prevent him--I mean if we had had a smash. I didn't
want him to get out of it."

"But you too--"

"You see I was angry...."

"It's been as good as a switchback," said Amanda after reflection. "But
weren't you a little careless about me, Cheetah?"

"I never thought of you," said Benham, and then as if he felt that
inadequate: "You see--I was so annoyed. It's odd at times how annoyed
one gets. Suddenly when that horse shied I realized what a beastly
business life was--as those brutes up there live it. I want to clear out
the whole hot, dirty, little aimless nest of them...."

"No, I'm sure," he repeated after a pause as though he had been
digesting something "I wasn't thinking about you at all."



4


The suppression of his discovery that his honeymoon was not in the least
the great journey of world exploration he had intended, but merely
an impulsive pleasure hunt, was by no means the only obscured and
repudiated conflict that disturbed the mind and broke out upon the
behaviour of Benham. Beneath that issue he was keeping down a far more
intimate conflict. It was in those lower, still less recognized depths
that the volcanic fire arose and the earthquakes gathered strength. The
Amanda he had loved, the Amanda of the gallant stride and fluttering
skirt was with him still, she marched rejoicing over the passes, and
a dearer Amanda, a soft whispering creature with dusky hair, who took
possession of him when she chose, a soft creature who was nevertheless a
fierce creature, was also interwoven with his life. But-- But there was
now also a multitude of other Amandas who had this in common that they
roused him to opposition, that they crossed his moods and jarred upon
his spirit. And particularly there was the Conquering Amanda not so much
proud of her beauty as eager to test it, so that she was not unmindful
of the stir she made in hotel lounges, nor of the magic that may shine
memorably through the most commonplace incidental conversation. This
Amanda was only too manifestly pleased to think that she made peasant
lovers discontented and hotel porters unmercenary; she let her light
shine before men. We lovers, who had deemed our own subjugation a
profound privilege, love not this further expansiveness of our lady's
empire. But Benham knew that no aristocrat can be jealous; jealousy he
held to be the vice of the hovel and farmstead and suburban villa, and
at an enormous expenditure of will he ignored Amanda's waving flags and
roving glances. So, too, he denied that Amanda who was sharp and shrewd
about money matters, that flash of an Amanda who was greedy for presents
and possessions, that restless Amanda who fretted at any cessation of
excitement, and that darkly thoughtful Amanda whom chance observations
and questions showed to be still considering an account she had to
settle with Lady Marayne. He resisted these impressions, he shut them
out of his mind, but still they worked into his thoughts, and presently
he could find himself asking, even as he and she went in step striding
side by side through the red-scarred pinewoods in the most perfect
outward harmony, whether after all he was so happily mated as he
declared himself to be a score of times a day, whether he wasn't
catching glimpses of reality through a veil of delusion that grew
thinner and thinner and might leave him disillusioned in the face of a
relationship--

Sometimes a man may be struck by a thought as though he had been struck
in the face, and when the name of Mrs. Skelmersdale came into his head,
he glanced at his wife by his side as if it were something that
she might well have heard. Was this indeed the same thing as that?
Wonderful, fresh as the day of Creation, clean as flame, yet the same!
Was Amanda indeed the sister of Mrs. Skelmersdale--wrought of clean
fire, but her sister?...

But also beside the inimical aspects which could set such doubts afoot
there were in her infinite variety yet other Amandas neither very dear
nor very annoying, but for the most part delightful, who entertained him
as strangers might, Amandas with an odd twist which made them amusing to
watch, jolly Amandas who were simply irrelevant. There was for example
Amanda the Dog Mistress, with an astonishing tact and understanding of
dogs, who could explain dogs and the cock of their ears and the droop of
their tails and their vanity and their fidelity, and why they looked up
and why they suddenly went off round the corner, and their pride in
the sound of their voices and their dastardly thoughts and sniffing
satisfactions, so that for the first time dogs had souls for Benham to
see. And there was an Amanda with a striking passion for the sleekness
and soft noses of horses. And there was an Amanda extremely garrulous,
who was a biographical dictionary and critical handbook to all the girls
in the school she had attended at Chichester--they seemed a very girlish
lot of girls; and an Amanda who was very knowing--knowing was the only
word for it--about pictures and architecture. And these and all the
other Amandas agreed together to develop and share this one quality
in common, that altogether they pointed to no end, they converged on
nothing. She was, it grew more and more apparent, a miscellany bound
in a body. She was an animated discursiveness. That passion to get all
things together into one aristocratic aim, that restraint of purpose,
that imperative to focus, which was the structural essential of Benham's
spirit, was altogether foreign to her composition.

There were so many Amandas, they were as innumerable as the
Venuses--Cytherea, Cypria, Paphia, Popularia, Euploea, Area,
Verticordia, Etaira, Basilea, Myrtea, Libertina, Freya, Astarte,
Philommedis, Telessigamma, Anadyomene, and a thousand others to whom men
have bowed and built temples, a thousand and the same, and yet it seemed
to Benham there was still one wanting.

The Amanda he had loved most wonderfully was that Amanda in armour who
had walked with him through the wilderness of the world along the road
to Chichester--and that Amanda came back to him no more.



5


Amanda too was making her observations and discoveries.

These moods of his perplexed her; she was astonished to find he was
becoming irritable; she felt that he needed a firm but gentle discipline
in his deportment as a lover. At first he had been perfect....

But Amanda was more prepared for human inconsecutiveness than Benham,
because she herself was inconsecutive, and her dissatisfaction with his
irritations and preoccupation broadened to no general discontent. He had
seemed perfect and he wasn't. So nothing was perfect. And he had to
be managed, just as one must manage a dog or a cousin or a mother or a
horse. Anyhow she had got him, she had no doubt that she held him by a
thousand ties, the spotless leopard had him between her teeth, he was a
prisoner in the dusk of her hair, and the world was all one vast promise
of entertainment.



6


But the raid into the Balkans was not the tremendous success she had
expected it to be. They had adventures, but they were not the richly
coloured, mediaeval affairs she had anticipated. For the most part until
Benham broke loose beyond Ochrida they were adventures in discomfort. In
those remote parts of Europe inns die away and cease, and it had never
occurred to Amanda that inns could die away anywhere. She had thought
that they just became very simple and natural and quaint. And she had
thought that when benighted people knocked at a door it would presently
open hospitably. She had not expected shots at random from the window.
And it is not usual in Albania generally for women, whether they are
Christian or Moslem, to go about unveiled; when they do so it leads
to singular manifestations. The moral sense of the men is shocked and
staggered, and they show it in many homely ways. Small boys at that
age when feminine beauty does not yet prevail with them, pelt. Also
in Mahometan districts they pelt men who do not wear fezzes, while
occasionally Christians of the shawl-headed or skull-cap persuasions
will pelt a fez. Sketching is always a peltable or mobable offence,
as being contrary to the Koran, and sitting down tempts the pelter.
Generally they pelt. The dogs of Albania are numerous, big, dirty, white
dogs, large and hostile, and they attack with little hesitation. The
women of Albania are secluded and remote, and indisposed to be of
service to an alien sister. Roads are infrequent and most bridges have
broken down. No bridge has been repaired since the later seventeenth
century, and no new bridge has been made since the decline and fall of
the Roman Empire. There are no shops at all. The scenery is magnificent
but precipitous, and many of the high roads are difficult to trace. And
there is rain. In Albania there is sometimes very heavy rain.

Yet in spite of these drawbacks they spent some splendid hours in their
exploration of that wild lost country beyond the Adriatic headlands.
There was the approach to Cattaro for example, through an arm of the
sea, amazingly beautiful on either shore, that wound its way into
the wild mountains and ended in a deep blue bay under the tremendous
declivity of Montenegro. The quay, with its trees and lateen craft, ran
along under the towers and portcullised gate of the old Venetian wall,
within clustered the town, and then the fortifications zigzagged up
steeply to a monstrous fantastic fortress perched upon a great mountain
headland that overhung the town. Behind it the rocks, slashed to and fro
with the road to Cettinje, continued to ascend into blue haze, upward
and upward until they became a purple curtain that filled half the
heavens. The paved still town was squalid by day, but in the evening it
became theatrically incredible, with an outdoor cafe amidst flowers
and creepers, a Hungarian military band, a rabble of promenaders like a
stage chorus in gorgeous costumes and a great gibbous yellow moon.

And there was Kroia, which Benham and Amanda saw first through the
branches of the great trees that bordered the broad green track they
were following. The town and its castle were poised at a tremendous
height, sunlit and brilliant against a sombre mass of storm cloud, over
vast cliffs and ravines. Kroia continued to be beautiful through a steep
laborious approach up to the very place itself, a clustering group
of houses and bazaars crowned with a tower and a minaret, and from a
painted corridor upon this crest they had a wonderful view of the great
seaward levels, and even far away the blue sea itself stretching between
Scutari and Durazzo. The eye fell in succession down the stages of a
vast and various descent, on the bazaars and tall minarets of the town,
on jagged rocks and precipices, on slopes of oak forest and slopes of
olive woods, on blue hills dropping away beyond blue hills to the coast.
And behind them when they turned they saw great mountains, sullenly
magnificent, cleft into vast irregular masses, dense with woods below
and grim and desolate above....

These were unforgettable scenes, and so too was the wild lonely valley
through which they rode to Ochrida amidst walnut and chestnut trees and
scattered rocks, and the first vision of that place itself, with its
fertile levels dotted with sheep and cattle, its castle and clustering
mosques, its spacious blue lake and the great mountains rising up
towards Olympus under the sun. And there was the first view of the
blue Lake of Presba seen between silvery beech stems, and that too had
Olympus in the far background, plain now and clear and unexpectedly
snowy. And there were midday moments when they sat and ate under vines
and heard voices singing very pleasantly, and there were forest glades
and forest tracks in a great variety of beauty with mountains appearing
through their parted branches, there were ilex woods, chestnut woods,
beech woods, and there were strings of heavily-laden mules staggering up
torrent-worn tracks, and strings of blue-swathed mysterious-eyed women
with burthens on their heads passing silently, and white remote houses
and ruins and deep gorges and precipices and ancient half-ruinous
bridges over unruly streams. And if there was rain there was also
the ending of rain, rainbows, and the piercing of clouds by the sun's
incandescence, and sunsets and the moon, first full, then new and then
growing full again as the holiday wore on.

They found tolerable accommodation at Cattaro and at Cettinje and at a
place halfway between them. It was only when they had secured a guide
and horses, and pushed on into the south-east of Montenegro that they
began to realize the real difficulties of their journey. They aimed for
a place called Podgoritza, which had a partially justifiable reputation
for an inn, they missed the road and spent the night in the open beside
a fire, rolled in the blankets they had very fortunately bought in
Cettinje. They supped on biscuits and Benham's brandy flask. It
chanced to be a fine night, and, drawn like moths by the fire, four
heavily-armed mountaineers came out of nowhere, sat down beside Benham
and Amanda, rolled cigarettes, achieved conversation in bad Italian
through the muleteer and awaited refreshment. They approved of the
brandy highly, they finished it, and towards dawn warmed to song. They
did not sing badly, singing in chorus, but it appeared to Amanda
that the hour might have been better chosen. In the morning they were
agreeably surprised to find one of the Englishmen was an Englishwoman,
and followed every accessible detail of her toilette with great
interest. They were quite helpful about breakfast when the trouble was
put to them; two vanished over a crest and reappeared with some sour
milk, a slabby kind of bread, goat's cheese young but hardened, and
coffee and the means of making coffee, and they joined spiritedly in the
ensuing meal. It ought to have been extraordinarily good fun, this camp
under the vast heavens and these wild visitors, but it was not such fun
as it ought to have been because both Amanda and Benham were extremely
cold, stiff, sleepy, grubby and cross, and when at last they were back
in the way to Podgoritza and had parted, after some present-giving
from their chance friends, they halted in a sunlit grassy place, rolled
themselves up in their blankets and recovered their arrears of sleep.

Podgoritza was their first experience of a khan, those oriental
substitutes for hotels, and it was a deceptively good khan, indeed it
was not a khan at all, it was an inn; it provided meals, it had a kind
of bar, or at any rate a row of bottles and glasses, it possessed an
upper floor with rooms, separate rooms, opening on to a gallery. The
room had no beds but it had a shelf about it on which Amanda and Benham
rolled up in their blankets and slept. "We can do this sort of thing all
right," said Amanda and Benham. "But we mustn't lose the way again."

"In Scutari," said Benham, "we will get an extra horse and a tent."

The way presently became a lake and they reached Scutari by boat towards
the dawn of the next day....

The extra horse involved the addition of its owner, a small suspicious
Latin Christian, to the company, and of another horse for him and
an ugly almost hairless boy attendant. Moreover the British consul
prevailed with Benham to accept the services of a picturesque Arnaut
CAVASSE, complete with a rifle, knives, and other implements and the
name of Giorgio. And as they got up into the highlands beyond Scutari
they began to realize the deceitfulness of Podgoritza and the real truth
about khans. Their next one they reached after a rainy evening, and
it was a cavernous room with a floor of indurated mud and full of
eye-stinging wood-smoke and wind and the smell of beasts, unpartitioned,
with a weakly hostile custodian from whom no food could be got but a
little goat's flesh and bread. The meat Giorgio stuck upon a skewer in
gobbets like cats-meat and cooked before the fire. For drink there was
coffee and raw spirits. Against the wall in one corner was a slab of
wood rather like the draining board in a scullery, and on this the
guests were expected to sleep. The horses and the rest of the party
camped loosely about the adjacent corner after a bitter dispute upon
some unknown point between the horse owner and the custodian.

Amanda and Benham were already rolled up on their slanting board like a
couple of chrysalids when other company began to arrive through the open
door out of the moonlight, drawn thither by the report of a travelling
Englishwoman.

They were sturdy men in light coloured garments adorned ostentatiously
with weapons, they moved mysteriously about in the firelit darknesses
and conversed in undertones with Giorgio. Giorgio seemed to have
considerable powers of exposition and a gift for social organization.
Presently he came to Benham and explained that raki was available and
that hospitality would do no harm; Benham and Amanda sat up and various
romantic figures with splendid moustaches came forward and shook hands
with him, modestly ignoring Amanda. There was drinking, in which Benham
shared, incomprehensible compliments, much ineffective saying of "BUONA
NOTTE," and at last Amanda and Benham counterfeited sleep. This seemed
to remove a check on the conversation and a heated discussion in tense
undertones went on, it seemed interminably.... Probably very few aspects
of Benham and Amanda were ignored.... Towards morning the twanging of a
string proclaimed the arrival of a querulous-faced minstrel with a sort
of embryonic one-stringed horse-headed fiddle, and after a brief parley
singing began, a long high-pitched solo. The fiddle squealed pitifully
under the persuasion of a semicircular bow. Two heads were lifted
enquiringly.

The singer had taken up his position at their feet and faced them. It
was a compliment.

"OH!" said Amanda, rolling over.

The soloist obliged with three songs, and then, just as day was
breaking, stopped abruptly and sprawled suddenly on the floor as if he
had been struck asleep. He was vocal even in his sleep. A cock in the
far corner began crowing and was answered by another outside....

But this does not give a full account of the animation of the khan.
"OH!" said Amanda, rolling over again with the suddenness of accumulated
anger.

"They're worse than in Scutari," said Benham, understanding her trouble
instantly.

"It isn't days and nights we are having," said Benham a few days later,
"it's days and nightmares."

But both he and Amanda had one quality in common. The deeper their
discomfort the less possible it was to speak of turning back from the
itinerary they had planned....

They met no robbers, though an excited little English Levantine in
Scutari had assured them they would do so and told a vivid story of a
ride to Ipek, a delay on the road due to a sudden inexplicable lameness
of his horse after a halt for refreshment, a political discussion that
delayed him, his hurry through the still twilight to make up for lost
time, the coming on of night and the sudden silent apparition out of
the darkness of the woods about the road of a dozen armed men each
protruding a gun barrel. "Sometimes they will wait for you at a ford
or a broken bridge," he said. "In the mountains they rob for arms. They
assassinate the Turkish soldiers even. It is better to go unarmed unless
you mean to fight for it.... Have you got arms?"

"Just a revolver," said Benham.

But it was after that that he closed with Giorgio.

If they found no robbers in Albania, they met soon enough with
bloodshed. They came to a village where a friend of a friend of
Giorgio's was discovered, and they slept at his house in preference to
the unclean and crowded khan. Here for the first time Amanda made the
acquaintance of Albanian women and was carried off to the woman's region
at the top of the house, permitted to wash, closely examined, shown
a baby and confided in as generously as gesture and some fragments of
Italian would permit. Benham slept on a rug on the first floor in a
corner of honour beside the wood fire. There had been much confused
conversation and some singing, he was dog-tired and slept heavily,
and when presently he was awakened by piercing screams he sat up in a
darkness that seemed to belong neither to time nor place....

Near his feet was an ashen glow that gave no light.

His first perplexity gave way to dismay at finding no Amanda by his
side. "Amanda!" he cried....

Her voice floated down through a chink in the floor above. "What can it
be, Cheetah?"

Then: "It's coming nearer."

The screaming continued, heart-rending, eviscerating shrieks. Benham,
still confused, lit a match. All the men about him were stirring or
sitting up and listening, their faces showing distorted and ugly in the
flicker of his light. "CHE E?" he tried. No one answered. Then one
by one they stood up and went softly to the ladder that led to the
stable-room below. Benham struck a second match and a third.

"Giorgio!" he called.

The cavasse made an arresting gesture and followed discreetly and
noiselessly after the others, leaving Benham alone in the dark.

Benham heard their shuffling patter, one after the other, down the
ladder, the sounds of a door being unbarred softly, and then no other
sound but that incessant shrieking in the darkness.

Had they gone out? Were they standing at the door looking out into the
night and listening?

Amanda had found the chink and her voice sounded nearer.

"It's a woman," she said.

The shrieking came nearer and nearer, long, repeated, throat-tearing
shrieks. Far off there was a great clamour of dogs. And there was
another sound, a whisper--?

"RAIN!"

The shrieks seemed to turn into a side street and receded. The tension
of listening relaxed. Men's voices sounded below in question and answer.
Dogs close at hand barked shortly and then stopped enquiringly.

Benham seemed to himself to be sitting alone for an interminable time.
He lit another match and consulted his watch. It was four o'clock and
nearly dawn....

Then slowly and stumbling up the ladder the men began to return to
Benham's room.

"Ask them what it is," urged Amanda.

But for a time not even Giorgio would understand Benham's questions.
There seemed to be a doubt whether he ought to know. The shrieking
approached again and then receded. Giorgio came and stood, a vague
thoughtful figure, by the embers of the fire. Explanation dropped from
him reluctantly. It was nothing. Some one had been killed: that was all.
It was a vendetta. A man had been missing overnight, and this morning
his brother who had been prowling and searching with some dogs had found
him, or rather his head. It was on this side of the ravine, thrown over
from the other bank on which the body sprawled stiffly, wet through, and
now growing visible in the gathering daylight. Yes--the voice was the
man's wife. It was raining hard.... There would be shrieking for nine
days. Yes, nine days. Confirmation with the fingers when Benham still
fought against the facts. Her friends and relatives would come and
shriek too. Two of the dead man's aunts were among the best keeners in
the whole land. They could keen marvellously. It was raining too hard
to go on.... The road would be impossible in rain.... Yes it was very
melancholy. Her house was close at hand. Perhaps twenty or thirty women
would join her. It was impossible to go on until it had stopped raining.
It would be tiresome, but what could one do?...



7


As they sat upon the parapet of a broken bridge on the road between
Elbassan and Ochrida Benham was moved to a dissertation upon the
condition of Albania and the politics of the Balkan peninsula.

"Here we are," he said, "not a week from London, and you see the sort
of life that men live when the forces of civilization fail. We have been
close to two murders--"

"Two?"

"That little crowd in the square at Scutari-- That was a murder. I
didn't tell you at the time."

"But I knew it was," said Amanda.

"And you see the filth of it all, the toiling discomfort of it all.
There is scarcely a house here in all the land that is not filthier
and viler than the worst slum in London. No man ventures far from his
village without arms, everywhere there is fear. The hills are impassable
because of the shepherd's dogs. Over those hills a little while ago a
stranger was torn to pieces by dogs--and partially eaten. Amanda, these
dogs madden me. I shall let fly at the beasts. The infernal indignity
of it! But that is by the way. You see how all this magnificent country
lies waste with nothing but this crawling, ugly mockery of human life."

"They sing," said Amanda.

"Yes," said Benham and reflected, "they do sing. I suppose singing is
the last thing left to men. When there is nothing else you can still sit
about and sing. Miners who have been buried in mines will sing, people
going down in ships."

"The Sussex labourers don't sing," said Amanda. "These people sing
well."

"They would probably sing as well if they were civilized. Even if they
didn't I shouldn't care. All the rest of their lives is muddle and
cruelty and misery. Look at the women. There was that party of bent
creatures we met yesterday, carrying great bundles, carrying even
the men's cloaks and pipes, while their rascal husbands and brothers
swaggered behind. Look at the cripples we have seen and the mutilated
men. If we have met one man without a nose, we have met a dozen. And
stunted people. All these people are like evil schoolboys; they do
nothing but malicious mischief; there is nothing adult about them but
their voices; they are like the heroic dreams of young ruffians in a
penitentiary. You saw that man at Scutari in the corner of the bazaar,
the gorgeous brute, you admired him--."

"The man with the gold inlaid pistols and the diamonds on his yataghan.
He wanted to show them to us."

"Yes. You let him see you admired him."

"I liked the things on his stall."

"Well, he has killed nearly thirty people."

"In duels?"

"Good Lord! NO! Assassinations. His shoemaker annoyed him by sending in
a bill. He went to the man's stall, found him standing with his child
in his arms and blew out his brains. He blundered against a passer-by in
the road and shot him. Those are his feats. Sometimes his pistols go off
in the bazaar just by accident."

"Does nobody kill him?"

"I wanted to," said Benham and became thoughtful for a time. "I think I
ought to have made some sort of quarrel. But then as I am an Englishman
he might have hesitated. He would have funked a strange beast like me.
And I couldn't have shot him if he had hesitated. And if he hadn't--"

"But doesn't a blood feud come down on him?"

"It only comes down on his family. The shoemaker's son thought the
matter over and squared accounts by putting the muzzle of a gun into the
small of the back of our bully's uncle. It was easier that way.... You
see you're dealing with men of thirteen years old or thereabouts, the
boy who doesn't grow up."

"But doesn't the law--?"

"There's no law. Only custom and the Turkish tax collector.

"You see this is what men are where there is no power, no discipline,
no ruler, no responsibility. This is a masterless world. This is pure
democracy. This is the natural state of men. This is the world of the
bully and the brigand and assassin, the world of the mud-pelter and
brawler, the world of the bent woman, the world of the flea and the
fly, the open drain and the baying dog. This is what the British
sentimentalist thinks a noble state for men."

"They fight for freedom."

"They fight among each other. There are their private feuds and their
village feuds and above all that great feud religion. In Albania there
is only one religion and that is hate. But there are three churches for
the better cultivation of hate and cruelty, the Latin, the Greek and the
Mahometan."

"But no one has ever conquered these people."

"Any one could, the Servians, the Bulgarians, the Greeks, the Italians,
the Austrians. Why, they can't even shoot! It's just the balance of
power and all that foolery keeps this country a roadless wilderness.
Good God, how I tire of it! These men who swagger and stink, their
brawling dogs, their greasy priests and dervishes, the down-at-heel
soldiers, the bribery and robbery, the cheating over the money...."

He slipped off the parapet, too impatient to sit any longer, and began
to pace up and down in the road.

"One marvels that no one comes to clear up this country, one itches to
be at the job, and then one realizes that before one can begin here, one
must get to work back there, where the fools and pedants of WELT POLITIK
scheme mischief one against another. This country frets me. I can't see
any fun in it, can't see the humour of it. And the people away there
know no better than to play off tribe against tribe, sect against sect,
one peasant prejudice against another. Over this pass the foolery grows
grimmer and viler. We shall come to where the Servian plots against
the Bulgarian and the Greek against both, and the Turk, with spasmodic
massacres and indulgences, broods over the brew. Every division is
subdivided. There are two sorts of Greek church, Exarchic, Patriarchic,
both teaching by threat and massacre. And there is no one, no one, with
the sense to over-ride all these squalid hostilities. All those fools
away there in London and Vienna and St. Petersburg and Rome take sides
as though these beastly tribes and leagues and superstitions meant
anything but blank, black, damnable ignorance. One fool stands up for
the Catholic Albanians, another finds heroes in the Servians, another
talks of Brave Little Montenegro, or the Sturdy Bulgarian, or the Heroic
Turk. There isn't a religion in the whole Balkan peninsula, there isn't
a tribal or national sentiment that deserves a moment's respect from
a sane man. They're things like niggers' nose-rings and Chinese secret
societies; childish things, idiot things that have to go. Yet there is
no one who will preach the only possible peace, which is the peace of
the world-state, the open conspiracy of all the sane men in the world
against the things that break us up into wars and futilities. And here
am I--who have the light--WANDERING! Just wandering!"

He shrugged his shoulders and came to stare at the torrent under the
bridge.

"You're getting ripe for London, Cheetah," said Amanda softly.

"I want somehow to get to work, to get my hands on definite things."

"How can we get back?"

She had to repeat her question presently.

"We can go on. Over the hills is Ochrida and then over another pass is
Presba, and from there we go down into Monastir and reach a railway and
get back to the world of our own times again."



8


But before they reached the world of their own times Macedonia was to
show them something grimmer than Albania.

They were riding through a sunlit walnut wood beyond Ochrida when they
came upon the thing.

The first they saw of it looked like a man lying asleep on a grassy
bank. But he lay very still indeed, he did not look up, he did not stir
as they passed, the pose of his hand was stiff, and when Benham glanced
back at him, he stifled a little cry of horror. For this man had no face
and the flies had been busy upon him....

Benham caught Amanda's bridle so that she had to give her attention to
her steed.

"Ahead!" he said, "Ahead! Look, a village!"

(Why the devil didn't they bury the man? Why? And that fool Giorgio and
the others were pulling up and beginning to chatter. After all she might
look back.)

Through the trees now they could see houses. He quickened his pace and
jerked Amanda's horse forward....

But the village was a still one. Not a dog barked.

Here was an incredible village without even a dog!

And then, then they saw some more people lying about. A woman lay in
a doorway. Near her was something muddy that might have been a child,
beyond were six men all spread out very neatly in a row with their faces
to the sky.

"Cheetah!" cried Amanda, with her voice going up. "They've been killed.
Some one has killed them."

Benham halted beside her and stared stupidly. "It's a band," he said.
"It's--propaganda. Greeks or Turks or Bulgarians."

"But their feet and hands are fastened! And--... WHAT HAVE THEY BEEN
DOING TO THEM?..."

"I want to kill," cried Benham. "Oh! I want to kill people. Come on,
Amanda! It blisters one's eyes. Come away. Come away! Come!"

Her face was white and her eyes terror-stricken. She obeyed him
mechanically. She gave one last look at those bodies....

Down the deep-rutted soil of the village street they clattered. They
came to houses that had been set on fire....

"What is that hanging from a tree?" cried Amanda. "Oh, oh!"

"Come on...."

Behind them rode the others scared and hurrying.

The sunlight had become the light of hell. There was no air but horror.
Across Benham's skies these fly-blown trophies of devilry dangled
mockingly in the place of God. He had no thought but to get away.

Presently they encountered a detachment of Turkish soldiers, very greasy
and ragged, with worn-out boots and yellow faces, toiling up the stony
road belatedly to the village. Amanda and Benham riding one behind
the other in a stricken silence passed this labouring column without a
gesture, but presently they heard the commander stopping and questioning
Giorgio....

Then Giorgio and the others came clattering to overtake them.

Giorgio was too full to wait for questions. He talked eagerly to
Benham's silence.

It must have happened yesterday, he explained. They were
Bulgarians--traitors. They had been converted to the Patriarchists by
the Greeks--by a Greek band, that is to say. They had betrayed one
of their own people. Now a Bulgarian band had descended upon
them. Bulgarian bands it seemed were always particularly rough on
Bulgarian-speaking Patriarchists....



9


That night they slept in a dirty little room in a peasant's house in
Resnia, and in the middle of the night Amanda woke up with a start and
heard Benham talking. He seemed to be sitting up as he talked. But he
was not talking to her and his voice sounded strange.

"Flies," he said, "in the sunlight!"

He was silent for a time and then he repeated the same words.

Then suddenly he began to declaim. "Oh! Brutes together. Apes. Apes with
knives. Have they no lord, no master, to save them from such things?
This is the life of men when no man rules.... When no man rules.... Not
even himself.... It is because we are idle, because we keep our wits
slack and our wills weak that these poor devils live in hell. These
things happen here and everywhere when the hand that rules grows
weak. Away in China now they are happening. Persia. Africa.... Russia
staggers. And I who should serve the law, I who should keep order,
wander and make love.... My God! may I never forget! May I never forget!
Flies in the sunlight! That man's face. And those six men!

"Grip the savage by the throat.

"The weak savage in the foreign office, the weak savage at the party
headquarters, feud and indolence and folly. It is all one world. This
and that are all one thing. The spites of London and the mutilations
of Macedonia. The maggots that eat men's faces and the maggots that rot
their minds. Rot their minds. Rot their minds. Rot their minds...."

To Amanda it sounded like delirium.

"CHEETAH!" she said suddenly between remonstrance and a cry of terror.

The darkness suddenly became quite still. He did not move.

She was afraid. "Cheetah!" she said again.

"What is it, Amanda?"

"I thought--. Are you all right?"

"Quite."

"But do you feel well?"

"I've got this cold I caught in Ochrida. I suppose I'm feverish.
But--yes, I'm well."

"You were talking."

Silence for a time.

"I was thinking," he said.

"You talked."

"I'm sorry," he said after another long pause.



10


The next morning Benham had a pink spot on either cheek, his eyes were
feverishly bright, he would touch no food and instead of coffee he
wanted water. "In Monastir there will be a doctor," he said. "Monastir
is a big place. In Monastir I will see a doctor. I want a doctor."

They rode out of the village in the freshness before sunrise and up long
hills, and sometimes they went in the shade of woods and sometimes in
a flooding sunshine. Benham now rode in front, preoccupied, intent,
regardless of Amanda, a stranger, and she rode close behind him
wondering.

"When you get to Monastir, young man," she told him, inaudibly, "you
will go straight to bed and we'll see what has to be done with you."

"AMMALATO," said Giorgio confidentially, coming abreast of her.

"MEDICO IN MONASTIR," said Amanda.

"SI,--MOLTI MEDICI, MONASTIR," Giorgio agreed.

Then came the inevitable dogs, big white brutes, three in full cry
charging hard at Benham and a younger less enterprising beast running
along the high bank above yapping and making feints to descend.

The goatherd, reclining under the shadow of a rock, awaited Benham's
embarrassment with an indolent malice.

"You UNCIVILIZED Beasts!" cried Benham, and before Amanda could realize
what he was up to, she heard the crack of his revolver and saw a puff
of blue smoke drift away above his right shoulder. The foremost beast
rolled over and the goatherd had sprung to his feet. He shouted with
something between anger and dismay as Benham, regardless of the fact
that the other dogs had turned and were running back, let fly a second
time. Then the goatherd had clutched at the gun that lay on the grass
near at hand, Giorgio was bawling in noisy remonstrance and also getting
ready to shoot, and the horse-owner and his boy were clattering back
to a position of neutrality up the stony road. "BANG!" came a flight
of lead within a yard of Benham, and then the goatherd was in retreat
behind a rock and Giorgio was shouting "AVANTI, AVANTI!" to Amanda.

She grasped his intention and in another moment she had Benham's horse
by the bridle and was leading the retreat. Giorgio followed close,
driving the two baggage mules before him.

"I am tired of dogs," Benham said. "Tired to death of dogs. All savage
dogs must be shot. All through the world. I am tired--"

Their road carried them down through the rocky pass and then up a long
slope in the open. Far away on the left they saw the goatherd running
and shouting and other armed goatherds appearing among the rocks. Behind
them the horse-owner and his boy came riding headlong across the zone of
danger.

"Dogs must be shot," said Benham, exalted. "Dogs must be shot."

"Unless they are GOOD dogs," said Amanda, keeping beside him with an eye
on his revolver.

"Unless they are good dogs to every one," said Benham.

They rushed along the road in a turbulent dusty huddle of horses and
mules and riders. The horse-owner, voluble in Albanian, was trying
to get past them. His boy pressed behind him. Giorgio in the rear had
unslung his rifle and got it across the front of his saddle. Far
away they heard the sound of a shot, and a kind of shudder in the air
overhead witnessed to the flight of the bullet. They crested a rise and
suddenly between the tree boughs Monastir was in view, a wide stretch of
white town, with many cypress and plane trees, a winding river with many
wooden bridges, clustering minarets of pink and white, a hilly cemetery,
and scattered patches of soldiers' tents like some queer white crop to
supplement its extensive barracks.

As they hurried down towards this city of refuge a long string of mules
burthened with great bales of green stuff appeared upon a convergent
track to the left. Besides the customary muleteers there were, by way of
an escort, a couple of tattered Turkish soldiers. All these men watched
the headlong approach of Benham's party with apprehensive inquiry.
Giorgio shouted some sort of information that made the soldiers brighten
up and stare up the hill, and set the muleteers whacking and shouting at
their convoy. It struck Amanda that Giorgio must be telling lies about
a Bulgarian band. In another moment Benham and Amanda found themselves
swimming in a torrent of mules. Presently they overtook a small flock of
fortunately nimble sheep, and picked up several dogs, dogs that happily
disregarded Benham in the general confusion. They also comprehended a
small springless cart, two old women with bundles and an elderly Greek
priest, before their dusty, barking, shouting cavalcade reached the
outskirts of Monastir. The two soldiers had halted behind to cover the
retreat.

Benham's ghastly face was now bedewed with sweat and he swayed in his
saddle as he rode. "This is NOT civilization, Amanda," he said, "this is
NOT civilization."

And then suddenly with extraordinary pathos:

"Oh! I want to go to BED! I want to go to BED! A bed with sheets...."

To ride into Monastir is to ride into a maze. The streets go nowhere in
particular. At least that was the effect on Amanda and Benham. It was
as if Monastir too had a temperature and was slightly delirious. But at
last they found an hotel--quite a civilized hotel....

The doctor in Monastir was an Armenian with an ambition that outran his
capacity to speak English. He had evidently studied the language chiefly
from books. He thought THESE was pronounced "theser" and THOSE was
pronounced "thoser," and that every English sentence should be taken at
a rush. He diagnosed Benham's complaint in various languages and failed
to make his meaning clear to Amanda. One combination of words he clung
to obstinately, having clearly the utmost faith in its expressiveness.
To Amanda it sounded like, "May, Ah! Slays," and it seemed to her that
he sought to intimate a probable fatal termination of Benham's fever.
But it was clear that the doctor was not satisfied that she understood.
He came again with a queer little worn book, a parallel vocabulary of
half-a-dozen European languages.

He turned over the pages and pointed to a word. "May! Ah! Slays!" he
repeated, reproachfully, almost bitterly.

"Oh, MEASLES!" cried Amanda....

So the spirited honeymoon passed its zenith.



11


The Benhams went as soon as possible down to Smyrna and thence by way
of Uskub tortuously back to Italy. They recuperated at the best hotel
of Locarno in golden November weather, and just before Christmas they
turned their faces back to England.

Benham's plans were comprehensive but entirely vague; Amanda had not so
much plans as intentions....




CHAPTER THE FIFTH ~~ THE ASSIZE OF JEALOUSY



1


It was very manifest in the disorder of papers amidst which White spent
so many evenings of interested perplexity before this novel began to be
written that Benham had never made any systematic attempt at editing
or revising his accumulation at all. There were not only overlapping
documents, in which he had returned again to old ideas and restated
them in the light of fresh facts and an apparent unconsciousness of his
earlier effort, but there were mutually destructive papers, new views
quite ousting the old had been tossed in upon the old, and the very
definition of the second limitation, as it had first presented itself to
the writer, had been abandoned. To begin with, this second division
had been labelled "Sex," in places the heading remained, no
effective substitute had been chosen for some time, but there was
a closely-written memorandum, very much erased and written over and
amended, which showed Benham's early dissatisfaction with that crude
rendering of what he had in mind. This memorandum was tacked to an
interrupted fragment of autobiography, a manuscript soliloquy in which
Benham had been discussing his married life.

"It was not until I had been married for the better part of a year, and
had spent more than six months in London, that I faced the plain issue
between the aims I had set before myself and the claims and immediate
necessities of my personal life. For all that time I struggled not so
much to reconcile them as to serve them simultaneously...."

At that the autobiography stopped short, and the intercalary note began.

This intercalary note ran as follows:

"I suppose a mind of my sort cannot help but tend towards
simplification, towards making all life turn upon some one dominant
idea, complex perhaps in its reality but reducible at last to one
consistent simple statement, a dominant idea which is essential as
nothing else is essential, which makes and sustains and justifies. This
is perhaps the innate disposition of the human mind, at least of the
European mind--for I have some doubts about the Chinese. Theology
drives obstinately towards an ultimate unity in God, science towards
an ultimate unity in law, towards a fundamental element and a universal
material truth from which all material truths evolve, and in matters of
conduct there is the same tendency to refer to a universal moral law.
Now this may be a simplification due to the need of the human mind to
comprehend, and its inability to do so until the load is lightened by
neglecting factors. William James has suggested that on account of this,
theology may be obstinately working away from the truth, that the truth
may be that there are several or many in compatible and incommensurable
gods; science, in the same search for unity, may follow divergent
methods of inquiry into ultimately uninterchangeable generalizations;
and there may be not only not one universal moral law, but no effective
reconciliation of the various rights and duties of a single individual.
At any rate I find myself doubtful to this day about my own personal
systems of right and wrong. I can never get all my life into one focus.
It is exactly like examining a rather thick section with a microscope of
small penetration; sometimes one level is clear and the rest foggy and
monstrous, and sometimes another.

"Now the ruling ME, I do not doubt, is the man who has set his face
to this research after aristocracy, and from the standpoint of this
research it is my duty to subordinate all other considerations to
this work of clearing up the conception of rule and nobility in human
affairs. This is my aristocratic self. What I did not grasp for a long
time, and which now grows clearer and clearer to me, is firstly that
this aristocratic self is not the whole of me, it has absolutely nothing
to do with a pain in my ear or in my heart, with a scar on my hand or my
memory, and secondly that it is not altogether mine. Whatever knowledge
I have of the quality of science, whatever will I have towards right,
is of it; but if from without, from the reasoning or demonstration or
reproof of some one else, there comes to me clear knowledge, clarified
will, that also is as it were a part of my aristocratic self coming
home to me from the outside. How often have I not found my own mind
in Prothero after I have failed to find it in myself? It is, to be
paradoxical, my impersonal personality, this Being that I have in common
with all scientific-spirited and aristocratic-spirited men. This it is
that I am trying to get clear from the great limitations of humanity.
When I assert a truth for the sake of truth to my own discomfort or
injury, there again is this incompatibility of the aristocratic self and
the accepted, confused, conglomerate self of the unanalyzed man. The two
have a separate system of obligations. One's affections, compounded
as they are in the strangest way of physical reactions and emotional
associations, one's implicit pledges to particular people, one's
involuntary reactions, one's pride and jealousy, all that one might call
the dramatic side of one's life, may be in conflict with the definitely
seen rightnesses of one's higher use...."

The writing changed at this point.

"All this seems to me at once as old as the hills and too new to be
true. This is like the conflict of the Superior Man of Confucius to
control himself, it is like the Christian battle of the spirit with the
flesh, it savours of that eternal wrangle between the general and the
particular which is metaphysics, it was for this aristocratic self, for
righteousness' sake, that men have hungered and thirsted, and on this
point men have left father and mother and child and wife and followed
after salvation. This world-wide, ever-returning antagonism has filled
the world in every age with hermits and lamas, recluses and teachers,
devoted and segregated lives. It is a perpetual effort to get above the
simplicity of barbarism. Whenever men have emerged from the primitive
barbarism of the farm and the tribe, then straightway there has emerged
this conception of a specialized life a little lifted off the earth;
often, for the sake of freedom, celibate, usually disciplined, sometimes
directed, having a generalized aim, beyond personal successes and bodily
desires. So it is that the philosopher, the scientifically concentrated
man, has appeared, often, I admit, quite ridiculously at first, setting
out upon the long journey that will end only when the philosopher is
king....

"At first I called my Second Limitation, Sex. But from the outset I
meant more than mere sexual desire, lust and lustful imaginings, more
than personal reactions to beauty and spirited living, more even than
what is called love. On the one hand I had in mind many appetites that
are not sexual yet turn to bodily pleasure, and on the other there are
elements of pride arising out of sex and passing into other regions,
all the elements of rivalry for example, that have strained my first
definition to the utmost. And I see now that this Second Limitation as I
first imagined it spreads out without any definite boundary, to include
one's rivalries with old schoolfellows, for example, one's generosities
to beggars and dependents, one's desire to avenge an injured friend,
one's point of honour, one's regard for the good opinion of an aunt and
one's concern for the health of a pet cat. All these things may enrich,
but they may also impede and limit the aristocratic scheme. I thought
for a time I would call this ill-defined and miscellaneous wilderness of
limitation the Personal Life. But at last I have decided to divide this
vast territory of difficulties into two subdivisions and make one of
these Indulgence, meaning thereby pleasurable indulgence of sense or
feeling, and the other a great mass of self-regarding motives that
will go with a little stretching under the heading of Jealousy. I
admit motives are continually playing across the boundary of these
two divisions, I should find it difficult to argue a case for my
classification, but in practice these two groupings have a quite
definite meaning for me. There is pride in the latter group of impulses
and not in the former; the former are always a little apologetic. Fear,
Indulgence, Jealousy, these are the First Three Limitations of the soul
of man. And the greatest of these is Jealousy, because it can use pride.
Over them the Life Aristocratic, as I conceive it, marches to its end.
It saves itself for the truth rather than sacrifices itself romantically
for a friend. It justifies vivisection if thereby knowledge is won for
ever. It upholds that Brutus who killed his sons. It forbids devotion to
women, courts of love and all such decay of the chivalrous idea. And it
resigns--so many things that no common Man of Spirit will resign. Its
intention transcends these things. Over all the world it would maintain
justice, order, a noble peace, and it would do this without indignation,
without resentment, without mawkish tenderness or individualized
enthusiasm or any queen of beauty. It is of a cold austere quality,
commanding sometimes admiration but having small hold upon the
affections of men. So that it is among its foremost distinctions that
its heart is steeled...."

There this odd fragment ended and White was left to resume the
interrupted autobiography.



2


What moods, what passions, what nights of despair and gathering storms
of anger, what sudden cruelties and amazing tendernesses are buried
and hidden and implied in every love story! What a waste is there of
exquisite things! So each spring sees a million glorious beginnings, a
sunlit heaven in every opening leaf, warm perfection in every stirring
egg, hope and fear and beauty beyond computation in every forest tree;
and in the autumn before the snows come they have all gone, of all
that incalculable abundance of life, of all that hope and adventure,
excitement and deliciousness, there is scarcely more to be found than
a soiled twig, a dirty seed, a dead leaf, black mould or a rotting
feather....

White held the ten or twelve pencilled pages that told how Benham and
Amanda drifted into antagonism and estrangement and as he held it he
thought of the laughter and delight they must have had together, the
exquisite excitements of her eye, the racing colour of her cheek, the
gleams of light upon her skin, the flashes of wit between them, the
sense of discovery, the high rare paths they had followed, the pools in
which they had swum together. And now it was all gone into nothingness,
there was nothing left of it, nothing at all, but just those sheets of
statement, and it may be, stored away in one single mind, like things
forgotten in an attic, a few neglected faded memories....

And even those few sheets of statement were more than most love leaves
behind it. For a time White would not read them. They lay neglected on
his knee as he sat back in Benham's most comfortable chair and enjoyed
an entirely beautiful melancholy.

White too had seen and mourned the spring.

Indeed, poor dear! he had seen and mourned several springs....

With a sigh he took up the manuscript and read Benham's desiccated story
of intellectual estrangement, and how in the end he had decided to
leave his wife and go out alone upon that journey of inquiry he had been
planning when first he met her.



3


Amanda had come back to England in a state of extravagantly vigorous
womanhood. Benham's illness, though it lasted only two or three
weeks, gave her a sense of power and leadership for which she had been
struggling instinctively ever since they came together. For a time at
Locarno he was lax-minded and indolent, and in that time she formed her
bright and limited plans for London. Benham had no plans as yet but
only a sense of divergence, as though he was being pulled in opposite
directions by two irresistible forces. To her it was plain that he
needed occupation, some distinguished occupation, and she could imagine
nothing better for him than a political career. She perceived he had
personality, that he stood out among men so that his very silences were
effective. She loved him immensely, and she had tremendous ambitions for
him and through him.

And also London, the very thought of London, filled her with appetite.
Her soul thirsted for London. It was like some enormous juicy fruit
waiting for her pretty white teeth, a place almost large enough to give
her avidity the sense of enough. She felt it waiting for her, household,
servants, a carriage, shops and the jolly delight of buying and
possessing things, the opera, first-nights, picture exhibitions, great
dinner-parties, brilliant lunch parties, crowds seen from a point
of vantage, the carriage in a long string of fine carriages with the
lamplit multitude peering, Amanda in a thousand bright settings, in a
thousand various dresses. She had had love; it had been glorious, it
was still glorious, but her love-making became now at times almost
perfunctory in the contemplation of these approaching delights and
splendours and excitements.

She knew, indeed, that ideas were at work in Benham's head; but she
was a realist. She did not see why ideas should stand in the way of a
career. Ideas are a brightness, the good looks of the mind. One talks
ideas, but THE THING THAT IS, IS THE THING THAT IS. And though she
believed that Benham had a certain strength of character of his own, she
had that sort of confidence in his love for her and in the power of her
endearments that has in it the assurance of a faint contempt. She had
mingled pride and sense in the glorious realization of the power over
him that her wit and beauty gave her. She had held him faint with her
divinity, intoxicated with the pride of her complete possession, and she
did not dream that the moment when he should see clearly that she could
deliberately use these ultimate delights to rule and influence him,
would be the end of their splendour and her power. Her nature, which
was just a nest of vigorous appetites, was incapable of suspecting his
gathering disillusionment until it burst upon her.

Now with her attention set upon London ahead he could observe her.
In the beginning he had never seemed to be observing her at all, they
dazzled one another; it seemed extraordinary now to him to note how much
he had been able to disregard. There were countless times still when he
would have dropped his observation and resumed that mutual exaltation
very gladly, but always now other things possessed her mind....

There was still an immense pleasure for him in her vigour; there was
something delightful in her pounce, even when she was pouncing on things
superficial, vulgar or destructive. She made him understand and share
the excitement of a big night at the opera, the glitter and prettiness
of a smart restaurant, the clustering little acute adventures of a great
reception of gay people, just as she had already made him understand and
sympathize with dogs. She picked up the art world where he had laid
it down, and she forced him to feel dense and slow before he rebelled
against her multitudinous enthusiasms and admirations. South Harting had
had its little group of artistic people; it is not one of your sleepy
villages, and she slipped back at once into the movement. Those were
the great days of John, the days before the Post Impressionist outbreak.
John, Orpen, Tonks, she bought them with vigour. Artistic circles began
to revolve about her. Very rapidly she was in possession.... And among
other desirable things she had, it seemed, pounced upon and captured
Lady Marayne.

At any rate it was clear that that awful hostile silence and aloofness
was to end. Benham never quite mastered how it was done. But Amanda
had gone in one morning to Desborough Street, very sweetly and
chastely dressed, had abased herself and announced a possible (though
subsequently disproved) grandchild. And she had appreciated the little
lady so highly and openly, she had so instantly caught and reproduced
her tone, that her success, though only temporary in its completeness,
was immediate. In the afternoon Benham was amazed by the apparition of
his mother amidst the scattered unsettled furnishings of the new home
Amanda had chosen in Lancaster Gate. He was in the hall, the door stood
open awaiting packing-cases from a van without. In the open doorway she
shone, looking the smallest of dainty things. There was no effect of her
coming but only of her having arrived there, as a little blue butterfly
will suddenly alight on a flower.

"Well, Poff!" said Lady Marayne, ignoring abysses, "What are you up to
now, Poff? Come and embrace me...."

"No, not so," she said, "stiffest of sons...."

She laid hold of his ears in the old fashion and kissed one eye.

"Congratulations, dear little Poff. Oh! congratulations! In heaps. I'm
so GLAD."

Now what was that for?

And then Amanda came out upon the landing upstairs, saw the encounter
with an involuntary cry of joy, and came downstairs with arms wide open.
It was the first intimation he had of their previous meeting. He was for
some minutes a stunned, entirely inadequate Benham....



4


At first Amanda knew nobody in London, except a few people in the
Hampstead Garden suburb that she had not the slightest wish to know, and
then very quickly she seemed to know quite a lot of people. The artistic
circle brought in people, Lady Marayne brought in people; they spread.
It was manifest the Benhams were a very bright young couple; he would
certainly do something considerable presently, and she was bright and
daring, jolly to look at and excellent fun, and, when you came to talk
to her, astonishingly well informed. They passed from one hostess's hand
to another: they reciprocated. The Clynes people and the Rushtones took
her up; Mr. Evesham was amused by her, Lady Beach Mandarin proclaimed
her charm like a trumpet, the Young Liberal people made jealous
advances, Lord Moggeridge found she listened well, she lit one of the
brightest weekend parties Lady Marayne had ever gathered at Chexington.
And her descriptions of recent danger and adventure in Albania not
only entertained her hearers but gave her just that flavour of personal
courage which completes the fascination of a young woman. People in the
gaps of a halting dinner-table conversation would ask: "Have you met
Mrs. Benham?"

Meanwhile Benham appeared to be talking. A smiling and successful young
woman, who a year ago had been nothing more than a leggy girl with a
good lot of miscellaneous reading in her head, and vaguely engaged, or
at least friendly to the pitch of engagement, to Mr. Rathbone-Sanders,
may be forgiven if in the full tide of her success she does not
altogether grasp the intention of her husband's discourse. It seemed to
her that he was obsessed by a responsibility for civilization and the
idea that he was aristocratic. (Secretly she was inclined to doubt
whether he was justified in calling himself aristocratic; at the best
his mother was county-stuff; but still if he did there was no great
harm in it nowadays.) Clearly his line was Tory-Democracy, social reform
through the House of Lords and friendly intimacy with the more spirited
young peers. And it was only very slowly and reluctantly that she
was forced to abandon this satisfactory solution of his problem. She
reproduced all the equipment and comforts of his Finacue Street study in
their new home, she declared constantly that she would rather forego
any old social thing than interfere with his work, she never made him
go anywhere with her without first asking if his work permitted it. To
relieve him of the burthen of such social attentions she even made a fag
or so. The making of fags out of manifestly stricken men, the keeping
of tamed and hopeless admirers, seemed to her to be the most natural and
reasonable of feminine privileges. They did their useful little services
until it pleased the Lord Cheetah to come to his own. That was how she
put it....

But at last he was talking to her in tones that could no longer be
ignored. He was manifestly losing his temper with her. There was a
novel austerity in his voice and a peculiar whiteness about his face on
certain occasions that lingered in her memory.

He was indeed making elaborate explanations. He said that what he wanted
to do was to understand "the collective life of the world," and that
this was not to be done in a West-End study. He had an extraordinary
contempt, it seemed, for both sides in the drama of British politics. He
had extravagant ideas of beginning in some much more fundamental way.
He wanted to understand this "collective life of the world," because
ultimately he wanted to help control it. (Was there ever such nonsense?)
The practical side of this was serious enough, however; he was back at
his old idea of going round the earth. Later on that might be rather
a jolly thing to do, but not until they had struck root a little more
surely in London.

And then with amazement, with incredulity, with indignation, she began
to realize that he was proposing to go off by himself upon this vague
extravagant research, that all this work she had been doing to make
a social place for him in London was as nothing to him, that he was
thinking of himself as separable from her....

"But, Cheetah! How can you leave your spotless leopard? You would howl
in the lonely jungle!"

"Possibly I shall. But I am going."

"Then I shall come."

"No." He considered her reasons. "You see you are not interested."

"But I am."

"Not as I am. You would turn it all into a jolly holiday. You don't want
to see things as I want to do. You want romance. All the world is a show
for you. As a show I can't endure it. I want to lay hands on it."

"But, Cheetah!" she said, "this is separation."

"You will have your life here. And I shall come back."

"But, Cheetah! How can we be separated?"

"We are separated," he said.

Her eyes became round with astonishment. Then her face puckered.

"Cheetah!" she cried in a voice of soft distress, "I love you. What do
you mean?"

And she staggered forward, tear-blinded, and felt for his neck and
shoulders, so that she might weep in his arms....



5


"Don't say we are separated," she whispered, putting her still wet face
close to his.

"No. We're mates," he answered softly, with his arm about her.

"How could we ever keep away from each uvver?" she whispered.

He was silent.

"How COULD we?"

He answered aloud. "Amanda," he said, "I mean to go round the world."

She disentangled herself from his arm and sat up beside him.

"What is to become of me," she asked suddenly in a voice of despair,
"while you go round the world? If you desert me in London," she said,
"if you shame me by deserting me in London-- If you leave me, I will
never forgive you, Cheetah! Never." Then in an almost breathless voice,
and as if she spoke to herself, "Never in all my days."



6


It was after that that Amanda began to talk about children. There was
nothing involuntary about Amanda. "Soon," she said, "we must begin to
think of children. Not just now, but a little later. It's good to travel
and have our fun, but life is unreal until there are children in the
background. No woman is really content until she is a mother...." And
for nearly a fortnight nothing more was said about that solitary journey
round the world.

But children were not the only new topic in Amanda's talk. She set
herself with an ingenious subtlety to remind her husband that there
were other men in the world. The convenient fags, sometimes a little
embarrassed, found their inobtrusive services being brought into the
light before Benham's eyes. Most of them were much older men than
himself, elderly philanderers of whom it seemed to him no sane man need
be jealous, men often of forty or more, but one was a contemporary, Sir
Philip Easton, a man with a touch of Spanish blood and a suggestion of
Spanish fire, who quite manifestly was very much in love with Amanda and
of whom she spoke with a slight perceptible difference of manner that
made Benham faintly uneasy. He was ashamed of the feeling. Easton it
seemed was a man of a peculiarly fine honour, so that Amanda could trust
herself with him to an extent that would have been inadvisable with men
of a commoner substance, and he had a gift of understanding and sympathy
that was almost feminine; he could cheer one up when one was lonely and
despondent. For Amanda was so methodical in the arrangement of her time
that even in the full rush of a London season she could find an hour
now and then for being lonely and despondent. And he was a liberal and
understanding purchaser of the ascendant painters; he understood
that side of Amanda's interests, a side upon which Benham was notably
deficient....

"Amanda seems to like that dark boy, Poff; what is his name?--Sir Philip
Easton?" said Lady Marayne.

Benham looked at her with a slightly hostile intelligence, and said
nothing.

"When a man takes a wife, he has to keep her," said Lady Marayne.

"No," said Benham after consideration. "I don't intend to be a
wife-herd."

"What?"

"Wife-herd--same as goat-herd."

"Coarse, you are sometimes, Poff--nowadays."

"It's exactly what I mean. I can understand the kind of curator's
interest an Oriental finds in shepherding a large establishment, but
to spend my days looking after one person who ought to be able to look
after herself--"

"She's very young."

"She's quite grown up. Anyhow I'm not a moral nursemaid."

"If you leave her about and go abroad--"

"Has she been talking to you, mother?"

"The thing shows."

"But about my going abroad?"

"She said something, my little Poff."

Lady Marayne suddenly perceived that beneath Benham's indifference
was something strung very tight, as though he had been thinking
inordinately. He weighed his words before he spoke again. "If Amanda
chooses to threaten me with a sort of conditional infidelity, I don't
see that it ought to change the plans I have made for my life...."



7


"No aristocrat has any right to be jealous," Benham wrote. "If he
chances to be mated with a woman who does not see his vision or
naturally go his way, he has no right to expect her, much less to compel
her to go his way. What is the use of dragging an unwilling companion
through morasses of uncongenial thought to unsought ends? What is the
use of dragging even a willing pretender, who has no inherent will to
seek and live the aristocratic life?

"But that does not excuse him from obedience to his own call...."

He wrote that very early in his examination of the Third Limitation.
Already he had thought out and judged Amanda. The very charm of her,
the sweetness, the nearness and magic of her, was making him more grimly
resolute to break away. All the elaborate process of thinking her
over had gone on behind the mask of his silences while she had been
preoccupied with her housing and establishment in London; it was with a
sense of extraordinary injustice, of having had a march stolen upon her,
of being unfairly trapped, that Amanda found herself faced by foregone
conclusions. He was ready now even with the details of his project. She
should go on with her life in London exactly as she had planned it. He
would take fifteen hundred a year for himself and all the rest she might
spend without check or stint as it pleased her. He was going round the
world for one or two years. It was even possible he would not go alone.
There was a man at Cambridge he might persuade to come with him, a don
called Prothero who was peculiarly useful in helping him to hammer out
his ideas....

To her it became commandingly necessary that none of these things should
happen.

She tried to play upon his jealousy, but her quick instinct speedily
told her that this only hardened his heart. She perceived that she must
make a softer appeal. Now of a set intention she began to revive and
imitate the spontaneous passion of the honeymoon; she perceived for the
first time clearly how wise and righteous a thing it is for a woman to
bear a child. "He cannot go if I am going to have a child," she told
herself. But that would mean illness, and for illness in herself or
others Amanda had the intense disgust natural to her youth. Yet even
illness would be better than this intolerable publication of her
husband's ability to leave her side....

She had a wonderful facility of enthusiasm and she set herself forthwith
to cultivate a philoprogenitive ambition, to communicate it to him. Her
dread of illness disappeared; her desire for offspring grew.

"Yes," he said, "I want to have children, but I must go round the world
none the less."

She argued with all the concentrated subtlety of her fine keen mind. She
argued with persistence and repetition. And then suddenly so that she
was astonished at herself, there came a moment when she ceased to argue.

She stood in the dusk in a window that looked out upon the park, and she
was now so intent upon her purpose as to be still and self-forgetful;
she was dressed in a dinner-dress of white and pale green, that set off
her slim erect body and the strong clear lines of her neck and shoulders
very beautifully, some greenish stones caught a light from without and
flashed soft whispering gleams from amidst the misty darkness of her
hair. She was going to Lady Marayne and the opera, and he was bound for
a dinner at the House with some young Liberals at which he was to meet
two representative Indians with a grievance from Bengal. Husband and
wife had but a few moments together. She asked about his company and he
told her.

"They will tell you about India."

"Yes."

She stood for a moment looking out across the lights and the dark green
trees, and then she turned to him.

"Why cannot I come with you?" she asked with sudden passion. "Why cannot
I see the things you want to see?"

"I tell you you are not interested. You would only be interested through
me. That would not help me. I should just be dealing out my premature
ideas to you. If you cared as I care, if you wanted to know as I want to
know, it would be different. But you don't. It isn't your fault that
you don't. It happens so. And there is no good in forced interest, in
prescribed discovery."

"Cheetah," she asked, "what is it that you want to know--that I don't
care for?"

"I want to know about the world. I want to rule the world."

"So do I."

"No, you want to have the world."

"Isn't it the same?"

"No. You're a greedier thing than I am, you Black Leopard you--standing
there in the dusk. You're a stronger thing. Don't you know you're
stronger? When I am with you, you carry your point, because you are more
concentrated, more definite, less scrupulous. When you run beside me
you push me out of my path.... You've made me afraid of you.... And so
I won't go with you, Leopard. I go alone. It isn't because I don't love
you. I love you too well. It isn't because you aren't beautiful and
wonderful...."

"But, Cheetah! nevertheless you care more for this that you want than
you care for me."

Benham thought of it. "I suppose I do," he said.

"What is it that you want? Still I don't understand."

Her voice had the break of one who would keep reasonable in spite of
pain.

"I ought to tell you."

"Yes, you ought to tell me."

"I wonder if I can tell you," he said very thoughtfully, and rested his
hands on his hips. "I shall seem ridiculous to you."

"You ought to tell me."

"I think what I want is to be king of the world."

She stood quite still staring at him.

"I do not know how I can tell you of it. Amanda, do you remember those
bodies--you saw those bodies--those mutilated men?"

"I saw them," said Amanda.

"Well. Is it nothing to you that those things happen?"

"They must happen."

"No. They happen because there are no kings but pitiful kings. They
happen because the kings love their Amandas and do not care."

"But what can YOU do, Cheetah?"

"Very little. But I can give my life and all my strength. I can give all
I can give."

"But how? How can you help it--help things like that massacre?"

"I can do my utmost to find out what is wrong with my world and rule it
and set it right."

"YOU! Alone."

"Other men do as much. Every one who does so helps others to do so. You
see--... In this world one may wake in the night and one may resolve to
be a king, and directly one has resolved one is a king. Does that sound
foolishness to you? Anyhow, it's fair that I should tell you, though
you count me a fool. This--this kingship--this dream of the night--is
my life. It is the very core of me. Much more than you are. More than
anything else can be. I mean to be a king in this earth. KING. I'm not
mad.... I see the world staggering from misery to misery and there is
little wisdom, less rule, folly, prejudice, limitation, the good things
come by chance and the evil things recover and slay them, and it is my
world and I am responsible. Every man to whom this light has come
is responsible. As soon as this light comes to you, as soon as your
kingship is plain to you, there is no more rest, no peace, no delight,
except in work, in service, in utmost effort. As far as I can do it I
will rule my world. I cannot abide in this smug city, I cannot
endure its self-complacency, its routine, its gloss of success, its
rottenness.... I shall do little, perhaps I shall do nothing, but what I
can understand and what I can do I will do. Think of that wild beautiful
country we saw, and the mean misery, the filth and the warring cruelty
of the life that lives there, tragedy, tragedy without dignity; and
think, too, of the limitless ugliness here, and of Russia slipping
from disorder to massacre, and China, that sea of human beings,
sliding steadily to disaster. Do you think these are only things in the
newspapers? To me at any rate they are not things in newspapers; they
are pain and failure, they are torment, they are blood and dust and
misery. They haunt me day and night. Even if it is utterly absurd I will
still do my utmost. It IS absurd. I'm a madman and you and my mother
are sensible people.... And I will go my way.... I don't care for the
absurdity. I don't care a rap."

He stopped abruptly.

"There you have it, Amanda. It's rant, perhaps. Sometimes I feel it's
rant. And yet it's the breath of life to me.... There you are.... At
last I've been able to break silence and tell you...."

He stopped with something like a sob and stood regarding the dusky
mystery of her face. She stood quite still, she was just a beautiful
outline in the twilight, her face was an indistinctness under the black
shadow of her hair, with eyes that were two patches of darkness.

He looked at his watch, lifting it close to his face to see the time.
His voice changed. "Well--if you provoke a man enough, you see he makes
speeches. Let it be a lesson to you, Amanda. Here we are talking instead
of going to our dinners. The car has been waiting ten minutes."

Amanda, so still, was the most disconcerting of all Amandas....

A strange exaltation seized upon her very suddenly. In an instant she
had ceased to plot against him. A vast wave of emotion swept her forward
to a resolution that astonished her.

"Cheetah!" she said, and the very quality of her voice had changed,
"give me one thing. Stay until June with me."

"Why?" he asked.

Her answer came in a voice so low that it was almost a whisper.

"Because--now--no, I don't want to keep you any more--I am not trying to
hold you any more.... I want...."

She came forward to him and looked up closely at his face.

"Cheetah," she whispered almost inaudibly, "Cheetah--I didn't
understand. But now--. I want to bear your child."

He was astonished. "Old Leopard!" he said.

"No," she answered, putting her hands upon his shoulders and drawing
very close to him, "Queen---if I can be--to your King."

"You want to bear me a child!" he whispered, profoundly moved.



8


The Hindu agitators at the cavernous dinner under the House of Commons
came to the conclusion that Benham was a dreamer. And over against
Amanda at her dinner-party sat Sir Sidney Umber, one of those men who
know that their judgments are quoted.

"Who is the beautiful young woman who is seeing visions?" he asked of
his neighbour in confidential undertones....

He tittered. "I think, you know, she ought to seem just SLIGHTLY aware
that the man to her left is talking to her...."



9


A few days later Benham went down to Cambridge, where Prothero was now a
fellow of Trinity and Brissenden Trust Lecturer....

All through Benham's writing there was manifest a persuasion that in
some way Prothero was necessary to his mind. It was as if he looked to
Prothero to keep him real. He suspected even while he obeyed that upward
flourish which was his own essential characteristic. He had a peculiar
feeling that somehow that upward bias would betray him; that from
exaltation he might presently float off, into the higher, the better,
and so to complete unreality. He fled from priggishness and the terror
of such sublimity alike to Prothero. Moreover, in relation to so many
things Prothero in a peculiar distinctive manner SAW. He had less
self-control than Benham, less integrity of purpose, less concentration,
and things that were before his eyes were by the very virtue of these
defects invariably visible to him. Things were able to insist upon
themselves with him. Benham, on the other hand, when facts contradicted
his purpose too stoutly, had a way of becoming blind to them. He
repudiated inconvenient facts. He mastered and made his world; Prothero
accepted and recorded his. Benham was a will towards the universe where
Prothero was a perception and Amanda a confusing responsive activity.
And it was because of his realization of this profound difference
between them that he was possessed by the idea of taking Prothero with
him about the world, as a detachable kind of vision--rather like that
eye the Graiae used to hand one another....

After the busy sunlit streets of Maytime Cambridge, Prothero's rooms in
Trinity, their windows full of Gothic perspectives and light-soaked blue
sky, seemed cool and quiet. A flavour of scholarship pervaded them--a
little blended with the flavour of innumerable breakfasts nearly but not
completely forgotten. Prothero's door had been locked against the world,
and he had appeared after a slight delay looking a little puffy and only
apprehending who his visitor was after a resentful stare for the better
part of a second. He might have been asleep, he might have been doing
anything but the examination papers he appeared to be doing. The two men
exchanged personal details; they had not met since some months before
Benham' s marriage, and the visitor's eye went meanwhile from his host
to the room and back to his host's face as though they were all aspects
of the thing he was after, the Prothero humour, the earthly touch, the
distinctive Prothero flavour. Then his eye was caught by a large red,
incongruous, meretricious-looking volume upon the couch that had an
air of having been flung aside, VENUS IN GEM AND MARBLE, its cover
proclaimed....

His host followed that glance and blushed. "They send me all sorts of
inappropriate stuff to review," he remarked.

And then he was denouncing celibacy.

The transition wasn't very clear to Benham. His mind had been
preoccupied by the problem of how to open his own large project.
Meanwhile Prothero got, as it were, the conversational bit between his
teeth and bolted. He began to say the most shocking things right away,
so that Benham's attention was caught in spite of himself.

"Inflammatory classics."

"What's that?"

"Celibacy, my dear Benham, is maddening me," said Prothero. "I can't
stand it any longer."

It seemed to Benham that somewhere, very far away, in another world,
such a statement might have been credible. Even in his own life,--it was
now indeed a remote, forgotten stage--there had been something distantly
akin....

"You're going to marry?"

"I must."

"Who's the lady, Billy?"

"I don't know. Venus."

His little red-brown eye met his friend's defiantly. "So far as I know,
it is Venus Anadyomene." A flash of laughter passed across his face
and left it still angrier, still more indecorously defiant. "I like her
best, anyhow. I do, indeed. But, Lord! I feel that almost any of them--"

"Tut, tut!" said Benham.

Prothero flushed deeply but stuck to his discourse.

"Wasn't it always your principle, Benham, to look facts in the face? I
am not pronouncing an immoral principle. Your manner suggests I am. I
am telling you exactly how I feel. That is how I feel. I want--Venus.
I don't want her to talk to or anything of that sort.... I have been
studying that book, yes, that large, vulgar, red book, all the morning,
instead of doing any work. Would you like to see it?... NO!...

"This spring, Benham, I tell you, is driving me mad. It is a peculiarly
erotic spring. I cannot sleep, I cannot fix my mind, I cannot attend
to ordinary conversation. These feelings, I understand, are by no means
peculiar to myself.... No, don't interrupt me, Benham; let me talk now
that the spirit of speech is upon me. When you came in you said, 'How
are you?' I am telling you how I am. You brought it on yourself. Well--I
am--inflamed. I have no strong moral or religious convictions to assist
me either to endure or deny this--this urgency. And so why should I deny
it? It's one of our chief problems here. The majority of my fellow
dons who look at me with secretive faces in hall and court and
combination-room are in just the same case as myself. The fever in
oneself detects the fever in others. I know their hidden thoughts. Their
fishy eyes defy me to challenge their hidden thoughts. Each covers his
miserable secret under the cloak of a wholesome manly indifference. A
tattered cloak.... Each tries to hide his abandonment to this horrible
vice of continence--"

"Billy, what's the matter with you?"

Prothero grimaced impatience. "Shall I NEVER teach you not to be a
humbug, Benham?" he screamed, and in screaming became calmer. "Nature
taunts me, maddens me. My life is becoming a hell of shame. 'Get out
from all these books,' says Nature, 'and serve the Flesh.' The Flesh,
Benham. Yes--I insist--the Flesh. Do I look like a pure spirit? Is any
man a pure spirit? And here am I at Cambridge like a lark in a cage,
with too much port and no Aspasia. Not that I should have liked
Aspasia."

"Mutual, perhaps, Billy."

"Oh! you can sneer!"

"Well, clearly--Saint Paul is my authority--it's marriage, Billy."

Prothero had walked to the window. He turned round.

"I CAN'T marry," he said. "The trouble has gone too far. I've lost my
nerve in the presence of women. I don't like them any more. They come
at one--done up in a lot of ridiculous clothes, and chattering about
all sorts of things that don't matter...." He surveyed his friend's
thoughtful attitude. "I'm getting to hate women, Benham. I'm beginning
now to understand the bitterness of spinsters against men. I'm beginning
to grasp the unkindliness of priests. The perpetual denial. To you,
happily married, a woman is just a human being. You can talk to her,
like her, you can even admire her calmly; you've got, you see, no grudge
against her...."

He sat down abruptly.

Benham, upon the hearthrug before the empty fireplace, considered him.

"Billy! this is delusion," he said. "What's come over you?"

"I'm telling you," said Prothero.

"No," said Benham.

Prothero awaited some further utterance.

"I'm looking for the cause of it. It's feeding, Billy. It's port and
stimulants where there is no scope for action. It's idleness. I begin to
see now how much fatter you are, how much coarser."

"Idleness! Look at this pile of examination answers. Look at that filing
system like an arsenal of wisdom. Useless wisdom, I admit, but anyhow
not idleness."

"There's still bodily idleness. No. That's your trouble. You're stuffy.
You've enlarged your liver. You sit in this room of a warm morning after
an extravagant breakfast--. And peep and covet."

"Just eggs and bacon!"

"Think of it! Coffee and toast it ought to be. Come out of it, Billy,
and get aired."

"How can one?"

"Easily. Come out of it now. Come for a walk, you Pig!"

"It's an infernally warm morning.

"Walk with me to Grantchester."

"We might go by boat. You could row."

"WALK."

"I ought to do these papers."

"You weren't doing them."

"No...."

"Walk with me to Grantchester. All this affliction of yours
is--horrid--and just nothing at all. Come out of it! I want you to come
with me to Russia and about the world. I'm going to leave my wife--"

"Leave your wife!"

"Why not? And I came here hoping to find you clear-headed, and instead
you are in this disgusting state. I've never met anything in my life so
hot and red and shiny and shameless. Come out of it, man! How can one
talk to you?"



10


"You pull things down to your own level," said Benham as they went
through the heat to Grantchester.

"I pull them down to truth," panted Prothero.

"Truth! As though being full of gross appetites was truth, and
discipline and training some sort of falsity!"

"Artificiality. And begetting pride, Benham, begetting a prig's pride."

For a time there was more than the heat of the day between them....

The things that Benham had come down to discuss were thrust into the
background by the impassioned materialism of Prothero.

"I'm not talking of Love," he said, remaining persistently outrageous.
"I'm talking of physical needs. That first. What is the good of
arranging systems of morality and sentiment before you know what is
physically possible....

"But how can one disentangle physical and moral necessities?"

"Then why don't we up and find out?" said Billy.

He had no patience with the secrecy, the ignorance, the emotion that
surrounded these questions. We didn't worship our ancestors when it came
to building bridges or working metals or curing disease or studying our
indigestion, and why should we become breathless or wordless with
awe and terror when it came to this fundamental affair? Why here in
particular should we give way to Holy Fear and stifled submission to
traditional suppressions and the wisdom of the ages? "What is the wisdom
of the ages?" said Prothero. "Think of the corners where that wisdom was
born.... Flea-bitten sages in stone-age hovels.... Wandering wise
man with a rolling eye, a fakir under a tree, a Jewish sheik, an Arab
epileptic...."

"Would you sweep away the experience of mankind?" protested Benham.

The experience of mankind in these matters had always been bitter
experience. Most of it was better forgotten. It didn't convince. It had
never worked things out. In this matter just as in every other matter
that really signified things had still to be worked out. Nothing had
been worked out hitherto. The wisdom of the ages was a Cant. People had
been too busy quarrelling, fighting and running away. There wasn't
any digested experience of the ages at all. Only the mis-remembered
hankey-pankey of the Dead Old Man.

"Is this love-making a physical necessity for most men and women or
isn't it?" Prothero demanded. "There's a simple question enough, and is
there anything whatever in your confounded wisdom of the ages to tell
me yes or no? Can an ordinary celibate be as healthy and vigorous as a
mated man? Is a spinster of thirty-eight a healthy human being? Can she
be? I don't believe so. Then why in thunder do we let her be? Here am I
at a centre of learning and wisdom and I don't believe so; and there is
nothing in all our colleges, libraries and roomsfull of wiseacres here,
to settle that plain question for me, plainly and finally. My life is a
grubby torment of cravings because it isn't settled. If sexual activity
IS a part of the balance of life, if it IS a necessity, well let's set
about making it accessible and harmless and have done with it. Swedish
exercises. That sort of thing. If it isn't, if it can be reduced and
done without, then let us set about teaching people HOW to control
themselves and reduce and get rid of this vehement passion. But all this
muffled mystery, this pompous sneak's way we take with it!"

"But, Billy! How can one settle these things? It's a matter of
idiosyncrasy. What is true for one man isn't true for another. There's
infinite difference of temperaments!"

"Then why haven't we a classification of temperaments and a moral code
for each sort? Why am I ruled by the way of life that is convenient for
Rigdon the vegetarian and fits Bowler the saint like a glove? It isn't
convenient for me. It fits me like a hair-shirt. Of course there
are temperaments, but why can't we formulate them and exercise the
elementary charity of recognizing that one man's health in these matters
is another man's death? Some want love and gratification and some don't.
There are people who want children and people who don't want to be
bothered by children but who are full of vivid desires. There are
people whose only happiness is chastity, and women who would rather
be courtesans than mothers. Some of us would concentrate upon a
single passion or a single idea; others overflow with a
miscellaneous--tenderness. Yes,--and you smile! Why spit upon and insult
a miscellaneous tenderness, Benham? Why grin at it? Why try every one
by the standards that suit oneself? We're savages, Benham, shamefaced
savages, still. Shamefaced and persecuting.

"I was angry about sex by seventeen," he went on. "Every year I live I
grow angrier."

His voice rose to a squeal of indignation as he talked.

"Think," he said, "of the amount of thinking and feeling about sex
that is going on in Cambridge this morning. The hundreds out of these
thousands full of it. A vast tank of cerebration. And we put none of it
together; we work nothing out from that but poor little couplings and
casual stories, patchings up of situations, misbehaviours, blunders,
disease, trouble, escapes; and the next generation will start, and the
next generation after that will start with nothing but your wisdom of
the ages, which isn't wisdom at all, which is just awe and funk, taboos
and mystery and the secretive cunning of the savage....

"What I really want to do is my work," said Prothero, going off quite
unexpectedly again. "That is why all this business, this incessant
craving and the shame of it and all makes me so infernally angry...."



11


"There I'm with you," cried Benham, struggling out of the thick torrent
of Prothero's prepossessions. "What we want to do is our work."

He clung to his idea. He raised his voice to prevent Prothero getting
the word again.

"It's this, that you call Work, that I call--what do I call it?--living
the aristocratic life, which takes all the coarse simplicity out of
this business. If it was only submission.... YOU think it is only
submission--giving way.... It isn't only submission. We'd manage sex all
right, we'd be the happy swine our senses would make us, if we didn't
know all the time that there was something else to live for,
something far more important. And different. Absolutely different
and contradictory. So different that it cuts right across all these
considerations. It won't fit in.... I don't know what this other thing
is; it's what I want to talk about with you. But I know that it IS, in
all my bones.... YOU know.... It demands control, it demands continence,
it insists upon disregard."

But the ideas of continence and disregard were unpleasant ideas to
Prothero that day.

"Mankind," said Benham, "is overcharged with this sex. It suffocates
us. It gives life only to consume it. We struggle out of the urgent
necessities of a mere animal existence. We are not so much living as
being married and given in marriage. All life is swamped in the love
story...."

"Man is only overcharged because he is unsatisfied," said Prothero,
sticking stoutly to his own view.



12


It was only as they sat at a little table in the orchard at Grantchester
after their lunch that Benham could make head against Prothero and
recover that largeness of outlook which had so easily touched the
imagination of Amanda. And then he did not so much dispose of Prothero's
troubles as soar over them. It is the last triumph of the human
understanding to sympathize with desires we do not share, and to Benham
who now believed himself to be loved beyond the chances of life, who
was satisfied and tranquil and austerely content, it was impossible
that Prothero's demands should seem anything more than the grotesque and
squalid squealings of the beast that has to be overridden and rejected
altogether. It is a freakish fact of our composition that these most
intense feelings in life are just those that are most rapidly and
completely forgotten; hate one may recall for years, but the magic
of love and the flame of desire serve their purpose in our lives and
vanish, leaving no trace, like the snows of Venice. Benham was still not
a year and a half from the meretricious delights of Mrs. Skelmersdale,
and he looked at Prothero as a marble angel might look at a swine in its
sty....

What he had now in mind was an expedition to Russia. When at last he
could sufficiently release Prothero's attention, he unfolded the project
that had been developing steadily in him since his honeymoon experience.

He had discovered a new reason for travelling. The last country we can
see clearly, he had discovered, is our own country. It is as hard to see
one's own country as it is to see the back of one's head. It is too
much behind us, too much ourselves. But Russia is like England with
everything larger, more vivid, cruder; one felt that directly one walked
about St. Petersburg. St. Petersburg upon its Neva was like a savage
untamed London on a larger Thames; they were seagull-haunted tidal
cities, like no other capitals in Europe. The shipping and buildings
mingled in their effects. Like London it looked over the heads of
its own people to a limitless polyglot empire. And Russia was an
aristocratic land, with a middle-class that had no pride in itself as a
class; it had a British toughness and incompetence, a British disregard
of logic and meticulous care. Russia, like England, was outside Catholic
Christendom, it had a state church and the opposition to that church was
not secularism but dissent. One could draw a score of such contrasted
parallels. And now it was in a state of intolerable stress, that laid
bare the elemental facts of a great social organization. It was having
its South African war, its war at the other end of the earth, with a
certain defeat instead of a dubious victory....

"There is far more freedom for the personal life in Russia than in
England," said Prothero, a little irrelevantly.

Benham went on with his discourse about Russia....

"At the college of Troitzka," said Prothero, "which I understand is a
kind of monster Trinity unencumbered by a University, Binns tells me
that although there is a profession of celibacy within the walls, the
arrangements of the town and more particularly of the various hotels are
conceived in a spirit of extreme liberality."

Benham hardly attended at all to these interruptions.

He went on to point out the elemental quality of the Russian situation.
He led up to the assertion that to go to Russia, to see Russia, to try
to grasp the broad outline of the Russian process, was the manifest duty
of every responsible intelligence that was free to do as much. And so he
was going, and if Prothero cared to come too--

"Yes," said Prothero, "I should like to go to Russia."



13


But throughout all their travel together that summer Benham was never
able to lift Prothero away from his obsession. It was the substance of
their talk as the Holland boat stood out past waiting destroyers and
winking beacons and the lights of Harwich, into the smoothly undulating
darkness of the North Sea; it rose upon them again as they sat over
the cakes and cheese of a Dutch breakfast in the express for Berlin.
Prothero filled the Sieges Allee with his complaints against nature
and society, and distracted Benham in his contemplation of Polish
agriculture from the windows of the train with turgid sexual liberalism.
So that Benham, during this period until Prothero left him and until
the tragic enormous spectacle of Russia in revolution took complete
possession of him, was as it were thinking upon two floors. Upon the one
he was thinking of the vast problems of a society of a hundred million
people staggering on the verge of anarchy, and upon the other he was
perplexed by the feverish inattention of Prothero to the tremendous
things that were going on all about them. It was only presently when the
serenity of his own private life began to be ruffled by disillusionment,
that he began to realize the intimate connexion of these two systems of
thought. Yet Prothero put it to him plainly enough.

"Inattentive," said Prothero, "of course I am inattentive. What is
really the matter with all this--this social mess people are in here, is
that nearly everybody is inattentive. These Big Things of yours, nobody
is thinking of them really. Everybody is thinking about the Near Things
that concern himself."

"The bombs they threw yesterday? The Cossacks and the whips?"

"Nudges. Gestures of inattention. If everybody was thinking of the Res
Publica would there be any need for bombs?"

He pursued his advantage. "It's all nonsense to suppose people think of
politics because they are in 'em. As well suppose that the passengers on
a liner understand the engines, or soldiers a war. Before men can
think of to-morrow, they must think of to-day. Before they can think
of others, they must be sure about themselves. First of all, food; the
private, the personal economic worry. Am I safe for food? Then sex, and
until one is tranquil and not ashamed, not irritated and dissatisfied,
how can one care for other people, or for next year or the Order of the
World? How can one, Benham?"

He seized the illustration at hand. "Here we are in Warsaw--not a month
after bomb-throwing and Cossack charging. Windows have still to be
mended, smashed doors restored. There's blood-stains still on some
of the houses. There are hundreds of people in the Citadel and in the
Ochrana prison. This morning there were executions. Is it anything more
than an eddy in the real life of the place? Watch the customers in the
shops, the crowd in the streets, the men in the cafes who stare at the
passing women. They are all swallowed up again in their own business.
They just looked up as the Cossacks galloped past; they just shifted a
bit when the bullets spat...."

And when the streets of Moscow were agog with the grotesque amazing
adventure of the Potemkin mutineers, Prothero was in the full tide of
the private romance that severed him from Benham and sent him back to
Cambridge--changed.

Before they reached Moscow Benham was already becoming accustomed to
disregard Prothero. He was looking over him at the vast heaving trouble
of Russia, which now was like a sea that tumbles under the hurrying
darknesses of an approaching storm. In those days it looked as though it
must be an overwhelming storm. He was drinking in the wide and massive
Russian effects, the drifting crowds in the entangling streets, the
houses with their strange lettering in black and gold, the innumerable
barbaric churches, the wildly driven droshkys, the sombre red fortress
of the Kremlin, with its bulbous churches clustering up into the sky,
the crosses, the innumerable gold crosses, the mad church of St. Basil,
carrying the Russian note beyond the pitch of permissible caricature,
and in this setting the obscure drama of clustering, staring,
sash-wearing peasants, long-haired students, sane-eyed women, a thousand
varieties of uniform, a running and galloping to and fro of messengers,
a flutter of little papers, whispers, shouts, shots, a drama elusive and
portentous, a gathering of forces, an accumulation of tension going on
to a perpetual clash and clamour of bells. Benham had brought letters of
introduction to a variety of people, some had vanished, it seemed. They
were "away," the porters said, and they continued to be "away,"--it was
the formula, he learnt, for arrest; others were evasive, a few showed
themselves extraordinarily anxious to inform him about things, to
explain themselves and things about them exhaustively. One young student
took him to various meetings and showed him in great detail the scene of
the recent murder of the Grand Duke Sergius. The buildings opposite the
old French cannons were still under repair. "The assassin stood just
here. The bomb fell there, look! right down there towards the gate; that
was where they found his arm. He was torn to fragments. He was scraped
up. He was mixed with the horses...."

Every one who talked spoke of the outbreak of revolution as a matter of
days or at the utmost weeks. And whatever question Benham chose to
ask these talkers were prepared to answer. Except one. "And after the
revolution," he asked, "what then?..." Then they waved their hands, and
failed to convey meanings by reassuring gestures.

He was absorbed in his effort to understand this universal ominous drift
towards a conflict. He was trying to piece together a process, if it
was one and the same process, which involved riots in Lodz, fighting at
Libau, wild disorder at Odessa, remote colossal battlings in Manchuria,
the obscure movements of a disastrous fleet lost somewhere now in the
Indian seas, steaming clumsily to its fate, he was trying to rationalize
it all in his mind, to comprehend its direction. He was struggling
strenuously with the obscurities of the language in which these things
were being discussed about him, a most difficult language demanding new
sets of visual images because of its strange alphabet. Is it any wonder
that for a time he failed to observe that Prothero was involved in some
entirely disconnected affair.

They were staying at the big Cosmopolis bazaar in the Theatre Square.
Thither, through the doors that are opened by distraught-looking men
with peacocks' feathers round their caps, came Benham's friends and
guides to take him out and show him this and that. At first Prothero
always accompanied Benham on these expeditions; then he began to make
excuses. He would stay behind in the hotel. Then when Benham returned
Prothero would have disappeared. When the porter was questioned about
Prothero his nescience was profound.

One night no Prothero was discoverable at any hour, and Benham, who
wanted to discuss a project for going on to Kieff and Odessa, was
alarmed.

"Moscow is a late place," said Benham's student friend. "You need not
be anxious until after four or five in the morning. It will be quite
time--QUITE time to be anxious to-morrow. He may be--close at hand."

When Benham hunted up Prothero in his room next morning he found him
sleepy and irritable.

"I don't trouble if YOU are late," said Prothero, sitting up in his bed
with a red resentful face and crumpled hair. "I wasn't born yesterday."

"I wanted to talk about leaving Moscow."

"I don't want to leave Moscow."

"But Odessa--Odessa is the centre of interest just now."

"I want to stay in Moscow."

Benham looked baffled.

Prothero stuck up his knees and rested his night-shirted arms upon them.
"I don't want to leave Moscow," he said, "and I'm not going to do so."

"But haven't we done--"

Prothero interrupted. "You may. But I haven't. We're not after the
same things. Things that interest you, Benham, don't interest me. I've
found--different things."

His expression was extraordinarily defiant.

"I want," he went on, "to put our affairs on a different footing. Now
you've opened the matter we may as well go into it. You were good enough
to bring me here.... There was a sort of understanding we were working
together.... We aren't.... The long and short of it is, Benham, I want
to pay you for my journey here and go on my own--independently."

His eye and voice achieved a fierceness that Benham found nearly
incredible in him.

Something that had got itself overlooked in the press of other matters
jerked back into Benham's memory. It popped back so suddenly that for an
instant he wanted to laugh. He turned towards the window, picked his
way among Prothero's carelessly dropped garments, and stood for a moment
staring into the square, with its drifting, assembling and dispersing
fleet of trains and its long line of blue-coated IZVOSHTCHIKS. Then he
turned.

"Billy," he said, "didn't I see you the other evening driving towards
the Hermitage?"

"Yes," said Prothero, and added, "that's it."

"You were with a lady."

"And she IS a lady," said Prothero, so deeply moved that his face
twitched as though he was going to weep.

"She's a Russian?"

"She had an English mother. Oh, you needn't stand there and look so
damned ironical! She's--she's a woman. She's a thing of kindness...."

He was too full to go on.

"Billy, old boy," said Benham, distressed, "I don't want to be
ironical--"

Prothero had got his voice again.

"You'd better know," he said, "you'd better know. She's one of those
women who live in this hotel."

"Live in this hotel!"

"On the fourth floor. Didn't you know? It's the way in most of these big
Russian hotels. They come down and sit about after lunch and dinner. A
woman with a yellow ticket. Oh! I don't care. I don't care a rap. She's
been kind to me; she's--she's dear to me. How are you to understand? I
shall stop in Moscow. I shall take her to England. I can't live without
her, Benham. And then-- And then you come worrying me to come to your
damned Odessa!"

And suddenly this extraordinary young man put his hands to his face
as though he feared to lose it and would hold it on, and after an
apoplectic moment burst noisily into tears. They ran between his
fingers. "Get out of my room," he shouted, suffocatingly. "What business
have you to come prying on me?"

Benham sat down on a chair in the middle of the room and stared
round-eyed at his friend. His hands were in his pockets. For a time he
said nothing.

"Billy," he began at last, and stopped again. "Billy, in this country
somehow one wants to talk like a Russian. Billy, my dear--I'm not your
father, I'm not your judge. I'm--unreasonably fond of you. It's not my
business to settle what is right or wrong for you. If you want to stay
in Moscow, stay in Moscow. Stay here, and stay as my guest...."

He stopped and remained staring at his friend for a little space.

"I didn't know," said Prothero brokenly; "I didn't know it was possible
to get so fond of a person...."

Benham stood up. He had never found Prothero so attractive and so
abominable in his life before.

"I shall go to Odessa alone, Billy. I'll make things all right here
before I go...."

He closed the door behind him and went in a state of profound thought to
his own room....

Presently Prothero came to him with a vague inopportune desire to
explain what so evidently did not need explaining. He walked about the
room trying ways of putting it, while Benham packed.

In an unaccountable way Prothero's bristling little mind seemed to have
shrunken to something sleek and small.

"I wish," he said, "you could stay for a later train and have lunch and
meet her. She's not the ordinary thing. She's--different."

Benham plumbed depths of wisdom. "Billy," he said, "no woman IS the
ordinary thing. They are all--different...."



14


For a time this affair of Prothero's seemed to be a matter as
disconnected from the Research Magnificent as one could imagine any
matter to be. While Benham went from Moscow and returned, and travelled
hither and thither, and involved himself more and more in the endless
tangled threads of the revolutionary movement in Russia, Prothero
was lost to all those large issues in the development of his personal
situation. He contributed nothing to Benham's thought except attempts at
discouragement. He reiterated his declaration that all the vast
stress and change of Russian national life was going on because it was
universally disregarded. "I tell you, as I told you before, that nobody
is attending. You think because all Moscow, all Russia, is in the
picture, that everybody is concerned. Nobody is concerned. Nobody cares
what is happening. Even the men who write in newspapers and talk at
meetings about it don't care. They are thinking of their dinners, of
their clothes, of their money, of their wives. They hurry home...."

That was his excuse.

Manifestly it was an excuse.

His situation developed into remarkable complications of jealousy and
divided counsels that Benham found altogether incomprehensible. To
Benham in those days everything was very simple in this business of
love. The aristocrat had to love ideally; that was all. He had to love
Amanda. He and Amanda were now very deeply in love again, more in
love, he felt, than they had ever been before. They were now writing
love-letters to each other and enjoying a separation that was almost
voluptuous. She found in the epistolatory treatment of her surrender to
him and to the natural fate of women, a delightful exercise for her very
considerable powers of expression. Life pointed now wonderfully to the
great time ahead when there would be a Cheetah cub in the world, and
meanwhile the Cheetah loped about the wild world upon a mighty quest. In
such terms she put it. Such foolishness written in her invincibly square
and youthful hand went daily from London to Russia, and stacked up
against his return in the porter's office at the Cosmopolis Bazaar or
pursued him down through the jarring disorders of south-west Russia, or
waited for him at ill-chosen post-offices that deflected his journeyings
wastefully or in several instances went altogether astray. Perhaps they
supplied self-educating young strikers in the postal service with useful
exercises in the deciphering of manuscript English. He wrote back five
hundred different ways of saying that he loved her extravagantly....

It seemed to Benham in those days that he had found the remedy and
solution of all those sexual perplexities that distressed the world;
Heroic Love to its highest note--and then you go about your business. It
seemed impossible not to be happy and lift one's chin high and diffuse
a bracing kindliness among the unfortunate multitudes who stewed in
affliction and hate because they had failed as yet to find this simple,
culminating elucidation. And Prothero--Prothero, too, was now achieving
the same grand elementariness, out of his lusts and protests and general
physical squalor he had flowered into love. For a time it is true it
made rather an ineffective companion of him, but this was the mere
goose-stepping for the triumphal march; this way ultimately lay
exaltation. Benham had had as yet but a passing glimpse of this
Anglo-Russian, who was a lady and altogether unlike her fellows; he had
seen her for a doubtful second or so as she and Prothero drove past him,
and his impression was of a rather little creature, white-faced with
dusky hair under a red cap, paler and smaller but with something in her,
a quiet alertness, that gave her a touch of kinship with Amanda. And
if she liked old Prothero-- And, indeed, she must like old Prothero or
could she possibly have made him so deeply in love with her?

They must stick to each other, and then, presently, Prothero's soul
would wake up and face the world again. What did it matter what she had
been?

Through stray shots and red conflict, long tediums of strained anxiety
and the physical dangers of a barbaric country staggering towards
revolution, Benham went with his own love like a lamp within him
and this affair of Prothero's reflecting its light, and he was quite
prepared for the most sympathetic and liberal behaviour when he came
back to Moscow to make the lady's acquaintance. He intended to help
Prothero to marry and take her back to Cambridge, and to assist by every
possible means in destroying and forgetting the official yellow ticket
that defined her status in Moscow. But he reckoned without either
Prothero or the young lady in this expectation.

It only got to him slowly through his political preoccupations
that there were obscure obstacles to this manifest course. Prothero
hesitated; the lady expressed doubts.

On closer acquaintance her resemblance to Amanda diminished. It was
chiefly a similarity of complexion. She had a more delicate face than
Amanda, and its youthful brightness was deadened; she had none of
Amanda's glow, and she spoke her mother's language with a pretty halting
limp that was very different from Amanda's clear decisions.

She put her case compactly.

"I would not DO in Cambridge," she said with an infinitesimal glance at
Prothero.

"Mr. Benham," she said, and her manner had the gravity of a woman
of affairs, "now do you see me in Cambridge? Now do you see me? Kept
outside the walls? In a little DATCHA? With no occupation? Just to amuse
him."

And on another occasion when Prothero was not with her she achieved
still completer lucidity.

"I would come if I thought he wanted me to come," she said. "But you see
if I came he would not want me to come. Because then he would have me
and so he wouldn't want me. He would just have the trouble. And I am not
sure if I should be happy in Cambridge. I am not sure I should be happy
enough to make him happy. It is a very learned and intelligent and
charming society, of course; but here, THINGS HAPPEN. At Cambridge
nothing happens--there is only education. There is no revolution in
Cambridge; there are not even sinful people to be sorry for.... And
he says himself that Cambridge people are particular. He says they are
liberal but very, very particular, and perhaps I could not always act my
part well. Sometimes I am not always well behaved. When there is music I
behave badly sometimes, or when I am bored. He says the Cambridge people
are so liberal that they do not mind what you are, but he says they are
so particular that they mind dreadfully how you are what you are.... So
that it comes to exactly the same thing...."

"Anna Alexievna," said Benham suddenly, "are you in love with Prothero?"

Her manner became conscientiously scientific.

"He is very kind and very generous--too generous. He keeps sending for
more money--hundreds of roubles, I try to prevent him."

"Were you EVER in love?"

"Of course. But it's all gone long ago. It was like being hungry. Only
very fine hungry. Exquisite hungry.... And then being disgusted...."

"He is in love with you."

"What is love?" said Anna. "He is grateful. He is by nature grateful."
She smiled a smile, like the smile of a pale Madonna who looks down on
her bambino.

"And you love nothing?"

"I love Russia--and being alone, being completely alone. When I am dead
perhaps I shall be alone. Not even my own body will touch me then."

Then she added, "But I shall be sorry when he goes."

Afterwards Benham talked to Prothero alone. "Your Anna," he said, "is
rather wonderful. At first, I tell you now frankly I did not like her
very much, I thought she looked 'used,' she drank vodka at lunch, she
was gay, uneasily; she seemed a sham thing. All that was prejudice. She
thinks; she's generous, she's fine."

"She's tragic," said Prothero as though it was the same thing.

He spoke as though he noted an objection. His next remark confirmed this
impression. "That's why I can't take her back to Cambridge," he said.

"You see, Benham," he went on, "she's human. She's not really feminine.
I mean, she's--unsexed. She isn't fitted to be a wife or a mother any
more. We've talked about the possible life in England, very plainly.
I've explained what a household in Cambridge would mean.... It doesn't
attract her.... In a way she's been let out from womanhood, forced out
of womanhood, and I see now that when women are let out from womanhood
there's no putting them back. I could give a lecture on Anna. I see
now that if women are going to be wives and mothers and homekeepers and
ladies, they must be got ready for it from the beginning, sheltered,
never really let out into the wild chances of life. She has been.
Bitterly. She's REALLY emancipated. And it's let her out into a sort of
nothingness. She's no longer a woman, and she isn't a man. She ought
to be able to go on her own--like a man. But I can't take her back to
Cambridge. Even for her sake."

His perplexed eyes regarded Benham.

"You won't be happy in Cambridge--alone," said Benham.

"Oh, damnably not! But what can I do? I had at first some idea of coming
to Moscow for good--teaching."

He paused. "Impossible. I'm worth nothing here. I couldn't have kept
her."

"Then what are you going to do, Billy?"

"I don't KNOW what I'm going to do, I tell you. I live for the moment.
To-morrow we are going out into the country."

"I don't understand," said Benham with a gesture of resignation. "It
seems to me that if a man and woman love each other--well, they insist
upon each other. What is to happen to her if you leave her in Moscow?"

"Damnation! Is there any need to ask that?"

"Take her to Cambridge, man. And if Cambridge objects, teach Cambridge
better manners."

Prothero's face was suddenly transfigured with rage.

"I tell you she won't come!" he said.

"Billy!" said Benham, "you should make her!"

"I can't."

"If a man loves a woman he can make her do anything--"

"But I don't love her like that," said Prothero, shrill with anger. "I
tell you I don't love her like that."

Then he lunged into further deeps. "It's the other men," he said, "it's
the things that have been. Don't you understand? Can't you understand?
The memories--she must have memories--they come between us. It's
something deeper than reason. It's in one's spine and under one's nails.
One could do anything, I perceive, for one's very own woman...."

"MAKE her your very own woman, said the exponent of heroic love.

"I shirk deeds, Benham, but you shirk facts. How could any man make her
his very own woman now? You--you don't seem to understand--ANYTHING.
She's nobody's woman--for ever. That--that might-have-been has gone for
ever.... It's nerves--a passion of the nerves. There's a cruelty in life
and-- She's KIND to me. She's so kind to me...."

And then again Prothero was weeping like a vexed child.



15


The end of Prothero's first love affair came to Benham in broken
fragments in letters. When he looked for Anna Alexievna in December--he
never learnt her surname--he found she had left the Cosmopolis Bazaar
soon after Prothero's departure and he could not find whither she had
gone. He never found her again. Moscow and Russia had swallowed her up.

Of course she and Prothero parted; that was a foregone conclusion. But
Prothero's manner of parting succeeded in being at every phase a shock
to Benham's ideas. It was clear he went off almost callously; it would
seem there was very little crying. Towards the end it was evident that
the two had quarrelled. The tears only came at the very end of all. It
was almost as if he had got through the passion and was glad to go.
Then came regret, a regret that increased in geometrical proportion with
every mile of distance.

In Warsaw it was that grief really came to Prothero. He had some hours
there and he prowled the crowded streets, seeing girls and women happy
with their lovers, abroad upon bright expeditions and full of delicious
secrets, girls and women who ever and again flashed out some instant
resemblance to Anna....

In Berlin he stopped a night and almost decided that he would go back.
"But now I had the damned frontier," he wrote, "between us."

It was so entirely in the spirit of Prothero, Benham thought, to let the
"damned frontier" tip the balance against him.

Then came a scrawl of passionate confession, so passionate that it
seemed as if Prothero had been transfigured. "I can't stand this
business," he wrote. "It has things in it, possibilities of emotional
disturbance--you can have no idea! In the train--luckily I was alone in
the compartment--I sat and thought, and suddenly, I could not help it,
I was weeping--noisy weeping, an uproar! A beastly German came and
stood in the corridor to stare. I had to get out of the train. It is
disgraceful, it is monstrous we should be made like this....

"Here I am stranded in Hanover with nothing to do but to write to you
about my dismal feelings...."

After that surely there was nothing before a broken-hearted Prothero but
to go on with his trailing wing to Trinity and a life of inappeasable
regrets; but again Benham reckoned without the invincible earthliness of
his friend. Prothero stayed three nights in Paris.

"There is an extraordinary excitement about Paris," he wrote. "A levity.
I suspect the gypsum in the subsoil--some as yet undescribed
radiations. Suddenly the world looks brightly cynical.... None of those
tear-compelling German emanations....

"And, Benham, I have found a friend.

"A woman. Of course you will laugh, you will sneer. You do not
understand these things.... Yet they are so simple. It was the strangest
accident brought us together. There was something that drew us together.
A sort of instinct. Near the Boulevard Poissoniere...."

"Good heavens!" said Benham. "A sort of instinct!"

"I told her all about Anna!"

"Good Lord!" cried Benham.

"She understood. Perfectly. None of your so-called 'respectable' women
could have understood.... At first I intended merely to talk to her...."

Benham crumpled the letter in his hand.

"Little Anna Alexievna!" he said, "you were too clean for him."



16


Benham had a vision of Prothero returning from all this foreign travel
meekly, pensively, a little sadly, and yet not without a kind of relief,
to the grey mildness of Trinity. He saw him, capped and gowned,
and restored to academic dignity again, nodding greetings, resuming
friendships.

The little man merged again into his rare company of discreet Benedicts
and restrained celibates at the high tables. They ate on in their mature
wisdom long after the undergraduates had fled. Presently they would
withdraw processionally to the combination room....

There would be much to talk about over the wine.

Benham speculated what account Prothero would give of Moscow....

He laughed abruptly.

And with that laugh Prothero dropped out of Benham's world for a space
of years. There may have been other letters, but if so they were lost
in the heaving troubles of a revolution-strained post-office. Perhaps
to this day they linger sere and yellow in some forgotten pigeon-hole in
Kishinev or Ekaterinoslav....



17


In November, after an adventure in the trader's quarter of Kieff which
had brought him within an inch of death, and because an emotional wave
had swept across him and across his correspondence with Amanda, Benham
went back suddenly to England and her. He wanted very greatly to see her
and also he wanted to make certain arrangements about his property. He
returned by way of Hungary, and sent telegrams like shouts of excitement
whenever the train stopped for a sufficient time. "Old Leopard, I am
coming, I am coming," he telegraphed, announcing his coming for the
fourth time. It was to be the briefest of visits, very passionate, the
mutual refreshment of two noble lovers, and then he was returning to
Russia again.

Amanda was at Chexington, and there he found her installed in the utmost
dignity of expectant maternity. Like many other people he had been a
little disposed to regard the bearing of children as a common human
experience; at Chexington he came to think of it as a rare and
sacramental function. Amanda had become very beautiful in quiet, grey,
dove-like tones; her sun-touched, boy's complexion had given way to
a soft glow of the utmost loveliness, her brisk little neck that had
always reminded him of the stalk of a flower was now softened and
rounded; her eyes were tender, and she moved about the place in the
manner of one who is vowed to a great sacrifice. She dominated the
scene, and Lady Marayne, with a certain astonishment in her eyes and
a smouldering disposition to irony, was the half-sympathetic,
half-resentful priestess of her daughter-in-law's unparalleled
immolation. The MOTIF of motherhood was everywhere, and at his bedside
he found--it had been put there for him by Amanda--among much
other exaltation of woman's mission, that most wonderful of all
philoprogenitive stories, Hudson's CRYSTAL AGE.

Everybody at Chexington had an air of being grouped about the impending
fact. An epidemic of internal troubles, it is true, kept Sir Godfrey in
the depths of London society, but to make up for his absence Mrs. Morris
had taken a little cottage down by the river and the Wilder girls were
with her, both afire with fine and subtle feelings and both, it seemed,
and more particularly Betty, prepared to be keenly critical of Benham's
attitude.

He did a little miss his cue in these exaltations, because he had
returned in a rather different vein of exaltation.

In missing it he was assisted by Amanda herself, who had at moments an
effect upon him of a priestess confidentially disrobed. It was as if she
put aside for him something official, something sincerely maintained,
necessary, but at times a little irksome. It was as if she was glad to
take him into her confidence and unbend. Within the pre-natal Amanda an
impish Amanda still lingered.

There were aspects of Amanda that it was manifest dear Betty must never
know....

But the real Amanda of that November visit even in her most unpontifical
moods did not quite come up to the imagined Amanda who had drawn him
home across Europe. At times she was extraordinarily jolly. They had two
or three happy walks about the Chexington woods; that year the golden
weather of October had flowed over into November, and except for a
carpet of green and gold under the horse-chestnuts most of the leaves
were still on the trees. Gleams of her old wanton humour shone on him.
And then would come something else, something like a shadow across the
world, something he had quite forgotten since his idea of heroic love
had flooded him, something that reminded him of those long explanations
with Mr. Rathbone-Sanders that had never been explained, and of the
curate in the doorway of the cottage and his unaccountable tears.

On the afternoon of his arrival at Chexington he was a little surprised
to find Sir Philip Easton coming through the house into the garden, with
an accustomed familiarity. Sir Philip perceived him with a start that
was instantly controlled, and greeted him with unnatural ease.

Sir Philip, it seemed, was fishing and reading and playing cricket in
the neighbourhood, which struck Benham as a poor way of spending the
summer, the sort of soft holiday a man learns to take from scholars
and literary men. A man like Sir Philip, he thought, ought to have been
aviating or travelling.

Moreover, when Sir Philip greeted Amanda it seemed to Benham that there
was a flavour of established association in their manner. But then Sir
Philip was also very assiduous with Lady Marayne. She called him "Pip,"
and afterwards Amanda called across the tennis-court to him, "Pip!" And
then he called her "Amanda." When the Wilder girls came up to join the
tennis he was just as brotherly....

The next day he came to lunch.

During that meal Benham became more aware than he had ever been before
of the peculiar deep expressiveness of this young man's eyes. They
watched him and they watched Amanda with a solicitude that seemed at
once pained and tender. And there was something about Amanda, a kind
of hard brightness, an impartiality and an air of something undefinably
suspended, that gave Benham an intuitive certitude that that afternoon
Sir Philip would be spoken to privately, and that then he would pack up
and go away in a state of illumination from Chexington. But before he
could be spoken to he contrived to speak to Benham.

They were left to smoke after lunch, and then it was he took advantage
of a pause to commit his little indiscretion.

"Mrs. Benham," he said, "looks amazingly well--extraordinarily well,
don't you think?"

"Yes," said Benham, startled. "Yes. She certainly keeps very well."

"She misses you terribly," said Sir Philip; "it is a time when a woman
misses her husband. But, of course, she does not want to hamper your
work...."

Benham felt it was very kind of him to take so intimate an interest in
these matters, but on the spur of the moment he could find no better
expression for this than a grunt.

"You don't mind," said the young man with a slight catch in the breath
that might have been apprehensive, "that I sometimes bring her books and
flowers and things? Do what little I can to keep life interesting down
here? It's not very congenial.... She's so wonderful--I think she is the
most wonderful woman in the world."

Benham perceived that so far from being a modern aristocrat he was
really a primitive barbarian in these matters.

"I've no doubt," he said, "that my wife has every reason to be grateful
for your attentions."

In the little pause that followed Benham had a feeling that Sir Philip
was engendering something still more personal. If so, he might
be constrained to invert very gently but very firmly the bowl of
chrysanthemums over Sir Philip's head, or kick him in an improving
manner. He had a ridiculous belief that Sir Philip would probably take
anything of the sort very touchingly. He scrambled in his mind for some
remark that would avert this possibility.

"Have you ever been in Russia?" he asked hastily. "It is the most
wonderful country in Europe. I had an odd adventure near Kiev. During a
pogrom."

And he drowned the developing situation in a flood of description....

But it was not so easy to drown the little things that were presently
thrown out by Lady Marayne. They were so much more in the air....



18


Sir Philip suddenly got out of the picture even as Benham had foreseen.

"Easton has gone away," he remarked three days later to Amanda.

"I told him to go. He is a bore with you about. But otherwise he is
rather a comfort, Cheetah." She meditated upon Sir Philip. "And he's an
HONOURABLE man," she said. "He's safe...."



19


After that visit it was that the notes upon love and sex began in
earnest. The scattered memoranda upon the perfectness of heroic love for
the modern aristocrat ended abruptly. Instead there came the first draft
for a study of jealousy. The note was written in pencil on Chexington
notepaper and manifestly that had been supported on the ribbed cover
of a book. There was a little computation in the corner, converting
forty-five degrees Reaumur into degrees Fahrenheit, which made White
guess it had been written in the Red Sea. But, indeed, it had been
written in a rather amateurishly stoked corridor-train on Benham's
journey to the gathering revolt in Moscow....

"I think I have been disposed to underrate the force of sexual
jealousy.... I thought it was something essentially contemptible,
something that one dismissed and put behind oneself in the mere effort
to be aristocratic, but I begin to realize that it is not quite so
easily settled with....

"One likes to know.... Possibly one wants to know too much.... In phases
of fatigue, and particularly in phases of sleeplessness, when one
is leaving all that one cares for behind, it becomes an irrational
torment....

"And it is not only in oneself that I am astonished by the power of this
base motive. I see, too, in the queer business of Prothero how strongly
jealousy, how strongly the sense of proprietorship, weighs with a
man....

"There is no clear reason why one should insist upon another human being
being one's ownest own--utterly one's own....

"There is, of course, no clear reason for most human motives....

"One does....

"There is something dishonouring in distrust--to both the distrusted and
the one who distrusts...."

After that, apparently, it had been too hot and stuffy to continue.



20


Benham did not see Amanda again until after the birth of their child.
He spent his Christmas in Moscow, watching the outbreak, the fitful
fighting and the subsequent break-up, of the revolution, and taking
care of a lost and helpless English family whose father had gone astray
temporarily on the way home from Baku. Then he went southward to Rostov
and thence to Astrakhan. Here he really began his travels. He determined
to get to India by way of Herat and for the first time in his life
rode out into an altogether lawless wilderness. He went on obstinately
because he found himself disposed to funk the journey, and because
discouragements were put in his way. He was soon quite cut off from all
the ways of living he had known. He learnt what it is to be flea-bitten,
saddle-sore, hungry and, above all, thirsty. He was haunted by a dread
of fever, and so contrived strange torments for himself with overdoses
of quinine. He ceased to be traceable from Chexington in March, and he
reappeared in the form of a telegram from Karachi demanding news in May.
He learnt he was the father of a man-child and that all was well with
Amanda.

He had not expected to be so long away from any communication with the
outer world, and something in the nature of a stricken conscience took
him back to England. He found a second William Porphyry in the world,
dominating Chexington, and Amanda tenderly triumphant and passionate,
the Madonna enthroned. For William Porphyry he could feel no emotion.
William Porphyry was very red and ugly and protesting, feeble and
aggressive, a matter for a skilled nurse. To see him was to ignore him
and dispel a dream. It was to Amanda Benham turned again.

For some days he was content to adore his Madonna and listen to the
familiar flatteries of her love. He was a leaner, riper man, Amanda
said, and wiser, so that she was afraid of him....

And then he became aware that she was requiring him to stay at her side.
"We have both had our adventures," she said, which struck him as an odd
phrase.

It forced itself upon his obstinate incredulity that all those
conceptions of heroic love and faithfulness he had supposed to be so
clearly understood between them had vanished from her mind. She had
absolutely forgotten that twilight moment at the window which had seemed
to him the crowning instant, the real marriage of their lives. It
had gone, it had left no recoverable trace in her. And upon his
interpretations of that he had loved her passionately for a year. She
was back at exactly the ideas and intentions that ruled her during their
first settlement in London. She wanted a joint life in the social world
of London, she demanded his presence, his attention, the daily practical
evidences of love. It was all very well for him to be away when the
child was coming, but now everything was different. Now he must stay by
her.

This time he argued no case. These issues he had settled for ever. Even
an indignant dissertation from Lady Marayne, a dissertation that began
with appeals and ended in taunts, did not move him. Behind these things
now was India. The huge problems of India had laid an unshakeable hold
upon his imagination. He had seen Russia, and he wanted to balance that
picture by a vision of the east....

He saw Easton only once during a week-end at Chexington. The young man
displayed no further disposition to be confidentially sentimental. But
he seemed to have something on his mind. And Amanda said not a word
about him. He was a young man above suspicion, Benham felt....

And from his departure the quality of the correspondence of these
two larger carnivores began to change. Except for the repetition of
accustomed endearments, they ceased to be love letters in any sense of
the word. They dealt chiefly with the "Cub," and even there Benham felt
presently that the enthusiasm diminished. A new amazing quality for
Amanda appeared--triteness. The very writing of her letters changed
as though it had suddenly lost backbone. Her habitual liveliness
of phrasing lost its point. Had she lost her animation? Was she ill
unknowingly? Where had the light gone? It was as if her attention was
distracted.... As if every day when she wrote her mind was busy about
something else.

Abruptly at last he understood. A fact that had never been stated,
never formulated, never in any way admitted, was suddenly pointed to
convergently by a thousand indicating fingers, and beyond question
perceived to be THERE....

He left a record of that moment of realization.

"Suddenly one night I woke up and lay still, and it was as if I had
never seen Amanda before. Now I saw her plainly, I saw her with that
same dreadful clearness that sometimes comes at dawn, a pitiless, a
scientific distinctness that has neither light nor shadow....

"Of course," I said, and then presently I got up very softly....

"I wanted to get out of my intolerable, close, personal cabin. I wanted
to feel the largeness of the sky. I went out upon the deck. We were off
the coast of Madras, and when I think of that moment, there comes back
to me also the faint flavour of spice in the air, the low line of the
coast, the cool flooding abundance of the Indian moonlight, the swish
of the black water against the side of the ship. And a perception of
infinite loss, as if the limitless heavens above this earth and below
to the very uttermost star were just one boundless cavity from which
delight had fled....

"Of course I had lost her. I knew it with absolute certainty. I knew it
from her insecure temperament, her adventurousness, her needs. I knew it
from every line she had written me in the last three months. I knew it
intuitively. She had been unfaithful. She must have been unfaithful.

"What had I been dreaming about to think that it would not be so?"



21


"Now let me write down plainly what I think of these matters. Let me
be at least honest with myself, whatever self-contradictions I may
have been led into by force of my passions. Always I have despised
jealousy....

"Only by the conquest of four natural limitations is the aristocratic
life to be achieved. They come in a certain order, and in that order the
spirit of man is armed against them less and less efficiently. Of fear
and my struggle against fear I have told already. I am fearful. I am a
physical coward until I can bring shame and anger to my assistance,
but in overcoming fear I have been helped by the whole body of human
tradition. Every one, the basest creatures, every Hottentot, every
stunted creature that ever breathed poison in a slum, knows that the
instinctive constitution of man is at fault here and that fear is
shameful and must be subdued. The race is on one's side. And so there is
a vast traditional support for a man against the Second Limitation, the
limitation of physical indulgence. It is not so universal as the first,
there is a grinning bawling humour on the side of grossness, but common
pride is against it. And in this matter my temperament has been my help:
I am fastidious, I eat little, drink little, and feel a shivering recoil
from excess. It is no great virtue; it happens so; it is something in
the nerves of my skin. I cannot endure myself unshaven or in any way
unclean; I am tormented by dirty hands or dirty blood or dirty memories,
and after I had once loved Amanda I could not--unless some irrational
impulse to get equal with her had caught me--have broken my faith to
her, whatever breach there was in her faith to me....

"I see that in these matters I am cleaner than most men and more easily
clean; and it may be that it is in the vein of just that distinctive
virtue that I fell so readily into a passion of resentment and anger.

"I despised a jealous man. There is a traditional discredit of jealousy,
not so strong as that against cowardice, but still very strong. But
the general contempt of jealousy is curiously wrapped up with the
supposition that there is no cause for jealousy, that it is unreasonable
suspicion. Given a cause then tradition speaks with an uncertain
voice....

"I see now that I despised jealousy because I assumed that it was
impossible for Amanda to love any one but me; it was intolerable
to imagine anything else, I insisted upon believing that she was as
fastidious as myself and as faithful as myself, made indeed after my
image, and I went on disregarding the most obvious intimations that she
was not, until that still moment in the Indian Ocean, when silently,
gently as a drowned body might rise out of the depths of a pool, that
knowledge of love dead and honour gone for ever floated up into my
consciousness.

"And then I felt that Amanda had cheated me! Outrageously. Abominably.

"Now, so far as my intelligence goes, there is not a cloud upon this
question. My demand upon Amanda was outrageous and I had no right
whatever to her love or loyalty. I must have that very clear....

"This aristocratic life, as I conceive it, must be, except accidentally
here and there, incompatible with the domestic life. It means going
hither and thither in the universe of thought as much as in the universe
of matter, it means adventure, it means movement and adventure that must
needs be hopelessly encumbered by an inseparable associate, it means
self-imposed responsibilities that will not fit into the welfare of a
family. In all ages, directly society had risen above the level of a
barbaric tribal village, this need of a release from the family for
certain necessary types of people has been recognized. It was
met sometimes informally, sometimes formally, by the growth and
establishment of special classes and orders, of priests, monks, nuns, of
pledged knights, of a great variety of non-family people, whose
concern was the larger collective life that opens out beyond the
simple necessities and duties and loyalties of the steading and of the
craftsman's house. Sometimes, but not always, that release took the form
of celibacy; but besides that there have been a hundred institutional
variations of the common life to meet the need of the special man,
the man who must go deep and the man who must go far. A vowed celibacy
ceased to be a tolerable rule for an aristocracy directly the eugenic
idea entered the mind of man, because a celibate aristocracy means the
abandonment of the racial future to a proletariat of base unleaderly
men. That was plain to Plato. It was plain to Campanelea. It was plain
to the Protestant reformers. But the world has never yet gone on to
the next step beyond that recognition, to the recognition of feminine
aristocrats, rulers and the mates of rulers, as untrammelled by domestic
servitudes and family relationships as the men of their kind. That I see
has always been my idea since in my undergraduate days I came under the
spell of Plato. It was a matter of course that my first gift to Amanda
should be his REPUBLIC. I loved Amanda transfigured in that dream....

"There are no such women....

"It is no excuse for me that I thought she was like-minded with myself.
I had no sound reason for supposing that. I did suppose that. I did not
perceive that not only was she younger than myself, but that while I
had been going through a mill of steely education, kept close, severely
exercised, polished by discussion, she had but the weak training of a
not very good school, some scrappy reading, the vague discussions
of village artists, and the draped and decorated novelties of the
'advanced.' It all went to nothing on the impact of the world.... She
showed herself the woman the world has always known, no miracle, and
the alternative was for me to give myself to her in the ancient way, to
serve her happiness, to control her and delight and companion her, or to
let her go.

"The normal woman centres upon herself; her mission is her own charm and
her own beauty and her own setting; her place is her home. She demands
the concentration of a man. Not to be able to command that is her
failure. Not to give her that is to shame her. As I had shamed
Amanda...."



22


"There are no such women." He had written this in and struck it out, and
then at some later time written it in again. There it stayed now as his
last persuasion, but it set White thinking and doubting. And, indeed,
there was another sheet of pencilled broken stuff that seemed to glance
at quite another type of womanhood.



23


"It is clear that the women aristocrats who must come to the remaking of
the world will do so in spite of limitations at least as great as those
from which the aristocratic spirit of man escapes. These women must
become aristocratic through their own innate impulse, they must be
self-called to their lives, exactly as men must be; there is no making
an aristocrat without a predisposition for rule and nobility. And they
have to discover and struggle against just exactly the limitations that
we have to struggle against. They have to conquer not only fear
but indulgence, indulgence of a softer, more insidious quality, and
jealousy--proprietorship....

"It is as natural to want a mate as to want bread, and a thousand times
in my work and in my wanderings I have thought of a mate and desired a
mate. A mate--not a possession. It is a need almost naively simple. If
only one could have a woman who thought of one and with one! Though
she were on the other side of the world and busied about a thousand
things....

"'WITH one,' I see it must be rather than 'OF one.' That 'of one' is
just the unexpurgated egotistical demand coming back again....

"Man is a mating creature. It is not good to be alone. But mating means
a mate....

"We should be lovers, of course; that goes without saying....

"And yet not specialized lovers, not devoted, ATTENDING lovers. 'Dancing
attendance'--as they used to say. We should meet upon our ways as the
great carnivores do....

"That at any rate was a sound idea. Though we only played with it.

"But that mate desire is just a longing that can have no possible
satisfaction now for me. What is the good of dreaming? Life and chance
have played a trick upon my body and soul. I am mated, though I am
mated to a phantom. I loved and I love Arnanda, not Easton's Amanda, but
Amanda in armour, the Amanda of my dreams. Sense, and particularly the
sense of beauty, lies deeper than reason in us. There can be no mate
for me now unless she comes with Amanda's voice and Amanda's face and
Amanda's quick movements and her clever hands...."



24


"Why am I so ungrateful to her still for all the happiness she gave me?

"There were things between us two as lovers,--love, things more
beautiful than anything else in the world, things that set the mind
hunting among ineffectual images in a search for impossible expression,
images of sunlight shining through blood-red petals, images of moonlight
in a scented garden, of marble gleaming in the shade, of far-off
wonderful music heard at dusk in a great stillness, of fairies dancing
softly, of floating happiness and stirring delights, of joys as keen and
sudden as the knife of an assassin, assassin's knives made out of tears,
tears that are happiness, wordless things; and surprises, expectations,
gratitudes, sudden moments of contemplation, the sight of a soft
eyelid closed in sleep, shadowy tones in the sound of a voice heard
unexpectedly; sweet, dear magical things that I can find no words
for....

"If she was a goddess to me, should it be any affair of mine that she
was not a goddess to herself; that she could hold all this that has been
between us more cheaply than I did? It does not change one jot of it for
me. At the time she did not hold it cheaply. She forgets where I do not
forget...."



25


Such were the things that Benham could think and set down.

Yet for whole days he was possessed by the thought of killing Amanda and
himself.

He did not at once turn homeward. It was in Ceylon that he dropped his
work and came home. At Colombo he found a heap of letters awaiting him,
and there were two of these that had started at the same time. They had
been posted in London on one eventful afternoon. Lady Marayne and Amanda
had quarrelled violently. Two earnest, flushed, quick-breathing women,
full of neat but belated repartee, separated to write their simultaneous
letters. Each letter trailed the atmosphere of that truncated encounter.
Lady Marayne told her story ruthlessly. Amanda, on the other hand,
generalized, and explained. Sir Philip's adoration of her was a
love-friendship, it was beautiful, it was pure. Was there no trust nor
courage in the world? She would defy all jealous scandal. She would not
even banish him from her side. Surely the Cheetah could trust her. But
the pitiless facts of Lady Marayne went beyond Amanda's explaining. The
little lady's dignity had been stricken. "I have been used as a cloak,"
she wrote.

Her phrases were vivid. She quoted the very words of Amanda, words she
had overheard at Chexington in the twilight. They were no invention.
They were the very essence of Amanda, the lover. It was as sure as if
Benham had heard the sound of her voice, as if he had peeped and seen,
as if she had crept by him, stooping and rustling softly. It brought
back the living sense of her, excited, flushed, reckless; his
wild-haired Amanda of infinite delight.... All day those words of hers
pursued him. All night they flared across the black universe. He buried
his face in the pillows and they whispered softly in his ear.

He walked his room in the darkness longing to smash and tear.

He went out from the house and shook his ineffectual fists at the
stirring quiet of the stars.

He sent no notice of his coming back. Nor did he come back with a
definite plan. But he wanted to get at Amanda.



26


It was with Amanda he had to reckon. Towards Easton he felt scarcely any
anger at all. Easton he felt only existed for him because Amanda willed
to have it so.

Such anger as Easton did arouse in him was a contemptuous anger. His
devotion filled Benham with scorn. His determination to serve Amanda at
any price, to bear the grossest humiliations and slights for her,
his humility, his service and tenderness, his care for her moods and
happiness, seemed to Benham a treachery to human nobility. That rage
against Easton was like the rage of a trade-unionist against a blackleg.
Are all the women to fall to the men who will be their master-slaves and
keepers? But it was not simply that Benham felt men must be freed from
this incessant attendance; women too must free themselves from their
almost instinctive demand for an attendant....

His innate disposition was to treat women as responsible beings. Never
in his life had he thought of a woman as a pretty thing to be fooled and
won and competed for and fought over. So that it was Amanda he wanted
to reach and reckon with now, Amanda who had mated and ruled his senses
only to fling him into this intolerable pit of shame and jealous fury.
But the forces that were driving him home now were the forces below the
level of reason and ideas, organic forces compounded of hate and desire,
profound aboriginal urgencies. He thought, indeed, very little as he
lay in his berth or sulked on deck; his mind lay waste under a pitiless
invasion of exasperating images that ever and again would so wring him
that his muscles would tighten and his hands clench or he would find
himself restraining a snarl, the threat of the beast, in his throat.

Amanda grew upon his imagination until she overshadowed the whole world.
She filled the skies. She bent over him and mocked him. She became a
mystery of passion and dark beauty. She was the sin of the world. One
breathed her in the winds of the sea. She had taken to herself the
greatness of elemental things....

So that when at last he saw her he was amazed to see her, and see that
she was just a creature of common size and quality, a rather tired and
very frightened-looking white-faced young woman, in an evening-dress of
unfamiliar fashion, with little common trinkets of gold and colour about
her wrists and neck.

In that instant's confrontation he forgot all that had brought him
homeward. He stared at her as one stares at a stranger whom one has
greeted in mistake for an intimate friend.

For he saw that she was no more the Amanda he hated and desired to kill
than she had ever been the Amanda he had loved.



27


He took them by surprise. It had been his intention to take them by
surprise. Such is the inelegance of the jealous state.

He reached London in the afternoon and put up at a hotel near Charing
Cross. In the evening about ten he appeared at the house in Lancaster
Gate. The butler was deferentially amazed. Mrs. Benham was, he said, at
a theatre with Sir Philip Easton, and he thought some other people also.
He did not know when she would be back. She might go on to supper. It
was not the custom for the servants to wait up for her.

Benham went into the study that reduplicated his former rooms in Finacue
Street and sat down before the fire the butler lit for him. He sent the
man to bed, and fell into profound meditation.

It was nearly two o'clock when he heard the sound of her latchkey and
went out at once upon the landing.

The half-door stood open and Easton's car was outside. She stood in
the middle of the hall and relieved Easton of the gloves and fan he was
carrying.

"Good-night," she said, "I am so tired."

"My wonderful goddess," he said.

She yielded herself to his accustomed embrace, then started, stared, and
wrenched herself out of his arms.

Benham stood at the top of the stairs looking down upon them,
white-faced and inexpressive. Easton dropped back a pace. For a moment
no one moved nor spoke, and then very quietly Easton shut the half-door
and shut out the noises of the road.

For some seconds Benham regarded them, and as he did so his spirit
changed....

Everything he had thought of saying and doing vanished out of his mind.

He stuck his hands into his pockets and descended the staircase. When
he was five or six steps above them, he spoke. "Just sit down here," he
said, with a gesture of one hand, and sat down himself upon the stairs.
"DO sit down," he said with a sudden testiness as they continued
standing. "I know all about this affair. Do please sit down and let us
talk.... Everybody's gone to bed long ago."

"Cheetah!" she said. "Why have you come back like this?"

Then at his mute gesture she sat down at his feet.

"I wish you would sit down, Easton," he said in a voice of subdued
savagery.

"Why have you come back?" Sir Philip Easton found his voice to ask.

"SIT down," Benham spat, and Easton obeyed unwillingly.

"I came back," Benham went on, "to see to all this. Why else? I
don't--now I see you--feel very fierce about it. But it has distressed
me. You look changed, Amanda, and fagged. And your hair is untidy. It's
as if something had happened to you and made you a stranger.... You two
people are lovers. Very natural and simple, but I want to get out of it.
Yes, I want to get out of it. That wasn't quite my idea, but now I see
it is. It's queer, but on the whole I feel sorry for you. All of us,
poor humans--. There's reason to be sorry for all of us. We're full
of lusts and uneasiness and resentments that we haven't the will to
control. What do you two people want me to do to you? Would you like a
divorce, Amanda? It's the clean, straight thing, isn't it? Or would the
scandal hurt you?"

Amanda sat crouched together, with her eyes on Benham.

"Give us a divorce," said Easton, looking to her to confirm him.

Amanda shook her head.

"I don't want a divorce," she said.

"Then what do you want?" asked Benham with sudden asperity.

"I don't want a divorce," she repeated. "Why do you, after a long
silence, come home like this, abruptly, with no notice?"

"It was the way it took me," said Benham, after a little interval.

"You have left me for long months."

"Yes. I was angry. And it was ridiculous to be angry. I thought I wanted
to kill you, and now I see you I see that all I want to do is to help
you out of this miserable mess--and then get away from you. You two
would like to marry. You ought to be married."

"I would die to make Amanda happy," said Easton.

"Your business, it seems to me, is to live to make her happy. That you
may find more of a strain. Less tragic and more tiresome. I, on the
other hand, want neither to die nor live for her." Amanda moved sharply.
"It's extraordinary what amazing vapours a lonely man may get into his
head. If you don't want a divorce then I suppose things might go on as
they are now."

"I hate things as they are now," said Easton. "I hate this falsehood and
deception."

"You would hate the scandal just as much," said Amanda.

"I would not care what the scandal was unless it hurt you."

"It would be only a temporary inconvenience," said Benham. "Every one
would sympathize with you.... The whole thing is so natural.... People
would be glad to forget very soon. They did with my mother."

"No," said Amanda, "it isn't so easy as that."

She seemed to come to a decision.

"Pip," she said. "I want to talk to--HIM--alone."

Easton's brown eyes were filled with distress and perplexity. "But why?"
he asked.

"I do," she said.

"But this is a thing for US."

"Pip, I want to talk to him alone. There is something--something I can't
say before you...."

Sir Philip rose slowly to his feet.

"Shall I wait outside?"

"No, Pip. Go home. Yes,--there are some things you must leave to me."

She stood up too and turned so that she and Benham both faced the
younger man. The strangest uneasiness mingled with his resolve to be
at any cost splendid. He felt--and it was a most unexpected and
disconcerting feeling--that he was no longer confederated with Amanda;
that prior, more fundamental and greater associations prevailed over his
little new grip upon her mind and senses. He stared at husband and wife
aghast in this realization. Then his resolute romanticism came to his
help. "I would trust you--" he began. "If you tell me to go--"

Amanda seemed to measure her hold upon him.

She laid her hand upon his arm. "Go, my dear Pip," she said. "Go."

He had a moment of hesitation, of anguish, and it seemed to Benham
as though he eked himself out with unreality, as though somewhen,
somewhere, he had seen something of the sort in a play and filled in a
gap that otherwise he could not have supplied.

Then the door had closed upon him, and Amanda, pale and darkly
dishevelled, faced her husband, silently and intensely.

"WELL?" said Benham.

She held out her arms to him.

"Why did you leave me, Cheetah? Why did you leave me?"



28


Benham affected to ignore those proffered arms. But they recalled in
a swift rush the animal anger that had brought him back to England.
To remind him of desire now was to revive an anger stronger than any
desire. He spoke seeking to hurt her.

"I am wondering now," he said, "why the devil I came back."

"You had to come back to me."

"I could have written just as well about these things."

"CHEETAH," she said softly, and came towards him slowly, stooping
forward and looking into his eyes, "you had to come back to see your old
Leopard. Your wretched Leopard. Who has rolled in the dirt. And is still
yours."

"Do you want a divorce? How are we to fix things, Amanda?"

"Cheetah, I will tell you how we will fix things."

She dropped upon the step below him. She laid her hands with a
deliberate softness upon him, she gave a toss so that her disordered
hair was a little more disordered, and brought her soft chin down to
touch his knees. Her eyes implored him.

"Cheetah," she said. "You are going to forgive."

He sat rigid, meeting her eyes.

"Amanda," he said at last, "you would be astonished if I kicked you away
from me and trampled over you to the door. That is what I want to do."

"Do it," she said, and the grip of her hands tightened. "Cheetah, dear!
I would love you to kill me."

"I don't want to kill you."

Her eyes dilated. "Beat me."

"And I haven't the remotest intention of making love to you," he said,
and pushed her soft face and hands away from him as if he would stand
up.

She caught hold of him again. "Stay with me," she said.

He made no effort to shake off her grip. He looked at the dark cloud of
her hair that had ruled him so magically, and the memory of old delights
made him grip a great handful almost inadvertently as he spoke. "Dear
Leopard," he said, "we humans are the most streaky of conceivable
things. I thought I hated you. I do. I hate you like poison. And also I
do not hate you at all."

Then abruptly he was standing over her.

She rose to her knees.

"Stay here, old Cheetah!" she said. "This is your house. I am your
wife."

He went towards the unfastened front door.

"Cheetah!" she cried with a note of despair.

He halted at the door.

"Amanda, I will come to-morrow. I will come in the morning, in the sober
London daylight, and then we will settle things."

He stared at her, and to her amazement he smiled. He spoke as one who
remarks upon a quite unexpected fact....

"Never in my life, Amanda, have I seen a human being that I wanted so
little to kill."



29


White found a fragment that might have been written within a week of
those last encounters of Benham and Amanda.

"The thing that astonished me most in Amanda was the change in her
mental quality.

"With me in the old days she had always been a sincere person; she had
deceived me about facts, but she had never deceived me about herself.
Her personal, stark frankness had been her essential strength. And it
was gone. I came back to find Amanda an accomplished actress, a thing
of poses and calculated effects. She was a surface, a sham, a Lorelei.
Beneath that surface I could not discover anything individual at all.
Fear and a grasping quality, such as God gave us all when he gave us
hands; but the individual I knew, the humorous wilful Spotless Leopard
was gone. Whither, I cannot imagine. An amazing disappearance. Clean out
of space and time like a soul lost for ever.

"When I went to see her in the morning, she was made up for a scene, she
acted an intricate part, never for a moment was she there in reality....

"I have got a remarkable persuasion that she lost herself in this way,
by cheapening love, by making base love to a lover she despised....
There can be no inequality in love. Give and take must balance. One must
be one's natural self or the whole business is an indecent trick, a vile
use of life! To use inferiors in love one must needs talk down to
them, interpret oneself in their insufficient phrases, pretend,
sentimentalize. And it is clear that unless oneself is to be lost, one
must be content to leave alone all those people that one can reach
only by sentimentalizing. But Amanda--and yet somehow I love her for
it still--could not leave any one alone. So she was always feverishly
weaving nets of false relationship. Until her very self was forgotten.
So she will go on until the end. With Easton it had been necessary for
her to key herself to a simple exalted romanticism that was entirely
insincere. She had so accustomed herself to these poses that her innate
gestures were forgotten. She could not recover them; she could not
even reinvent them. Between us there were momentary gleams as though
presently we should be our frank former selves again. They were never
more than momentary...."

And that was all that this astonishing man had seen fit to tell of his
last parting from his wife.

Perhaps he did Amanda injustice. Perhaps there was a stronger thread
of reality in her desire to recover him than he supposed. Clearly he
believed that under the circumstances Amanda would have tried to recover
anybody.

She had dressed for that morning's encounter in a very becoming and
intimate wrap of soft mauve and white silk, and she had washed and dried
her dark hair so that it was a vapour about her face. She set herself
with a single mind to persuade herself and Benham that they were
inseparable lovers, and she would not be deflected by his grim
determination to discuss the conditions of their separation. When he
asked her whether she wanted a divorce, she offered to throw over
Sir Philip and banish him for ever as lightly as a great lady might
sacrifice an objectionable poodle to her connubial peace.

Benham passed through perplexing phases, so that she herself began to
feel that her practice with Easton had spoilt her hands. His initial
grimness she could understand, and partially its breakdown into
irritability. But she was puzzled by his laughter. For he laughed
abruptly.

"You know, Amanda, I came home in a mood of tremendous tragedy. And
really,--you are a Lark."

And then overriding her altogether, he told her what he meant to do
about their future and the future of their little son.

"You don't want a divorce and a fuss. Then I'll leave things. I perceive
I've no intention of marrying any more. But you'd better do the straight
thing. People forget and forgive. Especially when there is no one about
making a fuss against you.

"Perhaps, after all, there is something to be said for shirking it.
We'll both be able to get at the boy then. You'll not hurt him, and
I shall want to see him. It's better for the boy anyhow not to have a
divorce.

"I'll not stand in your way. I'll get a little flat and I shan't come
too much to London, and when I do, you can get out of town. You must be
discreet about Easton, and if people say anything about him, send them
to me. After all, this is our private affair.

"We'll go on about money matters as we have been going. I trust to you
not to run me into overwhelming debts. And, of course, if at any time,
you do want to marry--on account of children or anything--if nobody
knows of this conversation we can be divorced then...."

Benham threw out these decisions in little dry sentences while Amanda
gathered her forces for her last appeal.

It was an unsuccessful appeal, and at the end she flung herself down
before him and clung to his knees. He struggled ridiculously to get
himself clear, and when at last he succeeded she dropped prostrate on
the floor with her dishevelled hair about her.

She heard the door close behind him, and still she lay there, a dark
Guinevere, until with a start she heard a step upon the thick carpet
without. He had come back. The door reopened. There was a slight pause,
and then she raised her face and met the blank stare of the second
housemaid. There are moments, suspended fragments of time rather than
links in its succession, when the human eye is more intelligible than
any words.

The housemaid made a rapid apologetic noise and vanished with a click of
the door.

"DAMN!" said Amanda.

Then slowly she rose to her knees.

She meditated through vast moments.

"It's a cursed thing to be a woman," said Amanda. She stood up. She put
her hand on the telephone in the corner and then she forgot about it.
After another long interval of thought she spoke.

"Cheetah!" she said, "Old Cheetah!...

"I didn't THINK it of you...."

Then presently with the even joyless movements of one who does a
reasonable business, with something indeed of the manner of one who
packs a trunk, she rang up Sir Philip Easton.



30


The head chambermaid on the first floor of the Westwood Hotel in
Danebury Street had a curious and perplexing glimpse of Benham's private
processes the morning after this affair.

Benham had taken Room 27 on the afternoon of his return to London. She
had seen him twice or three times, and he had struck her as a coldly
decorous person, tall, white-faced, slow speaking; the last man to
behave violently or surprise a head chambermaid in any way. On the
morning of his departure she was told by the first-floor waiter that the
occupant of Room 26 had complained of an uproar in the night, and almost
immediately she was summoned to see Benham.

He was standing facing the door and in a position which did a little
obscure the condition of the room behind him. He was carefully dressed,
and his manner was more cold and decorous than ever. But one of his
hands was tied up in a white bandage.

"I am going this morning," he said, "I am going down now to breakfast. I
have had a few little accidents with some of the things in the room and
I have cut my hand. I want you to tell the manager and see that they are
properly charged for on the bill.... Thank you."

The head chambermaid was left to consider the accidents.

Benham's things were all packed up and the room had an air of having
been straightened up neatly and methodically after a destructive
cataclysm. One or two items that the chambermaid might possibly have
overlooked in the normal course of things were carefully exhibited. For
example, the sheet had been torn into half a dozen strips and they were
lying side by side on the bed. The clock on the mantelpiece had
been knocked into the fireplace and then pounded to pieces. All the
looking-glasses in the room were smashed, apparently the electric lamp
that stood on the night table by the bedside had been wrenched off and
flung or hammered about amidst the other breakables. And there was
a considerable amount of blood splashed about the room. The head
chambermaid felt unequal to the perplexities of the spectacle and
summoned her most convenient friend, the head chambermaid on the third
floor, to her aid. The first-floor waiter joined their deliberations
and several housemaids displayed a respectful interest in the matter.
Finally they invoked the manager. He was still contemplating the scene
of the disorder when the precipitate retreat of his subordinates warned
him of Benham's return.

Benham was smoking a cigarette and his bearing was reassuringly
tranquil.

"I had a kind of nightmare," he said. "I am fearfully sorry to have
disarranged your room. You must charge me for the inconvenience as well
as for the damage."



31


"An aristocrat cannot be a lover."

"One cannot serve at once the intricacies of the wider issues of life
and the intricacies of another human being. I do not mean that one may
not love. One loves the more because one does not concentrate one's
love. One loves nations, the people passing in the street, beasts hurt
by the wayside, troubled scoundrels and university dons in tears....

"But if one does not give one's whole love and life into a woman's hands
I do not think one can expect to be loved.

"An aristocrat must do without close personal love...."

This much was written at the top of a sheet of paper. The writing ended
halfway down the page. Manifestly it was an abandoned beginning. And it
was, it seemed to White, the last page of all this confusion of matter
that dealt with the Second and Third Limitations. Its incompleteness
made its expression perfect....

There Benham's love experience ended. He turned to the great business
of the world. Desire and Jealousy should deflect his life no more; like
Fear they were to be dismissed as far as possible and subdued when
they could not be altogether dismissed. Whatever stirrings of blood or
imagination there were in him after that parting, whatever failures from
this resolution, they left no trace on the rest of his research, which
was concerned with the hates of peoples and classes and war and peace
and the possibilities science unveils and starry speculations of what
mankind may do.



32


But Benham did not leave England again until he had had an encounter
with Lady Marayne.

The little lady came to her son in a state of extraordinary anger and
distress. Never had she seemed quite so resolute nor quite so hopelessly
dispersed and mixed. And when for a moment it seemed to him that she was
not as a matter of fact dispersed and mixed at all, then with an instant
eagerness he dismissed that one elucidatory gleam. "What are you doing
in England, Poff?" she demanded. "And what are you going to do?

"Nothing! And you are going to leave her in your house, with your
property and a lover. If that's it, Poff, why did you ever come back?
And why did you ever marry her? You might have known; her father was a
swindler. She's begotten of deceit. She'll tell her own story while you
are away, and a pretty story she'll make of it."

"Do you want me to divorce her and make a scandal?"

"I never wanted you to go away from her. If you'd stayed and watched her
as a man should, as I begged you and implored you to do. Didn't I tell
you, Poff? Didn't I warn you?"

"But now what am I to do?"

"There you are! That's just a man's way. You get yourself into this
trouble, you follow your passions and your fancies and fads and then
you turn to me! How can I help you now, Poff? If you'd listened to me
before!"

Her blue eyes were demonstratively round.

"Yes, but--"

"I warned you," she interrupted. "I warned you. I've done all I could
for you. It isn't that I haven't seen through her. When she came to me
at first with that made-up story of a baby! And all about loving me like
her own mother. But I did what I could. I thought we might still make
the best of a bad job. And then--. I might have known she couldn't leave
Pip alone.... But for weeks I didn't dream. I wouldn't dream. Right
under my nose. The impudence of it!"

Her voice broke. "Such a horrid mess! Such a hopeless, horrid mess!"

She wiped away a bright little tear....

"It's all alike. It's your way with us. All of you. There isn't a man
in the world deserves to have a woman in the world. We do all we can
for you. We do all we can to amuse you, we dress for you and we talk for
you. All the sweet, warm little women there are! And then you go away
from us! There never was a woman yet who pleased and satisfied a man,
who did not lose him. Give you everything and off you must go! Lovers,
mothers...."

It dawned upon Benham dimly that his mother's troubles did not deal
exclusively with himself.

"But Amanda," he began.

"If you'd looked after her properly, it would have been right enough.
Pip was as good as gold until she undermined him.... A woman can't wait
about like an umbrella in a stand.... He was just a boy.... Only of
course there she was--a novelty. It is perfectly easy to understand. She
flattered him.... Men are such fools."

"Still--it's no good saying that now."

"But she'll spend all your money, Poff! She'll break your back with
debts. What's to prevent her? With him living on her! For that's what it
comes to practically."

"Well, what am I to do?"

"You aren't going back without tying her up, Poff? You ought to stop
every farthing of her money--every farthing. It's your duty."

"I can't do things like that."

"But have you no Shame? To let that sort of thing go on!"

"If I don't feel the Shame of it-- And I don't."

"And that money--. I got you that money, Poff! It was my money."

Benham stared at her perplexed. "What am I to do?" he asked.

"Cut her off, you silly boy! Tie her up! Pay her through a solicitor.
Say that if she sees him ONCE again--"

He reflected. "No," he said at last.

"Poff!" she cried, "every time I see you, you are more and more like
your father. You're going off--just as he did. That baffled, MULISH
look--priggish--solemn! Oh! it's strange the stuff a poor woman has to
bring into the world. But you'll do nothing. I know you'll do nothing.
You'll stand everything. You--you Cuckold! And she'll drive by me,
she'll pass me in theatres with the money that ought to have been mine!
Oh! Oh!"

She dabbed her handkerchief from one swimming eye to the other. But she
went on talking. Faster and faster, less and less coherently; more and
more wildly abusive. Presently in a brief pause of the storm Benham
sighed profoundly....

It brought the scene to a painful end....

For weeks her distress pursued and perplexed him.

He had an extraordinary persuasion that in some obscure way he was in
default, that he was to blame for her distress, that he owed her--he
could never define what he owed her.

And yet, what on earth was one to do?

And something his mother had said gave him the odd idea that he had
misjudged his father, that he had missed depths of perplexed and kindred
goodwill. He went down to see him before he returned to India. But if
there was a hidden well of feeling in Mr. Benham senior, it had been
very carefully boarded over. The parental mind and attention were
entirely engaged in a dispute in the SCHOOL WORLD about the heuristic
method. Somebody had been disrespectful to Martindale House and the
thing was rankling almost unendurably. It seemed to be a relief to him
to show his son very fully the essentially illogical position of his
assailant. He was entirely inattentive to Benham's carefully made
conversational opportunities. He would be silent at times while Benham
talked and then he would break out suddenly with: "What seems to me
so unreasonable, so ridiculous, in the whole of that fellow's second
argument--if one can call it an argument--.... A man who reasons as he
does is bound to get laughed at. If people will only see it...."




CHAPTER THE SIXTH ~~ THE NEW HAROUN AL RASCHID



1


Benham corresponded with Amanda until the summer of 1913. Sometimes
the two wrote coldly to one another, sometimes with warm affection,
sometimes with great bitterness. When he met White in Johannesburg
during the strike period of 1913, he was on his way to see her in London
and to settle their relationship upon a new and more definite footing.
It was her suggestion that they should meet.

About her he felt an enormous, inexorable, dissatisfaction. He could not
persuade himself that his treatment of her and that his relations to
her squared with any of his preconceptions of nobility, and yet at no
precise point could he detect where he had definitely taken an ignoble
step. Through Amanda he was coming to the full experience of life. Like
all of us he had been prepared, he had prepared himself, to take life
in a certain way, and life had taken him, as it takes all of us, in an
entirely different and unexpected way.... He had been ready for noble
deeds and villainies, for achievements and failures, and here as the
dominant fact of his personal life was a perplexing riddle. He could
not hate and condemn her for ten minutes at a time without a flow of
exoneration; he could not think of her tolerantly or lovingly without
immediate shame and resentment, and with the utmost will in the world he
could not banish her from his mind.

During the intervening years he had never ceased to have her in his
mind; he would not think of her it is true if he could help it, but
often he could not help it, and as a negative presence, as a thing
denied, she was almost more potent than she had been as a thing
accepted. Meanwhile he worked. His nervous irritability increased, but
it did not hinder the steady development of his Research.

Long before his final parting from Amanda he had worked out his idea and
method for all the more personal problems in life; the problems he put
together under his headings of the first three "Limitations." He
had resolved to emancipate himself from fear, indulgence, and that
instinctive preoccupation with the interests and dignity of self which
he chose to term Jealousy, and with the one tremendous exception of
Amanda he had to a large extent succeeded. Amanda. Amanda. Amanda.
He stuck the more grimly to his Research to drown that beating in his
brain.

Emancipation from all these personal things he held now to be a mere
prelude to the real work of a man's life, which was to serve this dream
of a larger human purpose. The bulk of his work was to discover and
define that purpose, that purpose which must be the directing and
comprehending form of all the activities of the noble life. One cannot
be noble, he had come to perceive, at large; one must be noble to
an end. To make human life, collectively and in detail, a thing more
comprehensive, more beautiful, more generous and coherent than it is
to-day seemed to him the fundamental intention of all nobility. He
believed more and more firmly that the impulses to make and help and
subserve great purposes are abundantly present in the world, that they
are inhibited by hasty thinking, limited thinking and bad thinking, and
that the real ennoblement of human life was not so much a creation as a
release. He lumped the preventive and destructive forces that keep men
dispersed, unhappy, and ignoble under the heading of Prejudice, and
he made this Prejudice his fourth and greatest and most difficult
limitation. In one place he had written it, "Prejudice or Divisions."
That being subdued in oneself and in the world, then in the measure of
its subjugation, the new life of our race, the great age, the noble age,
would begin.

So he set himself to examine his own mind and the mind of the world
about him for prejudice, for hampering follies, disguised disloyalties
and mischievous distrusts, and the great bulk of the papers that White
struggled with at Westhaven Street were devoted to various aspects of
this search for "Prejudice." It seemed to White to be at once the most
magnificent and the most preposterous of enterprises. It was indeed no
less than an enquiry into all the preventable sources of human failure
and disorder.... And it was all too manifest to White also that the last
place in which Benham was capable of detecting a prejudice was at the
back of his own head.

Under this Fourth Limitation he put the most remarkable array
of influences, race-hatred, national suspicion, the evil side of
patriotism, religious and social intolerance, every social consequence
of muddle headedness, every dividing force indeed except the
purely personal dissensions between man and man. And he developed a
metaphysical interpretation of these troubles. "No doubt," he wrote in
one place, "much of the evil between different kinds of men is due to
uncultivated feeling, to natural bad feeling, but far more is it due to
bad thinking." At times he seemed on the verge of the persuasion that
most human trouble is really due to bad metaphysics. It was, one must
remark, an extraordinary journey he had made; he had started from
chivalry and arrived at metaphysics; every knight he held must be a
logician, and ultimate bravery is courage of the mind. One thinks of his
coming to this conclusion with knit brows and balancing intentness
above whole gulfs of bathos--very much as he had once walked the Leysin
Bisse....

"Men do not know how to think," he insisted--getting along the
planks; "and they will not realize that they do not know how to
think. Nine-tenths of the wars in the world have arisen out of
misconceptions.... Misconception is the sin and dishonour of the mind,
and muddled thinking as ignoble as dirty conduct.... Infinitely more
disastrous."

And again he wrote: "Man, I see, is an over-practical creature, too
eager to get into action. There is our deepest trouble. He takes
conclusions ready-made, or he makes them in a hurry. Life is so short
that he thinks it better to err than wait. He has no patience, no faith
in anything but himself. He thinks he is a being when in reality he is
only a link in a being, and so he is more anxious to be complete than
right. The last devotion of which he is capable is that devotion of
the mind which suffers partial performance, but insists upon exhaustive
thought. He scamps his thought and finishes his performance, and before
he is dead it is already being abandoned and begun all over again by
some one else in the same egotistical haste...."

It is, I suppose, a part of the general humour of life that these words
should have been written by a man who walked the plank to fresh ideas
with the dizziest difficulty unless he had Prothero to drag him forward,
and who acted time after time with an altogether disastrous hastiness.



2


Yet there was a kind of necessity in this journey of Benham's from the
cocked hat and wooden sword of Seagate and his early shame at cowardice
and baseness to the spiritual megalomania of his complete Research
Magnificent. You can no more resolve to live a life of honour nowadays
and abstain from social and political scheming on a world-wide scale,
than you can profess religion and refuse to think about God. In the past
it was possible to take all sorts of things for granted and be loyal to
unexamined things. One could be loyal to unexamined things because they
were unchallenged things. But now everything is challenged. By the
time of his second visit to Russia, Benham's ideas of conscious
and deliberate aristocracy reaching out to an idea of universal
responsibility had already grown into the extraordinary fantasy that he
was, as it were, an uncrowned king in the world. To be noble is to
be aristocratic, that is to say, a ruler. Thence it follows that
aristocracy is multiple kingship, and to be an aristocrat is to partake
both of the nature of philosopher and king....

Yet it is manifest that the powerful people of this world are by no
means necessarily noble, and that most modern kings, poor in quality,
petty in spirit, conventional in outlook, controlled and limited,
fall far short of kingship. Nevertheless, there IS nobility, there
IS kingship, or this earth is a dustbin and mankind but a kind of
skin-disease upon a planet. From that it is an easy step to this idea,
the idea whose first expression had already so touched the imagination
of Amanda, of a sort of diffused and voluntary kingship scattered
throughout mankind. The aristocrats are not at the high table, the
kings are not enthroned, those who are enthroned are but pretenders and
SIMULACRA, kings of the vulgar; the real king and ruler is every man who
sets aside the naive passions and self-interest of the common life for
the rule and service of the world.

This is an idea that is now to be found in much contemporary writing. It
is one of those ideas that seem to appear simultaneously at many points
in the world, and it is impossible to say now how far Benham was
an originator of this idea, and how far he simply resonated to its
expression by others. It was far more likely that Prothero, getting it
heaven knows where, had spluttered it out and forgotten it, leaving it
to germinate in the mind of his friend....

This lordly, this kingly dream became more and more essential to
Benham as his life went on. When Benham walked the Bisse he was just
a youngster resolved to be individually brave; when he prowled in the
jungle by night he was there for all mankind. With every year he became
more and more definitely to himself a consecrated man as kings are
consecrated. Only that he was self-consecrated, and anointed only in
his heart. At last he was, so to speak, Haroun al Raschid again, going
unsuspected about the world, because the palace of his security would
not tell him the secrets of men's disorders. He was no longer a creature
of circumstances, he was kingly, unknown, Alfred in the Camp of the
Danes. In the great later accumulations of his Research the personal
matter, the introspection, the intimate discussion of motive, becomes
less and less. He forgets himself in the exaltation of kingliness. He
worries less and less over the particular rightness of his
definite acts. In these later papers White found Benham abstracted,
self-forgetful, trying to find out with an ever increased
self-detachment, with an ever deepening regal solicitude, why there are
massacres, wars, tyrannies and persecutions, why we let famine, disease
and beasts assail us, and want dwarf and cripple vast multitudes in the
midst of possible plenty. And when he found out and as far as he found
out, he meant quite simply and earnestly to apply his knowledge....



3


The intellectualism of Benham intensified to the end. His definition of
Prejudice impressed White as being the most bloodless and philosophical
formula that ever dominated the mind of a man.

"Prejudice," Benham had written, "is that common incapacity of the human
mind to understand that a difference in any respect is not a difference
in all respects, reinforced and rendered malignant by an instinctive
hostility to what is unlike ourselves. We exaggerate classification and
then charge it with mischievous emotion by referring it to ourselves."
And under this comprehensive formula he proceeded to study and attack
Family Prejudice, National Prejudice, Race Prejudice, War, Class
Prejudice, Professional Prejudice, Sex Prejudice, in the most
industrious and elaborate manner. Whether one regards one's self or
others he held that these prejudices are evil things. "From the point
of view of human welfare they break men up into wars and conflicts,
make them an easy prey to those who trade upon suspicion and hostility,
prevent sane collective co-operations, cripple and embitter life. From
the point of view of personal aristocracy they make men vulgar, violent,
unjust and futile. All the conscious life of the aristocrat must be a
constant struggle against false generalizations; it is as much his duty
to free himself from that as from fear, indulgence, and jealousy; it is
a larger and more elaborate task, but it is none the less cardinal and
essential. Indeed it is more cardinal and essential. The true knight has
to be not only no coward, no self-pamperer, no egotist. He has to be a
philosopher. He has to be no hasty or foolish thinker. His judgment no
more than his courage is to be taken by surprise.

"To subdue fear, desire and jealousy, is the aristocrat's personal
affair, it is his ritual and discipline, like a knight watching his
arms; but the destruction of division and prejudice and all their
forms and establishments, is his real task, that is the common work of
knighthood. It is a task to be done in a thousand ways; one man working
by persuasion, another by example, this one overthrowing some crippling
restraint upon the freedom of speech and the spread of knowledge,
and that preparing himself for a war that will shatter a tyrannous
presumption. Most imaginative literature, all scientific investigation,
all sound criticism, all good building, all good manufacture, all sound
politics, every honesty and every reasoned kindliness contribute to this
release of men from the heat and confusions of our present world."

It was clear to White that as Benham progressed with this major part of
his research, he was more and more possessed by the idea that he was not
making his own personal research alone, but, side by side with a vast,
masked, hidden and once unsuspected multitude of others; that this great
idea of his was under kindred forms the great idea of thousands, that
it was breaking as the dawn breaks, simultaneously to great numbers of
people, and that the time was not far off when the new aristocracy, the
disguised rulers of the world, would begin to realize their common
bent and effort. Into these latter papers there creeps more and more
frequently a new phraseology, such expressions as the "Invisible King"
and the "Spirit of Kingship," so that as Benham became personally more
and more solitary, his thoughts became more and more public and social.

Benham was not content to define and denounce the prejudices of mankind.
He set himself to study just exactly how these prejudices worked, to get
at the nature and habits and strengths of each kind of prejudice, and to
devise means for its treatment, destruction or neutralization. He had no
great faith in the power of pure reasonableness; his psychological ideas
were modern, and he had grasped the fact that the power of most of the
great prejudices that strain humanity lies deeper than the intellectual
level. Consequently he sought to bring himself into the closest contact
with prejudices in action and prejudices in conflict in order to
discover their sub-rational springs.

A large proportion of that larger moiety of the material at Westhaven
Street which White from his extensive experience of the public patience
decided could not possibly "make a book," consisted of notes and
discussions upon the first-hand observations Benham had made in this
or that part of the world. He began in Russia during the revolutionary
trouble of 1906, he went thence to Odessa, and from place to place in
Bessarabia and Kieff, where during a pogrom he had his first really
illuminating encounter with race and culture prejudice. His examination
of the social and political condition of Russia seems to have left him
much more hopeful than was the common feeling of liberal-minded people
during the years of depression that followed the revolution of 1906, and
it was upon the race question that his attention concentrated.

The Swadeshi outbreak drew him from Russia to India. Here in an entirely
different environment was another discord of race and culture, and
he found in his study of it much that illuminated and corrected his
impressions of the Russian issue. A whole drawer was devoted to a
comparatively finished and very thorough enquiry into human dissensions
in lower Bengal. Here there were not only race but culture conflicts,
and he could work particularly upon the differences between men of the
same race who were Hindus, Christians and Mahometans respectively.
He could compare the Bengali Mahometan not only with the Bengali
Brahminist, but also with the Mahometan from the north-west. "If one
could scrape off all the creed and training, would one find much the
same thing at the bottom, or something fundamentally so different that
no close homogeneous social life and not even perhaps a life of just
compromise is possible between the different races of mankind?"

His answer to that was a confident one. "There are no such natural and
unalterable differences in character and quality between any two sorts
of men whatever, as would make their peaceful and kindly co-operation in
the world impossible," he wrote.

But he was not satisfied with his observations in India. He found the
prevalence of caste ideas antipathetic and complicating. He went on
after his last parting from Amanda into China, it was the first of
several visits to China, and thence he crossed to America. White found a
number of American press-cuttings of a vehemently anti-Japanese quality
still awaiting digestion in a drawer, and it was clear to him that
Benham had given a considerable amount of attention to the development
of the "white" and "yellow" race hostility on the Pacific slope; but his
chief interest at that time had been the negro. He went to Washington
and thence south; he visited Tuskegee and Atlanta, and then went off at
a tangent to Hayti. He was drawn to Hayti by Hesketh Pritchard's vivid
book, WHERE BLACK RULES WHITE, and like Hesketh Pritchard he was able
to visit that wonderful monument to kingship, the hidden fastness of La
Ferriere, the citadel built a century ago by the "Black Napoleon," the
Emperor Christophe. He went with a young American demonstrator from
Harvard.



4


It was a memorable excursion. They rode from Cap Haytien for a day's
journey along dusty uneven tracks through a steaming plain of luxurious
vegetation, that presented the strangest mixture of unbridled jungle
with populous country. They passed countless villages of thatched huts
alive with curiosity and swarming with naked black children, and yet all
the time they seemed to be in a wilderness. They forded rivers, they had
at times to force themselves through thickets, once or twice they
lost their way, and always ahead of them, purple and sullen, the great
mountain peak with La Ferriere upon its crest rose slowly out of the
background until it dominated the landscape. Long after dark they
blundered upon rather than came to the village at its foot where they
were to pass the night. They were interrogated under a flaring torch by
peering ragged black soldiers, and passed through a firelit crowd into
the presence of the local commandant to dispute volubly about their
right to go further. They might have been in some remote corner of
Nigeria. Their papers, laboriously got in order, were vitiated by the
fact, which only became apparent by degrees, that the commandant could
not read. They carried their point with difficulty.

But they carried their point, and, watched and guarded by a hungry
half-naked negro in a kepi and the remains of a sky-blue pair of
trousers, they explored one of the most exemplary memorials of
imperialism that humanity has ever made. The roads and parks and
prospects constructed by this vanished Emperor of Hayti, had long
since disappeared, and the three men clambered for hours up ravines and
precipitous jungle tracks, occasionally crossing the winding traces of
a choked and ruined road that had once been the lordly approach to his
fastness. Below they passed an abandoned palace of vast extent, a palace
with great terraces and the still traceable outline of gardens, though
there were green things pushing between the terrace steps, and trees
thrust out of the empty windows. Here from a belvedere of which the
skull-like vestige still remained, the negro Emperor Christophe, after
fourteen years of absolute rule, had watched for a time the smoke of the
burning of his cane-fields in the plain below, and then, learning that
his bodyguard had deserted him, had gone in and blown out his brains.

He had christened the place after the best of examples, "Sans Souci."

But the citadel above, which was to have been his last defence, he never
used. The defection of his guards made him abandon that. To build it,
they say, cost Hayti thirty thousand lives. He had the true Imperial
lavishness. So high it was, so lost in a wilderness of trees and bush,
looking out over a land relapsed now altogether to a barbarism of patch
and hovel, so solitary and chill under the tropical sky--for even the
guards who still watched over its suspected treasures feared to live in
its ghostly galleries and had made hovels outside its walls--and at the
same time so huge and grandiose--there were walls thirty feet thick,
galleries with scores of rust-eaten cannon, circular dining-halls,
king's apartments and queen's apartments, towering battlements and
great arched doorways--that it seemed to Benham to embody the power and
passing of that miracle of human history, tyranny, the helpless bowing
of multitudes before one man and the transitoriness of such glories,
more completely than anything he had ever seen or imagined in the world
before. Beneath the battlements--they are choked above with jungle grass
and tamarinds and many flowery weeds--the precipice fell away a sheer
two thousand feet, and below spread a vast rich green plain populous and
diversified, bounded at last by the blue sea, like an amethystine wall.
Over this precipice Christophe was wont to fling his victims, and below
this terrace were bottle-shaped dungeons where men, broken and torn,
thrust in at the neck-like hole above, starved and died: it was his
headquarters here, here he had his torture chambers and the means for
nameless cruelties....

"Not a hundred years ago," said Benham's companion, and told the story
of the disgraced favourite, the youth who had offended.

"Leap," said his master, and the poor hypnotized wretch, after one
questioning glance at the conceivable alternatives, made his last
gesture of servility, and then stood out against the sky, swayed, and
with a convulsion of resolve, leapt and shot headlong down through the
shimmering air.

Came presently the little faint sound of his fall.

The Emperor satisfied turned away, unmindful of the fact that this
projectile he had launched had caught among the bushes below, and
presently struggled and found itself still a living man. It could
scramble down to the road and, what is more wonderful, hope for mercy.
An hour and it stood before Christophe again, with an arm broken and
bloody and a face torn, a battered thing now but with a faint flavour of
pride in its bearing. "Your bidding has been done, Sire," it said.

"So," said the Emperor, unappeased. "And you live? Well-- Leap
again...."

And then came other stories. The young man told them as he had heard
them, stories of ferocious wholesale butcheries, of men standing along
the walls of the banqueting chamber to be shot one by one as the feast
went on, of exquisite and terrifying cruelties, and his one note of
wonder, his refrain was, "HERE! Not a hundred years ago.... It makes one
almost believe that somewhere things of this sort are being done now."

They ate their lunch together amidst the weedy flowery ruins. The
lizards which had fled their coming crept out again to bask in the
sunshine. The soldier-guide and guard scrabbled about with his black
fingers in the ruinous and rifled tomb of Christophe in a search for
some saleable memento....

Benham sat musing in silence. The thought of deliberate cruelty was
always an actual physical distress to him. He sat bathed in the dreamy
afternoon sunlight and struggled against the pictures that crowded
into his mind, pictures of men aghast at death, and of fear-driven men
toiling in agony, and of the shame of extorted obedience and of cringing
and crawling black figures, and the defiance of righteous hate beaten
down under blow and anguish. He saw eyes alight with terror and lips
rolled back in agony, he saw weary hopeless flight before striding proud
destruction, he saw the poor trampled mangled dead, and he shivered in
his soul....

He hated Christophe and all that made Christophe; he hated pride, and
then the idea came to him that it is not pride that makes Christophes
but humility.

There is in the medley of man's composition, deeper far than his
superficial working delusion that he is a separated self-seeking
individual, an instinct for cooperation and obedience. Every natural
sane man wants, though he may want it unwittingly, kingly guidance, a
definite direction for his own partial life. At the bottom of his heart
he feels, even if he does not know it definitely, that his life is
partial. He is driven to join himself on. He obeys decision and the
appearance of strength as a horse obeys its rider's voice. One thinks
of the pride, the uncontrolled frantic will of this black ape of all
Emperors, and one forgets the universal docility that made him possible.
Usurpation is a crime to which men are tempted by human dirigibility.
It is the orderly peoples who create tyrants, and it is not so much
restraint above as stiff insubordination below that has to be taught to
men. There are kings and tyrannies and imperialisms, simply because of
the unkingliness of men.

And as he sat upon the battlements of La Ferriere, Benham cast off from
his mind his last tolerance for earthly kings and existing States, and
expounded to another human being for the first time this long-cherished
doctrine of his of the Invisible King who is the lord of human destiny,
the spirit of nobility, who will one day take the sceptre and rule the
earth.... To the young American's naive American response to any simply
felt emotion, he seemed with his white earnestness and his glowing eyes
a veritable prophet....

"This is the root idea of aristocracy," said Benham.

"I have never heard the underlying spirit of democracy, the real true
Thing in democracy, so thoroughly expressed," said the young American.



5


Benham's notes on race and racial cultures gave White tantalizing
glimpses of a number of picturesque experiences. The adventure in Kieff
had first roused Benham to the reality of racial quality. He was caught
in the wheels of a pogrom.

"Before that time I had been disposed to minimize and deny race. I still
think it need not prevent men from the completest social co-operation,
but I see now better than I did how difficult it is for any man to purge
from his mind the idea that he is not primarily a Jew, a Teuton, or a
Kelt, but a man. You can persuade any one in five minutes that he or she
belongs to some special and blessed and privileged sort of human
being; it takes a lifetime to destroy that persuasion. There are these
confounded differences of colour, of eye and brow, of nose or hair,
small differences in themselves except that they give a foothold and
foundation for tremendous fortifications of prejudice and tradition, in
which hostilities and hatreds may gather. When I think of a Jew's nose,
a Chinaman's eyes or a negro's colour I am reminded of that fatal little
pit which nature has left in the vermiform appendix, a thing no use in
itself and of no significance, but a gathering-place for mischief. The
extremest case of race-feeling is the Jewish case, and even here, I am
convinced, it is the Bible and the Talmud and the exertions of those
inevitable professional champions who live upon racial feeling, far more
than their common distinction of blood, which holds this people together
banded against mankind."

Between the lines of such general propositions as this White read little
scraps of intimation that linked with the things Benham let fall in
Johannesburg to reconstruct the Kieff adventure.

Benham had been visiting a friend in the country on the further side
of the Dnieper. As they drove back along dusty stretches of road amidst
fields of corn and sunflower and through bright little villages, they
saw against the evening blue under the full moon a smoky red glare
rising from amidst the white houses and dark trees of the town. "The
pogrom's begun," said Benham's friend, and was surprised when Benham
wanted to end a pleasant day by going to see what happens after the
beginning of a pogrom.

He was to have several surprises before at last he left Benham in
disgust and went home by himself.

For Benham, with that hastiness that so flouted his exalted theories,
passed rapidly from an attitude of impartial enquiry to active
intervention. The two men left their carriage and plunged into
the network of unlovely dark streets in which the Jews and traders
harboured.... Benham's first intervention was on behalf of a crouching
and yelping bundle of humanity that was being dragged about and kicked
at a street corner. The bundle resolved itself into a filthy little old
man, and made off with extraordinary rapidity, while Benham remonstrated
with the kickers. Benham's tallness, his very Gentile face, his good
clothes, and an air of tense authority about him had its effect, and
the kickers shuffled off with remarks that were partly apologies. But
Benham's friend revolted. This was no business of theirs.

Benham went on unaccompanied towards the glare of the burning houses.

For a time he watched. Black figures moved between him and the glare,
and he tried to find out the exact nature of the conflict by enquiries
in clumsy Russian. He was told that the Jews had insulted a religious
procession, that a Jew had spat at an ikon, that the shop of a cheating
Jew trader had been set on fire, and that the blaze had spread to the
adjacent group of houses. He gathered that the Jews were running out of
the burning block on the other side "like rats." The crowd was mostly
composed of town roughs with a sprinkling of peasants. They were
mischievous but undecided. Among them were a number of soldiers, and
he was surprised to see a policemen, brightly lit from head to foot,
watching the looting of a shop that was still untouched by the flames.

He held back some men who had discovered a couple of women's figures
slinking along in the shadow beneath a wall. Behind his remonstrances
the Jewesses escaped. His anger against disorder was growing upon
him....

Late that night Benham found himself the leading figure amidst a party
of Jews who had made a counter attack upon a gang of roughs in a court
that had become the refuge of a crowd of fugitives. Some of the young
Jewish men had already been making a fight, rather a poor and hopeless
fight, from the windows of the house near the entrance of the court, but
it is doubtful if they would have made an effective resistance if it
had not been for this tall excited stranger who was suddenly shouting
directions to them in sympathetically murdered Russian. It was not that
he brought powerful blows or subtle strategy to their assistance, but
that he put heart into them and perplexity into his adversaries because
he was so manifestly non-partizan. Nobody could ever have mistaken
Benham for a Jew. When at last towards dawn a not too zealous governor
called out the troops and began to clear the streets of rioters, Benham
and a band of Jews were still keeping the gateway of that court behind a
hasty but adequate barricade of furniture and handbarrows.

The ghetto could not understand him, nobody could understand him, but it
was clear a rare and precious visitor had come to their rescue, and he
was implored by a number of elderly, dirty, but very intelligent-looking
old men to stay with them and preserve them until their safety was
assured.

They could not understand him, but they did their utmost to entertain
him and assure him of their gratitude. They seemed to consider him as
a representative of the British Government, and foreign intervention on
their behalf is one of those unfortunate fixed ideas that no persecuted
Jews seem able to abandon.

Benham found himself, refreshed and tended, sitting beside a wood fire
in an inner chamber richly flavoured by humanity and listening to a
discourse in evil but understandable German. It was a discourse upon the
wrongs and the greatness of the Jewish people--and it was delivered by
a compact middle-aged man with a big black beard and long-lashed but
animated eyes. Beside him a very old man dozed and nodded approval. A
number of other men crowded the apartment, including several who had
helped to hold off the rioters from the court. Some could follow the
talk and ever again endorsed the speaker in Yiddish or Russian; others
listened with tantalized expressions, their brows knit, their lips
moving.

It was a discourse Benham had provoked. For now he was at the very heart
of the Jewish question, and he could get some light upon the mystery
of this great hatred at first hand. He did not want to hear tales of
outrages, of such things he knew, but he wanted to understand what was
the irritation that caused these things.

So he listened. The Jew dilated at first on the harmlessness and
usefulness of the Jews.

"But do you never take a certain advantage?" Benham threw out.

"The Jews are cleverer than the Russians. Must we suffer for that?"

The spokesman went on to the more positive virtues of his race. Benham
suddenly had that uncomfortable feeling of the Gentile who finds a bill
being made against him. Did the world owe Israel nothing for Philo,
Aron ben Asher, Solomon Gabriol, Halevy, Mendelssohn, Heine, Meyerbeer,
Rubinstein, Joachim, Zangwill? Does Britain owe nothing to Lord
Beaconsfield, Montefiore or the Rothschilds? Can France repudiate her
debt to Fould, Gaudahaux, Oppert, or Germany to Furst, Steinschneider,
Herxheimer, Lasker, Auerbach, Traube and Lazarus and Benfey?...

Benham admitted under the pressure of urgent tones and gestures that
these names did undoubtedly include the cream of humanity, but was it
not true that the Jews did press a little financially upon the inferior
peoples whose lands they honoured in their exile?

The man with the black beard took up the challenge bravely.

"They are merciful creditors," he said. "And it is their genius to
possess and control. What better stewards could you find for the wealth
of nations than the Jews? And for the honours? That always had been the
role of the Jews--stewardship. Since the days of Joseph in Egypt...."

Then in a lower voice he went on to speak of the deficiencies of the
Gentile population. He wished to be just and generous but the truth was
the truth. The Christian Russians loved drink and laziness; they had no
sense of property; were it not for unjust laws even now the Jews would
possess all the land of South Russia....

Benham listened with a kind of fascination. "But," he said.

It was so. And with a confidence that aroused a protest or so from the
onlookers, the Jewish apologist suddenly rose up, opened a safe close
beside the fire and produced an armful of documents.

"Look!" he said, "all over South Russia there are these!"

Benham was a little slow to understand, until half a dozen of these
papers had been thrust into his hand. Eager fingers pointed, and several
voices spoke. These things were illegalities that might some day be
legal; there were the records of loans and hidden transactions that
might at any time put all the surrounding soil into the hands of the
Jew. All South Russia was mortgaged....

"But is it so?" asked Benham, and for a time ceased to listen and stared
into the fire.

Then he held up the papers in his hand to secure silence and, feeling
his way in unaccustomed German, began to speak and continued to speak in
spite of a constant insurgent undertone of interruption from the Jewish
spokesman.

All men, Benham said, were brothers. Did they not remember Nathan the
Wise?

"I did not claim him," said the spokesman, misunderstanding. "He is a
character in fiction."

But all men are brothers, Benham maintained. They had to be merciful to
one another and give their gifts freely to one another. Also they had
to consider each other's weaknesses. The Jews were probably justified
in securing and administering the property of every community into which
they came, they were no doubt right in claiming to be best fitted for
that task, but also they had to consider, perhaps more than they did,
the feelings and vanities of the host population into which they brought
these beneficent activities. What was said of the ignorance, incapacity
and vice of the Roumanians and Russians was very generally believed and
accepted, but it did not alter the fact that the peasant, for all his
incapacity, did like to imagine he owned his own patch and hovel and did
have a curious irrational hatred of debt....

The faces about Benham looked perplexed.

"THIS," said Benham, tapping the papers in his hand. "They will not
understand the ultimate benefit of it. It will be a source of anger
and fresh hostility. It does not follow because your race has supreme
financial genius that you must always follow its dictates to the
exclusion of other considerations...."

The perplexity increased.

Benham felt he must be more general. He went on to emphasize the
brotherhood of man, the right to equal opportunity, equal privilege,
freedom to develop their idiosyncrasies as far as possible, unhindered
by the idiosyncrasies of others. He could feel the sympathy and
understanding of his hearers returning. "You see," said Benham, "you
must have generosity. You must forget ancient scores. Do you not see the
world must make a fresh beginning?"

He was entirely convinced he had them with him. The heads nodded assent,
the bright eyes and lips followed the slow disentanglement of his bad
German.

"Free yourselves and the world," he said.

Applause.

"And so," he said breaking unconsciously into English, "let us begin by
burning these BEASTLY mortgages!"

And with a noble and dramatic gesture Benham cast his handful on the
fire. The assenting faces became masks of horror. A score of hands
clutched at those precious papers, and a yell of dismay and anger filled
the room. Some one caught at his throat from behind. "Don't kill him!"
cried some one. "He fought for us!"



6


An hour later Benham returned in an extraordinarily dishevelled
and battered condition to his hotel. He found his friend in anxious
consultation with the hotel proprietor.

"We were afraid that something had happened to you," said his friend.

"I got a little involved," said Benham.

"Hasn't some one clawed your cheek?"

"Very probably," said Benham.

"And torn your coat? And hit you rather heavily upon the neck?"

"It was a complicated misunderstanding," said Benham. "Oh! pardon! I'm
rather badly bruised upon that arm you're holding."



7


Benham told the story to White as a jest against himself.

"I see now of course that they could not possibly understand my point of
view," he said....

"I'm not sure if they quite followed my German....

"It's odd, too, that I remember saying, 'Let's burn these mortgages,'
and at the time I'm almost sure I didn't know the German for
mortgage...."

It was not the only occasion on which other people had failed to
grasp the full intention behind Benham's proceedings. His aristocratic
impulses were apt to run away with his conceptions of brotherhood, and
time after time it was only too manifest to White that Benham's
pallid flash of anger had astonished the subjects of his disinterested
observations extremely. His explorations in Hayti had been terminated
abruptly by an affair with a native policeman that had necessitated the
intervention of the British Consul. It was begun with that suddenness
that was too often characteristic of Benham, by his hitting the
policeman. It was in the main street of Cap Haytien, and the policeman
had just clubbed an unfortunate youth over the head with the heavily
loaded wooden club which is the normal instrument of Haytien discipline.
His blow was a repartee, part of a triangular altercation in which a
large, voluble, mahogany-coloured lady whose head was tied up in a
blue handkerchief played a conspicuous part, but it seemed to Benham an
entirely unjustifiable blow.

He allowed an indignation with negro policemen in general that had been
gathering from the very moment of his arrival at Port-au-Prince to carry
him away. He advanced with the kind of shout one would hurl at a dog,
and smote the policeman to the earth with the stout stick that the
peculiar social atmosphere of Hayti had disposed him to carry. By the
local standard his blow was probably a trivial one, but the moral effect
of his indignant pallor and a sort of rearing tallness about him
on these occasions was always very considerable. Unhappily these
characteristics could have no effect on a second negro policeman who was
approaching the affray from behind, and he felled Benham by a blow on
the shoulder that was meant for the head, and with the assistance of his
colleague overpowered him, while the youth and the woman vanished.

The two officials dragged Benham in a state of vehement protest to the
lock-up, and only there, in the light of a superior officer's superior
knowledge, did they begin to realize the grave fact of his British
citizenship.

The memory of the destruction of the Haytien fleet by a German gunboat
was still vivid in Port-au-Prince, and to that Benham owed it that in
spite of his blank refusal to compensate the man he had knocked over, he
was after two days of anger, two days of extreme insanitary experience,
and much meditation upon his unphilosophical hastiness, released.

Quite a number of trivial incidents of a kindred sort diversified his
enquiries into Indian conditions. They too turned for the most part
on his facile exasperation at any defiance of his deep-felt desire for
human brotherhood. At last indeed came an affair that refused ultimately
to remain trivial, and tangled him up in a coil that invoked newspaper
articles and heated controversies.

The effect of India upon Benham's mind was a peculiar mixture of
attraction and irritation. He was attracted by the Hindu spirit of
intellectualism and the Hindu repudiation of brutality, and he was
infuriated by the spirit of caste that cuts the great world of India
into a thousand futile little worlds, all aloof and hostile one to the
other. "I came to see India," he wrote, "and there is no India. There is
a great number of Indias, and each goes about with its chin in the air,
quietly scorning everybody else."

His Indian adventures and his great public controversy on caste began
with a tremendous row with an Indian civil servant who had turned an
Indian gentleman out of his first-class compartment, and culminated in
a disgraceful fracas with a squatting brown holiness at Benares, who had
thrown aside his little brass bowlful of dinner because Benham's shadow
had fallen upon it.

"You unendurable snob!" said Benham, and then lapsing into the forceful
and inadvisable: "By Heaven, you SHALL eat it!..."



8


Benham's detestation of human divisions and hostilities was so deep in
his character as to seem almost instinctive. But he had too a very clear
reason for his hostility to all these amazing breaks in human continuity
in his sense of the gathering dangers they now involve. They had always,
he was convinced, meant conflict, hatred, misery and the destruction
of human dignity, but the new conditions of life that have been brought
about by modern science were making them far more dangerous than they
had ever been before. He believed that the evil and horror of war was
becoming more and more tremendous with every decade, and that the free
play of national prejudice and that stupid filching ambitiousness
that seems to be inseparable from monarchy, were bound to precipitate
catastrophe, unless a real international aristocracy could be brought
into being to prevent it.

In the drawer full of papers labelled "Politics," White found a paper
called "The Metal Beast." It showed that for a time Benham had been
greatly obsessed by the thought of the armaments that were in those days
piling up in every country in Europe. He had gone to Essen, and at Essen
he had met a German who had boasted of Zeppelins and the great guns that
were presently to smash the effete British fleet and open the Imperial
way to London.

"I could not sleep," he wrote, "on account of this man and his talk and
the streak of hatred in his talk. He distressed me not because he seemed
exceptional, but because he seemed ordinary. I realized that he was more
human than I was, and that only killing and killing could come out of
such humanity. I thought of the great ugly guns I had seen, and of the
still greater guns he had talked about, and how gloatingly he thought
of the destruction they could do. I felt as I used to feel about that
infernal stallion that had killed a man with its teeth and feet, a
despairing fear, a sense of monstrosity in life. And this creature
who had so disturbed me was only a beastly snuffy little man in an
ill-fitting frock-coat, who laid his knife and fork by their tips on the
edge of his plate, and picked his teeth with gusto and breathed into
my face as he talked to me. The commonest of representative men. I went
about that Westphalian country after that, with the conviction that
headless, soulless, blood-drinking metal monsters were breeding all
about me. I felt that science was producing a poisonous swarm, a nest
of black dragons. They were crouching here and away there in France and
England, they were crouching like beasts that bide their time, mewed
up in forts, kennelled in arsenals, hooded in tarpaulins as hawks are
hooded.... And I had never thought very much about them before, and
there they were, waiting until some human fool like that frock-coated
thing of spite, and fools like him multiplied by a million, saw fit
to call them out to action. Just out of hatred and nationalism and
faction...."

Then came a queer fancy.

"Great guns, mines, battleships, all that cruelty-apparatus; I see it
more and more as the gathering revenge of dead joyless matter for the
happiness of life. It is a conspiracy of the lifeless, an enormous
plot of the rebel metals against sensation. That is why in particular
half-living people seem to love these things. La Ferriere was a fastness
of the kind of tyranny that passes out of human experience, the tyranny
of the strong man over men. Essen comes, the new thing, the tyranny of
the strong machine....

"Science is either slave or master. These people--I mean the German
people and militarist people generally--have no real mastery over the
scientific and economic forces on which they seem to ride. The monster
of steel and iron carries Kaiser and Germany and all Europe captive. It
has persuaded them to mount upon its back and now they must follow the
logic of its path. Whither?... Only kingship will ever master that beast
of steel which has got loose into the world. Nothing but the sense of
unconquerable kingship in us all will ever dare withstand it.... Men
must be kingly aristocrats--it isn't MAY be now, it is MUST be--or,
these confederated metals, these things of chemistry and metallurgy,
these explosives and mechanisms, will trample the blood and life out of
our race into mere red-streaked froth and filth...."

Then he turned to the question of this metallic beast's release. Would
it ever be given blood?

"Men of my generation have been brought up in this threat of a great war
that never comes; for forty years we have had it, so that it is with
a note of incredulity that one tells oneself, 'After all this war may
happen. But can it happen?'"

He proceeded to speculate upon the probability whether a great war would
ever devastate western Europe again, and it was very evident to White
that he wanted very much to persuade himself against that idea. It was
too disagreeable for him to think it probable. The paper was dated 1910.
It was in October, 1914, that White, who was still working upon the
laborious uncertain account of Benham's life and thought he has recently
published, read what Benham had written. Benham concluded that the
common-sense of the world would hold up this danger until reason could
get "to the head of things."

"There are already mighty forces in Germany," Benham wrote, "that will
struggle very powerfully to avoid a war. And these forces increase.
Behind the coarseness and the threatenings, the melodrama and the
display of the vulgarer sort there arises a great and noble people.... I
have talked with Germans of the better kind.... You cannot have a whole
nation of Christophes.... There also the true knighthood discovers
itself.... I do not believe this war will overtake us."

"WELL!" said White.

"I must go back to Germany and understand Germany better," the notes
went on.

But other things were to hold Benham back from that resolve. Other
things were to hold many men back from similar resolves until it was too
late for them....

"It is preposterous that these monstrous dangers should lower over
Europe, because a certain threatening vanity has crept into the blood of
a people, because a few crude ideas go inadequately controlled.... Does
no one see what that metallic beast will do if they once let it loose?
It will trample cities; it will devour nations...."

White read this on the 9th of October, 1914. One crumpled evening
paper at his feet proclaimed in startled headlines: "Rain of Incendiary
Shells. Antwerp Ablaze." Another declared untruthfully but impressively:
"Six Zeppelins drop Bombs over the Doomed City."

He had bought all the evening papers, and had read and re-read them and
turned up maps and worried over strategic problems for which he had no
data at all--as every one did at that time--before he was able to go on
with Benham's manuscripts.

These pacific reassurances seemed to White's war-troubled mind like
finding a flattened and faded flower, a girl's love token, between the
pages of some torn and scorched and blood-stained book picked out from a
heap of loot after rapine and murder had had their fill....

"How can we ever begin over again?" said White, and sat for a long time
staring gloomily into the fire, forgetting forgetting, forgetting too
that men who are tired and weary die, and that new men are born to
succeed them....

"We have to begin over again," said White at last, and took up Benham's
papers where he had laid them down....



9


One considerable section of Benham's treatment of the Fourth Limitation
was devoted to what he called the Prejudices of Social Position. This
section alone was manifestly expanding into a large treatise upon the
psychology of economic organization....

It was only very slowly that he had come to realize the important part
played by economic and class hostilities in the disordering of
human affairs. This was a very natural result of his peculiar social
circumstances. Most people born to wealth and ease take the established
industrial system as the natural method in human affairs; it is only
very reluctantly and by real feats of sympathy and disinterestedness
that they can be brought to realize that it is natural only in the sense
that it has grown up and come about, and necessary only because nobody
is strong and clever enough to rearrange it. Their experience of it is
a satisfactory experience. On the other hand, the better off one is, the
wider is one's outlook and the more alert one is to see the risks and
dangers of international dissensions. Travel and talk to foreigners open
one's eyes to aggressive possibilities; history and its warnings become
conceivable. It is in the nature of things that socialists and labour
parties should minimize international obligations and necessities, and
equally so that autocracies and aristocracies and plutocracies should be
negligent of and impatient about social reform.

But Benham did come to realize this broader conflict between worker and
director, between poor man and possessor, between resentful humanity and
enterprise, between unwilling toil and unearned opportunity. It is a far
profounder and subtler conflict than any other in human affairs. "I can
foresee a time," he wrote, "when the greater national and racial hatreds
may all be so weakened as to be no longer a considerable source of human
limitation and misery, when the suspicions of complexion and language
and social habit are allayed, and when the element of hatred and
aggression may be clean washed out of most religious cults, but I do not
begin to imagine a time, because I cannot imagine a method, when there
will not be great friction between those who employ, those who direct
collective action, and those whose part it is to be the rank and file in
industrialism. This, I know, is a limitation upon my confidence due
very largely to the restricted nature of my knowledge of this sort of
organization. Very probably resentment and suspicion in the mass and
self-seeking and dishonesty in the fortunate few are not so deeply
seated, so necessary as they seem to be, and if men can be cheerfully
obedient and modestly directive in war time, there is no reason why
ultimately they should not be so in the business of peace. But I do not
understand the elements of the methods by which this state of affairs
can be brought about.

"If I were to confess this much to an intelligent working man I know
that at once he would answer 'Socialism,' but Socialism is no more a
solution of this problem than eating is a solution when one is lost in
the wilderness and hungry. Of course everybody with any intelligence
wants Socialism, everybody, that is to say, wants to see all human
efforts directed to the common good and a common end, but brought face
to face with practical problems Socialism betrays a vast insufficiency
of practical suggestions. I do not say that Socialism would not work,
but I do say that so far Socialists have failed to convince me that
they could work it. The substitution of a stupid official for a greedy
proprietor may mean a vanished dividend, a limited output and no
other human advantage whatever. Socialism is in itself a mere eloquent
gesture, inspiring, encouraging, perhaps, but beyond that not very
helpful, towards the vast problem of moral and material adjustment
before the race. That problem is incurably miscellaneous and intricate,
and only by great multitudes of generous workers, one working at this
point and one at that, secretly devoted knights of humanity, hidden
and dispersed kings, unaware of one another, doubting each his right
to count himself among those who do these kingly services, is this
elaborate rightening of work and guidance to be done."

So from these most fundamental social difficulties he came back to his
panacea. All paths and all enquiries led him back to his conception of
aristocracy, conscious, self-disciplined, devoted, self-examining yet
secret, making no personal nor class pretences, as the supreme need not
only of the individual but the world.



10


It was the Labour trouble in the Transvaal which had brought the two
schoolfellows together again. White had been on his way to Zimbabwe.
An emotional disturbance of unusual intensity had driven him to seek
consolations in strange scenery and mysterious desolations. It was as if
Zimbabwe called to him. Benham had come to South Africa to see into the
question of Indian immigration, and he was now on his way to meet Amanda
in London. Neither man had given much heed to the gathering social
conflict on the Rand until the storm burst about them. There had been
a few paragraphs in the papers about a dispute upon a point of labour
etiquette, a question of the recognition of Trade Union officials, a
thing that impressed them both as technical, and then suddenly a long
incubated quarrel flared out in rioting and violence, the burning of
houses and furniture, attacks on mines, attempts to dynamite trains.
White stayed in Johannesburg because he did not want to be stranded up
country by the railway strike that was among the possibilities of
the situation. Benham stayed because he was going to London very
reluctantly, and he was glad of this justification for a few days'
delay. The two men found themselves occupying adjacent tables in the
Sherborough Hotel, and White was the first to recognize the other. They
came together with a warmth and readiness of intimacy that neither would
have displayed in London.

White had not seen Benham since the social days of Amanda at Lancaster
Gate, and he was astonished at the change a few years had made in him.
The peculiar contrast of his pallor and his dark hair had become more
marked, his skin was deader, his features seemed more prominent and his
expression intenser. His eyes were very bright and more sunken under his
brows. He had suffered from yellow fever in the West Indies, and these
it seemed were the marks left by that illness. And he was much more
detached from the people about him; less attentive to the small
incidents of life, more occupied with inner things. He greeted White
with a confidence that White was one day to remember as pathetic.

"It is good to meet an old friend," Benham said. "I have lost friends.
And I do not make fresh ones. I go about too much by myself, and I do
not follow the same tracks that other people are following...."

What track was he following? It was now that White first heard of the
Research Magnificent. He wanted to know what Benham was doing, and
Benham after some partial and unsatisfactory explanation of his interest
in insurgent Hindoos, embarked upon larger expositions. "It is, of
course, a part of something else," he amplified. He was writing a book,
"an enormous sort of book." He laughed with a touch of shyness. It
was about "everything," about how to live and how not to live. And
"aristocracy, and all sorts of things." White was always curious about
other people's books. Benham became earnest and more explicit under
encouragement, and to talk about his book was soon to talk about
himself. In various ways, intentionally and inadvertently, he told White
much. These chance encounters, these intimacies of the train and hotel,
will lead men at times to a stark frankness of statement they would
never permit themselves with habitual friends.

About the Johannesburg labour trouble they talked very little,
considering how insistent it was becoming. But the wide propositions
of the Research Magnificent, with its large indifference to immediate
occurrences, its vast patience, its tremendous expectations, contrasted
very sharply in White's memory with the bitterness, narrowness and
resentment of the events about them. For him the thought of that first
discussion of this vast inchoate book into which Benham's life was
flowering, and which he was ultimately to summarize, trailed with it a
fringe of vivid little pictures; pictures of crowds of men hurrying
on bicycles and afoot under a lowering twilight sky towards murmuring
centres of disorder, of startling flares seen suddenly afar off, of the
muffled galloping of troops through the broad dusty street in the night,
of groups of men standing and watching down straight broad roads, roads
that ended in groups of chimneys and squat buildings of corrugated iron.
And once there was a marching body of white men in the foreground and a
complicated wire fence, and a clustering mass of Kaffirs watching them
over this fence and talking eagerly amongst themselves.

"All this affair here is little more than a hitch in the machinery,"
said Benham, and went back to his large preoccupation....

But White, who had not seen so much human disorder as Benham, felt that
it was more than that. Always he kept the tail of his eye upon that
eventful background while Benham talked to him.

When the firearms went off he may for the moment have even given the
background the greater share of his attention....



11


It was only as White burrowed through his legacy of documents that the
full values came to very many things that Benham said during these last
conversations. The papers fitted in with his memories of their long
talks like text with commentary; so much of Benham's talk had repeated
the private writings in which he had first digested his ideas that it
was presently almost impossible to disentangle what had been said and
understood at Johannesburg from the fuller statement of those patched
and corrected manuscripts. The two things merged in White's mind as he
read. The written text took upon itself a resonance of Benham's
voice; it eked out the hints and broken sentences of his remembered
conversation.

But some things that Benham did not talk about at all, left by their
mere marked absence an impression on White's mind. And occasionally
after Benham had been talking for a long time there would be an
occasional aphasia, such as is often apparent in the speech of men who
restrain themselves from betraying a preoccupation. He would say nothing
about Amanda or about women in general, he was reluctant to speak of
Prothero, and another peculiarity was that he referred perhaps half a
dozen times or more to the idea that he was a "prig." He seemed to be
defending himself against some inner accusation, some unconquerable
doubt of the entire adventure of his life. These half hints and hints by
omission exercised the quick intuitions of White's mind very keenly, and
he drew far closer to an understanding of Benham's reserves than Benham
ever suspected....

At first after his parting from Amanda in London Benham had felt
completely justified in his treatment of her. She had betrayed him and
he had behaved, he felt, with dignity and self-control. He had no doubt
that he had punished her very effectively, and it was only after he had
been travelling in China with Prothero for some time and in the light
of one or two chance phrases in her letters that he began to have doubts
whether he ought to have punished her at all. And one night at Shanghai
he had a dream in which she stood before him, dishevelled and tearful,
his Amanda, very intensely his Amanda, and said that she was dirty
and shameful and spoilt for ever, because he had gone away from her.
Afterwards the dream became absurd: she showed him the black leopard's
fur as though it was a rug, and it was now moth-eaten and mangey, the
leopard skin that had been so bright and wonderful such a little time
ago, and he awoke before he could answer her, and for a long time he
was full of unspoken answers explaining that in view of her deliberate
unfaithfulness the position she took up was absurd. She had spoilt her
own fur. But what was more penetrating and distressing in this dream was
not so much the case Amanda stated as the atmosphere of unconquerable
intimacy between them, as though they still belonged to each other,
soul to soul, as though nothing that had happened afterwards could have
destroyed their common responsibility and the common interest of their
first unstinted union. She was hurt, and of course he was hurt. He began
to see that his marriage to Amanda was still infinitely more than a
technical bond.

And having perceived that much he presently began to doubt whether she
realized anything of the sort. Her letters fluctuated very much in tone,
but at times they were as detached and guarded as a schoolgirl writing
to a cousin. Then it seemed to Benham an extraordinary fraud on her
part that she should presume to come into his dream with an entirely
deceptive closeness and confidence. She began to sound him in these
latter letters upon the possibility of divorce. This, which he had been
quite disposed to concede in London, now struck him as an outrageous
suggestion. He wrote to ask her why, and she responded exasperatingly
that she thought it was "better." But, again, why better? It is
remarkable that although his mind had habituated itself to the idea that
Easton was her lover in London, her thought of being divorced, no doubt
to marry again, filled him with jealous rage. She asked him to take
the blame in the divorce proceedings. There, again, he found himself
ungenerous. He did not want to do that. Why should he do that? As a
matter of fact he was by no means reconciled to the price he had paid
for his Research Magnificent; he regretted his Amanda acutely. He was
regretting her with a regret that grew when by all the rules of life it
ought to be diminishing.

It was in consequence of that regret and his controversies with Prothero
while they travelled together in China that his concern about what he
called priggishness arose. It is a concern that one may suppose has a
little afflicted every reasonably self-conscious man who has turned from
the natural passionate personal life to religion or to public service
or any abstract devotion. These things that are at least more extensive
than the interests of flesh and blood have a trick of becoming
unsubstantial, they shine gloriously and inspiringly upon the
imagination, they capture one and isolate one and then they vanish out
of sight. It is far easier to be entirely faithful to friend or lover
than it is to be faithful to a cause or to one's country or to a
religion. In the glow of one's first service that larger idea may be as
closely spontaneous as a handclasp, but in the darkness that comes as
the glow dies away there is a fearful sense of unreality. It was in such
dark moments that Benham was most persecuted by his memories of Amanda
and most distressed by this suspicion that the Research Magnificent was
a priggishness, a pretentious logomachy. Prothero could indeed hint as
much so skilfully that at times the dream of nobility seemed an insult
to the sunshine, to the careless laughter of children, to the good light
in wine and all the warm happiness of existence. And then Amanda would
peep out of the dusk and whisper, "Of course if you could leave me--!
Was I not LIFE? Even now if you cared to come back to me-- For I loved
you best and loved you still, old Cheetah, long after you had left me to
follow your dreams.... Even now I am drifting further into lies and the
last shreds of dignity drop from me; a dirty, lost, and shameful
leopard I am now, who was once clean and bright.... You could come back,
Cheetah, and you could save me yet. If you would love me...."

In certain moods she could wring his heart by such imagined speeches,
the very quality of her voice was in them, a softness that his ear had
loved, and not only could she distress him, but when Benham was in this
heartache mood, when once she had set him going, then his little mother
also would rise against him, touchingly indignant, with her blue eyes
bright with tears; and his frowsty father would back towards him and
sit down complaining that he was neglected, and even little Mrs.
Skelmersdale would reappear, bravely tearful on her chair looking after
him as he slunk away from her through Kensington Gardens; indeed every
personal link he had ever had to life could in certain moods pull him
back through the door of self-reproach Amanda opened and set him aching
and accusing himself of harshness and self-concentration. The very
kittens of his childhood revived forgotten moments of long-repented
hardness. For a year before Prothero was killed there were these
heartaches. That tragedy gave them their crowning justification. All
these people said in this form or that, "You owed a debt to us, you
evaded it, you betrayed us, you owed us life out of yourself, love and
services, and you have gone off from us all with this life that was
ours, to live by yourself in dreams about the rule of the world,
and with empty phantoms of power and destiny. All this was
intellectualization. You sacrificed us to the thin things of the mind.
There is no rule of the world at all, or none that a man like you
may lay hold upon. The rule of the world is a fortuitous result of
incalculably multitudinous forces. But all of us you could have made
happier. You could have spared us distresses. Prothero died because of
you. Presently it will be the turn of your father, your mother--Amanda
perhaps...."

He made no written note of his heartaches, but he made several memoranda
about priggishness that White read and came near to understanding. In
spite of the tugging at his heart-strings, Benham was making up his mind
to be a prig. He weighed the cold uningratiating virtues of priggishness
against his smouldering passion for Amanda, and against his obstinate
sympathy for Prothero's grossness and his mother's personal pride, and
he made his choice. But it was a reluctant choice.

One fragment began in the air. "Of course I had made myself responsible
for her life. But it was, you see, such a confoundedly energetic life,
as vigorous and as slippery as an eel.... Only by giving all my strength
to her could I have held Amanda.... So what was the good of trying to
hold Amanda?...

"All one's people have this sort of claim upon one. Claims made by their
pride and their self-respect, and their weaknesses and dependences.
You've no right to hurt them, to kick about and demand freedom when
it means snapping and tearing the silly suffering tendrils they have
wrapped about you. The true aristocrat I think will have enough grasp,
enough steadiness, to be kind and right to every human being and still
do the work that ought to be his essential life. I see that now.
It's one of the things this last year or so of loneliness has made me
realize; that in so far as I have set out to live the aristocratic life
I have failed. Instead I've discovered it--and found myself out. I'm an
overstrung man. I go harshly and continuously for one idea. I live as I
ride. I blunder through my fences, I take off too soon. I've no natural
ease of mind or conduct or body. I am straining to keep hold of a thing
too big for me and do a thing beyond my ability. Only after Prothero's
death was it possible for me to realize the prig I have always been,
first as regards him and then as regards Amanda and my mother and every
one. A necessary unavoidable priggishness...." I do not see how
certain things can be done without prigs, people, that is to say, so
concentrated and specialized in interest as to be a trifle inhuman, so
resolved as to be rather rhetorical and forced.... All things must begin
with clumsiness, there is no assurance about pioneers....

"Some one has to talk about aristocracy, some one has to explain
aristocracy.... But the very essence of aristocracy, as I conceive it,
is that it does not explain nor talk about itself....

"After all it doesn't matter what I am.... It's just a private vexation
that I haven't got where I meant to get. That does not affect the truth
I have to tell....

"If one has to speak the truth with the voice of a prig, still one must
speak the truth. I have worked out some very considerable things in my
research, and the time has come when I must set them out clearly and
plainly. That is my job anyhow. My journey to London to release Amanda
will be just the end of my adolescence and the beginning of my real
life. It will release me from my last entanglement with the fellow
creatures I have always failed to make happy.... It's a detail in the
work.... And I shall go on.

"But I shall feel very like a man who goes back for a surgical
operation.

"It's very like that. A surgical operation, and when it is over perhaps
I shall think no more about it.

"And beyond these things there are great masses of work to be done. So
far I have but cleared up for myself a project and outline of living. I
must begin upon these masses now, I must do what I can upon the details,
and, presently, I shall see more clearly where other men are working to
the same ends...."



12


Benham's expedition to China with Prothero was essentially a wrestle
between his high resolve to work out his conception of the noble life to
the utmost limit and his curiously invincible affection and sympathy for
the earthliness of that inglorious little don. Although Benham insisted
upon the dominance of life by noble imaginations and relentless
reasonableness, he would never altogether abandon the materialism of
life. Prothero had once said to him, "You are the advocate of the brain
and I of the belly. Only, only we respect each other." And at another
time, "You fear emotions and distrust sensations. I invite them. You do
not drink gin because you think it would make you weep. But if I could
not weep in any other way I would drink gin." And it was under
the influence of Prothero that Benham turned from the haughty
intellectualism, the systematized superiorities and refinements, the
caste marks and defensive dignities of India to China, that great
teeming stinking tank of humorous yellow humanity.

Benham had gone to Prothero again after a bout of elevated idealism.
It was only very slowly that he reconciled his mind to the idea of an
entirely solitary pursuit of his aristocratic dream. For some time as
he went about the world he was trying to bring himself into relationship
with the advanced thinkers, the liberal-minded people who seemed to
promise at least a mental and moral co-operation. Yet it is difficult to
see what co-operation was possible unless it was some sort of agreement
that presently they should all shout together. And it was after a
certain pursuit of Rabindranath Tagore, whom he met in Hampstead, that a
horror of perfect manners and perfect finish came upon him, and he fled
from that starry calm to the rich uncleanness of the most undignified
fellow of Trinity. And as an advocate and exponent of the richness of
the lower levels of life, as the declared antagonist of caste and of
the uttermost refinements of pride, Prothero went with Benham by way of
Siberia to the Chinese scene.

Their controversy was perceptible at every dinner-table in their
choice of food and drink. Benham was always wary and Prothero always
appreciative. It peeped out in the distribution of their time, in the
direction of their glances. Whenever women walked about, Prothero gave
way to a sort of ethnological excitement. "That girl--a wonderful racial
type." But in Moscow he was sentimental. He insisted on going again to
the Cosmopolis Bazaar, and when he had ascertained that Anna Alexievna
had vanished and left no trace he prowled the streets until the small
hours.

In the eastward train he talked intermittently of her. "I should have
defied Cambridge," he said.

But at every stopping station he got out upon the platform
ethnologically alert....

Theoretically Benham was disgusted with Prothero. Really he was not
disgusted at all. There was something about Prothero like a sparrow,
like a starling, like a Scotch terrier.... These, too, are morally
objectionable creatures that do not disgust....

Prothero discoursed much upon the essential goodness of Russians. He
said they were a people of genius, that they showed it in their faults
and failures just as much as in their virtues and achievements. He
extolled the "germinating disorder" of Moscow far above the "implacable
discipline" of Berlin. Only a people of inferior imagination, a base
materialist people, could so maintain its attention upon precision and
cleanliness. Benham was roused to defence against this paradox. "But all
exaltation neglects," said Prothero. "No religion has ever boasted that
its saints were spick and span." This controversy raged between them in
the streets of Irkutsk. It was still burning while they picked their way
through the indescribable filth of Pekin.

"You say that all this is a fine disdain for material things," said
Benham. "But look out there!"

Apt to their argument a couple of sturdy young women came shuffling
along, cleaving the crowd in the narrow street by virtue of a single
word and two brace of pails of human ordure.

"That is not a fine disdain for material things," said Benham. "That is
merely individualism and unsystematic living."

"A mere phase of frankness. Only frankness is left to them now. The
Manchus crippled them, spoilt their roads and broke their waterways.
European intervention paralyses every attempt they make to establish
order on their own lines. In the Ming days China did not reek.... And,
anyhow, Benham, it's better than the silly waste of London...."

And in a little while Prothero discovered that China had tried Benham
and found him wanting, centuries and dynasties ago.

What was this new-fangled aristocratic man, he asked, but the ideal of
Confucius, the superior person, "the son of the King"? There you had the
very essence of Benham, the idea of self-examination, self-preparation
under a vague Theocracy. ("Vaguer," said Benham, "for the Confucian
Heaven could punish and reward.") Even the elaborate sham modesty of the
two dreams was the same. Benham interrupted and protested with heat. And
this Confucian idea of the son of the King, Prothero insisted, had been
the cause of China's paralysis. "My idea of nobility is not traditional
but expectant," said Benham. "After all, Confucianism has held together
a great pacific state far longer than any other polity has ever lasted.
I'll accept your Confucianism. I've not the slightest objection to
finding China nearer salvation than any other land. Do but turn it round
so that it looks to the future and not to the past, and it will be the
best social and political culture in the world. That, indeed, is what
is happening. Mix Chinese culture with American enterprise and you will
have made a new lead for mankind."

From that Benham drove on to discoveries. "When a man thinks of the past
he concentrates on self; when he thinks of the future he radiates from
self. Call me a neo-Confucian; with the cone opening forward away from
me, instead of focussing on me...."

"You make me think of an extinguisher," said Prothero.

"You know I am thinking of a focus," said Benham. "But all your thought
now has become caricature.... You have stopped thinking. You are
fighting after making up your mind...."

Prothero was a little disconcerted by Benham's prompt endorsement of his
Chinese identification. He had hoped it would be exasperating. He tried
to barb his offence. He amplified the indictment. All cultures must
be judged by their reaction and fatigue products, and Confucianism had
produced formalism, priggishness, humbug.... No doubt its ideals had had
their successes; they had unified China, stamped the idea of universal
peace and good manners upon the greatest mass of population in the
world, paved the way for much beautiful art and literature and living.
"But in the end, all your stern orderliness, Benham," said Prothero,
"only leads to me. The human spirit rebels against this everlasting
armour on the soul. After Han came T'ang. Have you never read Ling Po?
There's scraps of him in English in that little book you have--what is
it?--the LUTE OF JADE? He was the inevitable Epicurean; the Omar Khayyam
after the Prophet. Life must relax at last...."

"No!" cried Benham. "If it is traditional, I admit, yes; but if it is
creative, no...."

Under the stimulation of their undying controversy Benham was driven to
closer enquiries into Chinese thought. He tried particularly to get to
mental grips with English-speaking Chinese. "We still know nothing of
China," said Prothero. "Most of the stuff we have been told about this
country is mere middle-class tourists' twaddle. We send merchants from
Brixton and missionaries from Glasgow, and what doesn't remind them of
these delectable standards seems either funny to them or wicked. I admit
the thing is slightly pot-bound, so to speak, in the ancient characters
and the ancient traditions, but for all that, they KNOW, they HAVE, what
all the rest of the world has still to find and get. When they begin to
speak and write in a modern way and handle modern things and break into
the soil they have scarcely touched, the rest of the world will find
just how much it is behind.... Oh! not soldiering; the Chinese are not
such fools as that, but LIFE...."

Benham was won to a half belief in these assertions.

He came to realize more and more clearly that while India dreams or
wrestles weakly in its sleep, while Europe is still hopelessly and
foolishly given over to militant monarchies, racial vanities, delirious
religious feuds and an altogether imbecile fumbling with loaded
guns, China, even more than America, develops steadily into a massive
possibility of ordered and aristocratic liberalism....

The two men followed their associated and disconnected paths. Through
Benham's chance speeches and notes, White caught glimpses, as one might
catch glimpses through a moving trellis, of that bilateral adventure. He
saw Benham in conversation with liberal-minded mandarins, grave-faced,
bald-browed persons with disciplined movements, who sat with their hands
thrust into their sleeves talking excellent English; while Prothero
pursued enquiries of an intenser, more recondite sort with gentlemen of
a more confidential type. And, presently, Prothero began to discover and
discuss the merits of opium.

For if one is to disavow all pride and priggishness, if one is to
find the solution of life's problem in the rational enjoyment of one's
sensations, why should one not use opium? It is art materialized.
It gives tremendous experiences with a minimum of exertion, and if
presently its gifts diminish one need but increase the quantity.
Moreover, it quickens the garrulous mind, and steadies the happiness of
love. Across the varied adventures of Benham's journey in China fell the
shadow first of a suspicion and then of a certainty....

The perfected and ancient vices of China wrapped about Prothero like
some tainted but scented robe, and all too late Benham sought to drag
him away. And then in a passion of disgust turned from him.

"To this," cried Benham, "one comes! Save for pride and fierceness!"

"Better this than cruelty," said Prothero talking quickly and clearly
because of the evil thing in his veins. "You think that you are the only
explorer of life, Benham, but while you toil up the mountains I board
the house-boat and float down the stream. For you the stars, for me the
music and the lanterns. You are the son of a mountaineering don, and I
am a Chinese philosopher of the riper school. You force yourself beyond
fear of pain, and I force myself beyond fear of consequences. What
are we either of us but children groping under the black cloak of our
Maker?--who will not blind us with his light. Did he not give us also
these lusts, the keen knife and the sweetness, these sensations that are
like pineapple smeared with saltpetre, like salted olives from heaven,
like being flayed with delight.... And did he not give us dreams
fantastic beyond any lust whatever? What is the good of talking? Speak
to your own kind. I have gone, Benham. I am lost already. There is
no resisting any more, since I have drugged away resistance. Why then
should I come back? I know now the symphonies of the exalted nerves; I
can judge; and I say better lie and hear them to the end than come back
again to my old life, to my little tin-whistle solo, my--effort! My
EFFORT!... I ruin my body. I know. But what of that?... I shall soon be
thin and filthy. What of the grape-skin when one has had the pulp?"

"But," said Benham, "the cleanness of life!"

"While I perish," said Prothero still more wickedly, "I say good
things...."



13


White had a vision of a great city with narrow crowded streets, hung
with lank banners and gay with vertical vermilion labels, and of a
pleasant large low house that stood in a garden on a hillside, a garden
set with artificial stones and with beasts and men and lanterns of white
porcelain, a garden which overlooked this city. Here it was that Benham
stayed and talked with his host, a man robed in marvellous silks and
subtle of speech even in the European languages he used, and meanwhile
Prothero, it seemed, had gone down into the wickedness of the town
below. It was a very great town indeed, spreading for miles along the
banks of a huge river, a river that divided itself indolently into three
shining branches so as to make islands of the central portion of the
place. And on this river swarmed for ever a vast flotilla of ships and
boats, boats in which people lived, boats in which they sought pleasure,
moored places of assembly, high-pooped junks, steamboats, passenger
sampans, cargo craft, such a water town in streets and lanes, endless
miles of it, as no other part of the world save China can display. In
the daylight it was gay with countless sunlit colours embroidered upon
a fabric of yellow and brown, at night it glittered with a hundred
thousand lights that swayed and quivered and were reflected quiveringly
upon the black flowing waters.

And while Benham sat and talked in the garden above came a messenger who
was for some reason very vividly realized by White's imagination. He was
a tall man with lack-lustre eyes and sunken cheeks that made his cheek
bones very prominent, and gave his thin-lipped mouth something of the
geniality of a skull, and the arm he thrust out of his yellow robe to
hand Prothero's message to Benham was lean as a pole. So he stood out in
White's imagination, against the warm afternoon sky and the brown roofs
and blue haze of the great town below, and was with one exception the
distinctest thing in the story. The message he bore was scribbled by
Prothero himself in a nerveless scrawl: "Send a hundred dollars by this
man. I am in a frightful fix."

Now Benham's host had been twitting him with the European patronage of
opium, and something in this message stirred his facile indignation.
Twice before he had had similar demands. And on the whole they had
seemed to him to be unreasonable demands. He was astonished that while
he was sitting and talking of the great world-republic of the future and
the secret self-directed aristocracy that would make it possible,
his own friend, his chosen companion, should thus, by this inglorious
request and this ungainly messenger, disavow him. He felt a wave of
intense irritation.

"No," he said, "I will not."

And he was too angry to express himself in any language understandable
by his messenger.

His host intervened and explained after a few questions that the
occasion was serious. Prothero, it seemed, had been gambling.

"No," said Benham. "He is shameless. Let him do what he can."

The messenger was still reluctant to go.

And scarcely had he gone before misgivings seized Benham.

"Where IS your friend?" asked the mandarin.

"I don't know," said Benham.

"But they will keep him! They may do all sorts of things when they find
he is lying to them."

"Lying to them?"

"About your help."

"Stop that man," cried Benham suddenly realizing his mistake. But
when the servants went to stop the messenger their intentions were
misunderstood, and the man dashed through the open gate of the garden
and made off down the winding road.

"Stop him!" cried Benham, and started in pursuit, suddenly afraid for
Prothero.

The Chinese are a people of great curiosity, and a small pebble
sometimes starts an avalanche....

White pieced together his conception of the circles of disturbance that
spread out from Benham's pursuit of Prothero's flying messenger.

For weeks and months the great town had been uneasy in all its ways
because of the insurgent spirits from the south and the disorder from
the north, because of endless rumours and incessant intrigue. The stupid
manoeuvres of one European "power" against another, the tactlessness of
missionaries, the growing Chinese disposition to meet violence and force
with violence and force, had fermented and brewed the possibility of an
outbreak. The sudden resolve of Benham to get at once to Prothero was
like the firing of a mine. This tall, pale-faced, incomprehensible
stranger charging through the narrow streets that led to the
pleasure-boats in the south river seemed to many a blue-clad citizen
like the White Peril embodied. Behind him came the attendants of
the rich man up the hill; but they surely were traitors to help this
stranger.

Before Benham could at all realize what was happening he found his way
to the river-boat on which he supposed Prothero to be detained, barred
by a vigorous street fight. Explanations were impossible; he joined in
the fight.

For three days that fight developed round the mystery of Prothero's
disappearance.

It was a complicated struggle into which the local foreign traders
on the river-front and a detachment of modern drilled troops from the
up-river barracks were presently drawn. It was a struggle that was never
clearly explained, and at the end of it they found Prothero's body flung
out upon a waste place near a little temple on the river bank, stabbed
while he was asleep....

And from the broken fragments of description that Benham let fall, White
had an impression of him hunting for all those three days through the
strange places of a Chinese city, along narrow passages, over queer
Venetian-like bridges, through the vast spaces of empty warehouses, in
the incense-scented darkness of temple yards, along planks that passed
to the dark hulls of secret barges, in quick-flying boats that slipped
noiselessly among the larger craft, and sometimes he hunted alone,
sometimes in company, sometimes black figures struggled in the darkness
against dim-lit backgrounds and sometimes a swarm of shining yellow
faces screamed and shouted through the torn paper windows.... And
then at the end of this confused effect of struggle, this Chinese
kinematograph film, one last picture jerked into place and stopped and
stood still, a white wall in the sunshine come upon suddenly round a
corner, a dirty flagged passage and a stiff crumpled body that had for
the first time an inexpressive face....



14


Benham sat at a table in the smoking-room of the Sherborough Hotel
at Johannesburg and told of these things. White watched him from an
armchair. And as he listened he noted again the intensification of
Benham's face, the darkness under his brows, the pallor of his skin, the
touch of red in his eyes. For there was still that red gleam in Benham's
eyes; it shone when he looked out of a darkness into a light. And he
sat forward with his arms folded under him, or moved his long lean hand
about over the things on the table.

"You see," he said, "this is a sort of horror in my mind. Things like
this stick in my mind. I am always seeing Prothero now, and it will take
years to get this scar off my memory again. Once before--about a horse,
I had the same kind of distress. And it makes me tender, sore-minded
about everything. It will go, of course, in the long run, and it's just
like any other ache that lays hold of one. One can't cure it. One has to
get along with it....

"I know, White, I ought to have sent that money, but how was I to know
then that it was so imperative to send that money?...

"At the time it seemed just pandering to his vices....

"I was angry. I shall never subdue that kind of hastiness altogether.
It takes me by surprise. Before the messenger was out of sight I had
repented....

"I failed him. I have gone about in the world dreaming of tremendous
things and failing most people. My wife too...."

He stopped talking for a little time and folded his arms tight and
stared hard in front of himself, his lips compressed.

"You see, White," he said, with a kind of setting of the teeth, "this
is the sort of thing one has to stand. Life is imperfect. Nothing can be
done perfectly. And on the whole--" He spoke still more slowly, "I would
go through again with the very same things that have hurt my people. If
I had to live over again. I would try to do the things without hurting
the people, but I would do the things anyhow. Because I'm raw with
remorse, it does not follow that on the whole I am not doing right.
Right doing isn't balm. If I could have contrived not to hurt these
people as I have done, it would have been better, just as it would be
better to win a battle without any killed or wounded. I was clumsy with
them and they suffered, I suffer for their suffering, but still I have
to stick to the way I have taken. One's blunders are accidents. If
one thing is clearer than another it is that the world isn't
accident-proof....

"But I wish I had sent those dollars to Prothero.... God! White, but
I lie awake at night thinking of that messenger as he turned away....
Trying to stop him....

"I didn't send those dollars. So fifty or sixty people were killed
and many wounded.... There for all practical purposes the thing ends.
Perhaps it will serve to give me a little charity for some other fool's
haste and blundering....

"I couldn't help it, White. I couldn't help it....

"The main thing, the impersonal thing, goes on. One thinks, one learns,
one adds one's contribution of experience and understanding. The spirit
of the race goes on to light and comprehension. In spite of accidents.
In spite of individual blundering.

"It would be absurd anyhow to suppose that nobility is so easy as to
come slick and true on every occasion....

"If one gives oneself to any long aim one must reckon with minor
disasters. This Research I undertook grows and grows. I believe in it
more and more. The more it asks from me the more I give to it. When I
was a youngster I thought the thing I wanted was just round the corner.
I fancied I would find out the noble life in a year or two, just what
it was, just where it took one, and for the rest of my life I would live
it. Finely. But I am just one of a multitude of men, each one going a
little wrong, each one achieving a little right. And the noble life is
a long, long way ahead.... We are working out a new way of living for
mankind, a new rule, a new conscience. It's no small job for all of us.
There must be lifetimes of building up and lifetimes of pulling down and
trying again. Hope and disappointments and much need for philosophy....
I see myself now for the little workman I am upon this tremendous
undertaking. And all my life hereafter goes to serve it...."

He turned his sombre eyes upon his friend. He spoke with a grim
enthusiasm. "I'm a prig. I'm a fanatic, White. But I have something
clear, something better worth going on with than any adventure of
personal relationship could possibly be...."

And suddenly he began to tell White as plainly as he could of the faith
that had grown up in his mind. He spoke with a touch of defiance, with
the tense force of a man who shrinks but overcomes his shame. "I will
tell you what I believe."

He told of his early dread of fear and baseness, and of the slow
development, expansion and complication of his idea of self-respect
until he saw that there is no honour nor pride for a man until he refers
his life to ends and purposes beyond himself. An aristocrat must be
loyal. So it has ever been, but a modern aristocrat must also be
lucid; there it is that one has at once the demand for kingship and the
repudiation of all existing states and kings. In this manner he had
come to his idea of a great world republic that must replace the little
warring kingdoms of the present, to the conception of an unseen kingship
ruling the whole globe, to his King Invisible, who is the Lord of Truth
and all sane loyalty. "There," he said, "is the link of our order, the
new knighthood, the new aristocracy, that must at last rule the earth.
There is our Prince. He is in me, he is in you; he is latent in all
mankind. I have worked this out and tried it and lived it, and I know
that outwardly and inwardly this is the way a man must live, or else be
a poor thing and a base one. On great occasions and small occasions I
have failed myself a thousand times, but no failure lasts if your faith
lasts. What I have learnt, what I have thought out and made sure, I
want now to tell the world. Somehow I will tell it, as a book I suppose,
though I do not know if I shall ever be able to make a book. But I have
away there in London or with me here all the masses of notes I have
made in my search for the life that is worth while living.... We who are
self-appointed aristocrats, who are not ashamed of kingship, must speak
to one another....

"We can have no organization because organizations corrupt....

"No recognition....

"But we can speak plainly...."

(As he talked his voice was for a space drowned by the jingle and voices
of mounted police riding past the hotel.)

"But on one side your aristocracy means revolution," said White. "It
becomes a political conspiracy."

"Manifestly. An open conspiracy. It denies the king upon the stamps and
the flag upon the wall. It is the continual proclamation of the Republic
of Mankind."



15


The earlier phases of violence in the Rand outbreak in 1913 were
manifest rather in the outskirts of Johannesburg than at the centre.
"Pulling out" was going on first at this mine and then that, there were
riots in Benoni, attacks on strike breakers and the smashing up of
a number of houses. It was not until July the 4th that, with the
suppression of a public meeting in the market-place, Johannesburg itself
became the storm centre.

Benham and White were present at this marketplace affair, a confused
crowded occasion, in which a little leaven of active men stirred through
a large uncertain multitude of decently dressed onlookers. The whole
big square was astir, a swaying crowd of men. A ramshackle platform
improvised upon a trolley struggled through the swarming straw hats to a
street corner, and there was some speaking. At first it seemed as though
military men were using this platform, and then it was manifestly in
possession of an excited knot of labour leaders with red rosettes. The
military men had said their say and got down. They came close by Benham,
pushing their way across the square. "We've warned them," said one. A
red flag, like some misunderstood remark at a tea-party, was fitfully
visible and incomprehensible behind the platform. Somebody was either
pitched or fell off the platform. One could hear nothing from the
speakers except a minute bleating....

Then there were shouts that the police were charging. A number of
mounted men trotted into the square. The crowd began a series of short
rushes that opened lanes for the passage of the mounted police as they
rode to and fro. These men trotted through the crowd, scattering knots
of people. They carried pick-handles, but they did not seem to be
hitting with them. It became clear that they aimed at the capture of
the trolley. There was only a feeble struggle for the trolley; it was
captured and hauled through the scattered spectators in the square
to the protection of a small impassive body of regular cavalry at the
opposite corner. Then quite a number of people seemed to be getting
excited and fighting. They appeared to be vaguely fighting the
foot-police, and the police seemed to be vaguely pushing through
them and dispersing them. The roof of a little one-story shop became
prominent as a centre of vigorous stone-throwing.

It was no sort of battle. Merely the normal inconsecutiveness of human
affairs had become exaggerated and pugnacious. A meeting was being
prevented, and the police engaged in the operation were being pelted or
obstructed. Mostly people were just looking on.

"It amounts to nothing," said Benham. "Even if they held a meeting, what
could happen? Why does the Government try to stop it?"

The drifting and charging and a little booing went on for some time.
Every now and then some one clambered to a point of vantage, began
a speech and was pulled down by policemen. And at last across the
confusion came an idea, like a wind across a pond.

The strikers were to go to the Power Station.

That had the effect of a distinct move in the game. The Power Station
was the centre of Johannesburg's light and energy. There if anywhere it
would be possible to express one's disapproval of the administration,
one's desire to embarrass and confute it. One could stop all sorts of
things from the Power Station. At any rate it was a repartee to the
suppression of the meeting. Everybody seemed gladdened by a definite
project.

Benham and White went with the crowd.

At the intersection of two streets they were held up for a time; the
scattered drift of people became congested. Gliding slowly across the
mass came an electric tram, an entirely unbattered tram with even its
glass undamaged, and then another and another. Strikers, with the
happy expression of men who have found something expressive to do, were
escorting the trams off the street. They were being meticulously careful
with them. Never was there less mob violence in a riot. They walked by
the captured cars almost deferentially, like rough men honoured by a
real lady's company. And when White and Benham reached the Power House
the marvel grew. The rioters were already in possession and going freely
over the whole place, and they had injured nothing. They had stopped
the engines, but they had not even disabled them. Here too manifestly a
majority of the people were, like White and Benham, merely lookers-on.

"But this is the most civilized rioting," said Benham. "It isn't
rioting; it's drifting. Just as things drifted in Moscow. Because nobody
has the rudder....

"What maddens me," he said, "is the democracy of the whole thing. White!
I HATE this modern democracy. Democracy and inequality! Was there ever
an absurder combination? What is the good of a social order in which the
men at the top are commoner, meaner stuff than the men underneath, the
same stuff, just spoilt, spoilt by prosperity and opportunity and the
conceit that comes with advantage? This trouble wants so little, just
a touch of aristocracy, just a little cultivated magnanimity, just an
inkling of responsibility, and the place might rise instantly out of all
this squalor and evil temper.... What does all this struggle here amount
to? On one side unintelligent greed, unintelligent resentment on the
other; suspicion everywhere....

"And you know, White, at bottom THEY ALL WANT TO BE DECENT!

"If only they had light enough in their brains to show them how.
It's such a plain job they have here too, a new city, the simplest
industries, freedom from war, everything to make a good life for men,
prosperity, glorious sunshine, a kind of happiness in the air. And
mismanagement, fear, indulgence, jealousy, prejudice, stupidity, poison
it all. A squabble about working on a Saturday afternoon, a squabble
embittered by this universal shadow of miner's phthisis that the masters
were too incapable and too mean to prevent.

"Oh, God!" cried Benham, "when will men be princes and take hold of
life? When will the kingship in us wake up and come to its own?... Look
at this place! Look at this place!... The easy, accessible happiness!
The manifest prosperity. The newness and the sunshine. And the silly
bitterness, the rage, the mischief and miseries!..."

And then: "It's not our quarrel...."

"It's amazing how every human quarrel draws one in to take sides.
Life is one long struggle against the incidental. I can feel my anger
gathering against the Government here in spite of my reason. I want to
go and expostulate. I have a ridiculous idea that I ought to go off to
Lord Gladstone or Botha and expostulate.... What good would it do?
They move in the magic circles of their own limitations, an official, a
politician--how would they put it?--'with many things to consider....'

"It's my weakness to be drawn into quarrels. It's a thing I have to
guard against....

"What does it all amount to? It is like a fight between navvies in
a tunnel to settle the position of the Pole star. It doesn't concern
us.... Oh! it doesn't indeed concern us. It's a scuffle in the darkness,
and our business, the business of all brains, the only permanent good
work is to light up the world.... There will be mischief and hatred
here and suppression and then forgetfulness, and then things will go on
again, a little better or a little worse...."

"I'm tired of this place, White, and of all such places. I'm tired of
the shouting and running, the beating and shooting. I'm sick of all the
confusions of life's experience, which tells only of one need amidst an
endless multitude of distresses. I've seen my fill of wars and disputes
and struggles. I see now how a man may grow weary at last of life and
its disorders, its unreal exacting disorders, its blunders and its
remorse. No! I want to begin upon the realities I have made for myself.
For they are the realities. I want to go now to some quiet corner
where I can polish what I have learnt, sort out my accumulations, be
undisturbed by these transitory symptomatic things....

"What was that boy saying? They are burning the STAR office.... Well,
let them...."

And as if to emphasize his detachment, his aversion, from the things
that hurried through the night about them, from the red flare in the
sky and the distant shouts and revolver shots and scuffling flights down
side streets, he began to talk again of aristocracy and the making of
greatness and a new great spirit in men. All the rest of his life, he
said, must be given to that. He would say his thing plainly and honestly
and afterwards other men would say it clearly and beautifully; here it
would touch a man and there it would touch a man; the Invisible King in
us all would find himself and know himself a little in this and a little
in that, and at last a day would come, when fair things and fine things
would rule the world and such squalor as this about them would be as
impossible any more for men as a Stone Age Corroboree....

Late or soon?

Benham sought for some loose large measure of time.

"Before those constellations above us have changed their shapes....

"Does it matter if we work at something that will take a hundred years
or ten thousand years? It will never come in our lives, White. Not soon
enough for that. But after that everything will be soon--when one comes
to death then everything is at one's fingertips--I can feel that greater
world I shall never see as one feels the dawn coming through the last
darkness...."



16


The attack on the Rand Club began while Benham and White were at lunch
in the dining-room at the Sherborough on the day following the burning
of the STAR office. The Sherborough dining-room was on the first floor,
and the Venetian window beside their table opened on to a verandah
above a piazza. As they talked they became aware of an excitement in the
street below, shouting and running and then a sound of wheels and the
tramp of a body of soldiers marching quickly. White stood up and looked.
"They're seizing the stuff in the gunshops," he said, sitting down
again. "It's amazing they haven't done it before."

They went on eating and discussing the work of a medical mission at
Mukden that had won Benham's admiration....

A revolver cracked in the street and there was a sound of glass
smashing. Then more revolver shots. "That's at the big club at the
corner, I think," said Benham and went out upon the verandah.

Up and down the street mischief was afoot. Outside the Rand Club in
the cross street a considerable mass of people had accumulated, and
was being hustled by a handful of khaki-clad soldiers. Down the street
people were looking in the direction of the market-place and then
suddenly a rush of figures flooded round the corner, first a froth
of scattered individuals and then a mass, a column, marching with an
appearance of order and waving a flag. It was a poorly disciplined body,
it fringed out into a swarm of sympathizers and spectators upon the
side walk, and at the head of it two men disputed. They seemed to be
differing about the direction of the whole crowd. Suddenly one smote the
other with his fist, a blow that hurled him sideways, and then turned
with a triumphant gesture to the following ranks, waving his arms in
the air. He was a tall lean man, hatless and collarless, greyhaired and
wild-eyed. On he came, gesticulating gauntly, past the hotel.

And then up the street something happened. Benham's attention was turned
round to it by a checking, by a kind of catch in the breath, on the part
of the advancing procession under the verandah.

The roadway beyond the club had suddenly become clear. Across it a dozen
soldiers had appeared and dismounted methodically and lined out, with
their carbines in readiness. The mounted men at the club corner had
vanished, and the people there had swayed about towards this new
threat. Quite abruptly the miscellaneous noises of the crowd ceased.
Understanding seized upon every one.

These soldiers were going to fire....

The brown uniformed figures moved like automata; the rifle shots rang
out almost in one report....

There was a rush in the crowd towards doorways and side streets, an
enquiring pause, the darting back of a number of individuals into the
roadway and then a derisive shouting. Nobody had been hit. The soldiers
had fired in the air.

"But this is a stupid game," said Benham. "Why did they fire at all?"

The tall man who had led the mob had run out into the middle of the
road. His commando was a little disposed to assume a marginal position,
and it had to be reassured. He was near enough for Benham to see his
face. For a time it looked anxious and thoughtful. Then he seemed to
jump to his decision. He unbuttoned and opened his coat wide as if
defying the soldiers. "Shoot," he bawled, "Shoot, if you dare!"

A little uniform movement of the soldiers answered him. The small figure
of the officer away there was inaudible. The coat of the man below
flapped like the wings of a crowing cock before a breast of dirty shirt,
the hoarse voice cracked with excitement, "Shoot, if you dare. Shoot, if
you dare! See!"

Came the metallic bang of the carbines again, and in the instant the
leader collapsed in the road, a sprawl of clothes, hit by half a dozen
bullets. It was an extraordinary effect. As though the figure had been
deflated. It was incredible that a moment before this thing had been a
man, an individual, a hesitating complicated purpose.

"Good God!" cried Benham, "but--this is horrible!"

The heap of garments lay still. The red hand that stretched out towards
the soldiers never twitched.

The spectacular silence broke into a confusion of sounds, women
shrieked, men cursed, some fled, some sought a corner from which they
might still see, others pressed forward. "Go for the swine!" bawled a
voice, a third volley rattled over the heads of the people, and in
the road below a man with a rifle halted, took aim, and answered the
soldiers' fire. "Look out!" cried White who was watching the soldiers,
and ducked. "This isn't in the air!"

Came a straggling volley again, like a man running a metal hammer very
rapidly along iron corrugations, and this time people were dropping all
over the road. One white-faced man not a score of yards away fell with
a curse and a sob, struggled up, staggered for some yards with blood
running abundantly from his neck, and fell and never stirred again.
Another went down upon his back clumsily in the roadway and lay wringing
his hands faster and faster until suddenly with a movement like a sigh
they dropped inert by his side. A straw-hatted youth in a flannel suit
ran and stopped and ran again. He seemed to be holding something red and
strange to his face with both hands; above them his eyes were round
and anxious. Blood came out between his fingers. He went right past
the hotel and stumbled and suddenly sprawled headlong at the opposite
corner. The majority of the crowd had already vanished into doorways and
side streets. But there was still shouting and there was still a remnant
of amazed and angry men in the roadway--and one or two angry women. They
were not fighting. Indeed they were unarmed, but if they had had weapons
now they would certainly have used them.

"But this is preposterous!" cried Benham. "Preposterous. Those soldiers
are never going to shoot again! This must stop."

He stood hesitating for a moment and then turned about and dashed for
the staircase. "Good Heaven!" cried White. "What are you going to do?"

Benham was going to stop that conflict very much as a man might go to
stop a clock that is striking unwarrantably and amazingly. He was going
to stop it because it annoyed his sense of human dignity.

White hesitated for a moment and then followed, crying "Benham!"

But there was no arresting this last outbreak of Benham's all too
impatient kingship. He pushed aside a ducking German waiter who was
peeping through the glass doors, and rushed out of the hotel. With
a gesture of authority he ran forward into the middle of the street,
holding up his hand, in which he still held his dinner napkin clenched
like a bomb. White believes firmly that Benham thought he would be able
to dominate everything. He shouted out something about "Foolery!"

Haroun al Raschid was flinging aside all this sublime indifference to
current things....

But the carbines spoke again.

Benham seemed to run unexpectedly against something invisible. He
spun right round and fell down into a sitting position. He sat looking
surprised.

After one moment of blank funk White drew out his pocket handkerchief,
held it arm high by way of a white flag, and ran out from the piazza of
the hotel.



17


"Are you hit?" cried White dropping to his knees and making himself as
compact as possible. "Benham!"

Benham, after a moment of perplexed thought answered in a strange voice,
a whisper into which a whistling note had been mixed.

"It was stupid of me to come out here. Not my quarrel. Faults on both
sides. And now I can't get up. I will sit here a moment and pull myself
together. Perhaps I'm--I must be shot. But it seemed to come--inside
me.... If I should be hurt. Am I hurt?... Will you see to that book of
mine, White? It's odd. A kind of faintness.... What?"

"I will see after your book," said White and glanced at his hand because
it felt wet, and was astonished to discover it bright red. He forgot
about himself then, and the fresh flight of bullets down the street.

The immediate effect of this blood was that he said something more about
the book, a promise, a definite promise. He could never recall his
exact words, but their intention was binding. He conveyed his absolute
acquiescence with Benham's wishes whatever they were. His life for that
moment was unreservedly at his friend's disposal....

White never knew if his promise was heard. Benham had stopped speaking
quite abruptly with that "What?"

He stared in front of him with a doubtful expression, like a man who is
going to be sick, and then, in an instant, every muscle seemed to give
way, he shuddered, his head flopped, and White held a dead man in his
arms.


THE END

========================================
========================================

THE NEW MACHIAVELLI

by H. G. Wells



CONTENTS


     BOOK THE FIRST

     THE MAKING OF A MAN

     I.   CONCERNING A BOOK THAT WAS NEVER WRITTEN
     II.  BROMSTEAD AND MY FATHER
     III. SCHOLASTIC
     IV.  ADOLESCENCE


     BOOK THE SECOND

     MARGARET

     I.   MARGARET IN STAFFORDSHIRE
     II.  MARGARET IN LONDON
     III. MARGARET IN VENICE
     IV.  THE HOUSE IN WESTMINSTER


     BOOK THE THIRD

     THE HEART OF POLITICS

     I.   THE RIDDLE FOR THE STATESMAN
     II.  SEEKING ASSOCIATES
     III. SECESSION
     IV.  THE BESETTING OF SEX


     BOOK THE FOURTH

     ISABEL

     I.   LOVE AND SUCCESS
     II.  THE IMPOSSIBLE POSITION
     III. THE BREAKING POINT





BOOK THE FIRST: THE MAKING OF A MAN



CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ CONCERNING A BOOK THAT WAS NEVER WRITTEN


1

Since I came to this place I have been very restless, wasting my
energies in the futile beginning of ill-conceived books. One does not
settle down very readily at two and forty to a new way of living, and
I have found myself with the teeming interests of the life I have
abandoned still buzzing like a swarm of homeless bees in my head. My
mind has been full of confused protests and justifications. In any case
I should have found difficulties enough in expressing the complex thing
I have to tell, but it has added greatly to my trouble that I have a
great analogue, that a certain Niccolo Machiavelli chanced to fall out
of politics at very much the age I have reached, and wrote a book to
engage the restlessness of his mind, very much as I have wanted to do.
He wrote about the relation of the great constructive spirit in politics
to individual character and weaknesses, and so far his achievement lies
like a deep rut in the road of my intention. It has taken me far astray.
It is a matter of many weeks now--diversified indeed by some long drives
into the mountains behind us and a memorable sail to Genoa across the
blue and purple waters that drowned Shelley--since I began a laboured
and futile imitation of "The Prince." I sat up late last night with the
jumbled accumulation; and at last made a little fire of olive twigs and
burnt it all, sheet by sheet--to begin again clear this morning.

But incidentally I have re-read most of Machiavelli, not excepting those
scandalous letters of his to Vettori, and it seems to me, now that I
have released myself altogether from his literary precedent, that he
still has his use for me. In spite of his vast prestige I claim kindred
with him and set his name upon my title-page, in partial intimation of
the matter of my story. He takes me with sympathy not only by reason
of the dream he pursued and the humanity of his politics, but by the
mixture of his nature. His vices come in, essential to my issue. He is
dead and gone, all his immediate correlations to party and faction have
faded to insignificance, leaving only on the one hand his broad method
and conceptions, and upon the other his intimate living personality,
exposed down to its salacious corners as the soul of no contemporary can
ever be exposed. Of those double strands it is I have to write, of the
subtle protesting perplexing play of instinctive passion and desire
against too abstract a dream of statesmanship. But things that seemed to
lie very far apart in Machiavelli's time have come near to one another;
it is no simple story of white passions struggling against the red that
I have to tell.

The state-making dream is a very old dream indeed in the world's
history. It plays too small a part in novels. Plato and Confucius
are but the highest of a great host of minds that have had a kindred
aspiration, have dreamt of a world of men better ordered, happier,
finer, securer. They imagined cities grown more powerful and peoples
made rich and multitudinous by their efforts, they thought in terms
of harbours and shining navies, great roads engineered marvellously,
jungles cleared and deserts conquered, the ending of muddle and
diseases and dirt and misery; the ending of confusions that waste human
possibilities; they thought of these things with passion and desire as
other men think of the soft lines and tender beauty of women. Thousands
of men there are to-day almost mastered by this white passion of
statecraft, and in nearly every one who reads and thinks you could find,
I suspect, some sort of answering response. But in every one it presents
itself extraordinarily entangled and mixed up with other, more intimate
things.

It was so with Machiavelli. I picture him at San Casciano as he lived
in retirement upon his property after the fall of the Republic, perhaps
with a twinge of the torture that punished his conspiracy still lurking
in his limbs. Such twinges could not stop his dreaming. Then it was "The
Prince" was written. All day he went about his personal affairs,
saw homely neighbours, dealt with his family, gave vent to everyday
passions. He would sit in the shop of Donato del Corno gossiping
curiously among vicious company, or pace the lonely woods of his estate,
book in hand, full of bitter meditations. In the evening he returned
home and went to his study. At the entrance, he says, he pulled off his
peasant clothes covered with the dust and dirt of that immediate life,
washed himself, put on his "noble court dress," closed the door on
the world of toiling and getting, private loving, private hating and
personal regrets, sat down with a sigh of contentment to those wider
dreams.

I like to think of him so, with brown books before him lit by the light
of candles in silver candlesticks, or heading some new chapter of "The
Prince," with a grey quill in his clean fine hand.

So writing, he becomes a symbol for me, and the less none because of his
animal humour, his queer indecent side, and because of such lapses
into utter meanness as that which made him sound the note of the
begging-letter writer even in his "Dedication," reminding His
Magnificence very urgently, as if it were the gist of his matter, of the
continued malignity of fortune in his affairs. These flaws complete him.
They are my reason for preferring him as a symbol to Plato, of whose
indelicate side we know nothing, and whose correspondence with Dionysius
of Syracuse has perished; or to Confucius who travelled China in search
of a Prince he might instruct, with lapses and indignities now lost
in the mists of ages. They have achieved the apotheosis of individual
forgetfulness, and Plato has the added glory of that acquired beauty,
that bust of the Indian Bacchus which is now indissolubly mingled with
his tradition. They have passed into the world of the ideal, and every
humbug takes his freedoms with their names. But Machiavelli, more recent
and less popular, is still all human and earthly, a fallen brother--and
at the same time that nobly dressed and nobly dreaming writer at the
desk.

That vision of the strengthened and perfected state is protagonist in
my story. But as I re-read "The Prince" and thought out the manner of
my now abandoned project, I came to perceive how that stir and whirl of
human thought one calls by way of embodiment the French Revolution, has
altered absolutely the approach to such a question. Machiavelli, like
Plato and Pythagoras and Confucius two hundred odd decades before him,
saw only one method by which a thinking man, himself not powerful, might
do the work of state building, and that was by seizing the imagination
of a Prince. Directly these men turned their thoughts towards
realisation, their attitudes became--what shall I call it?--secretarial.
Machiavelli, it is true, had some little doubts about the particular
Prince he wanted, whether it was Caesar Borgia of Giuliano or Lorenzo,
but a Prince it had to be. Before I saw clearly the differences of our
own time I searched my mind for the modern equivalent of a Prince. At
various times I redrafted a parallel dedication to the Prince of
Wales, to the Emperor William, to Mr. Evesham, to a certain newspaper
proprietor who was once my schoolfellow at City Merchants', to Mr. J. D.
Rockefeller--all of them men in their several ways and circumstances and
possibilities, princely. Yet in every case my pen bent of its own accord
towards irony because--because, although at first I did not realise it,
I myself am just as free to be a prince. The appeal was unfair. The old
sort of Prince, the old little principality has vanished from the world.
The commonweal is one man's absolute estate and responsibility no more.
In Machiavelli's time it was indeed to an extreme degree one man's
affair. But the days of the Prince who planned and directed and was
the source and centre of all power are ended. We are in a condition of
affairs infinitely more complex, in which every prince and statesman is
something of a servant and every intelligent human being something of
a Prince. No magnificent pensive Lorenzos remain any more in this world
for secretarial hopes.

In a sense it is wonderful how power has vanished, in a sense wonderful
how it has increased. I sit here, an unarmed discredited man, at a small
writing-table in a little defenceless dwelling among the vines, and no
human being can stop my pen except by the deliberate self-immolation of
murdering me, nor destroy its fruits except by theft and crime. No King,
no council, can seize and torture me; no Church, no nation silence me.
Such powers of ruthless and complete suppression have vanished. But that
is not because power has diminished, but because it has increased and
become multitudinous, because it has dispersed itself and specialised.
It is no longer a negative power we have, but positive; we cannot
prevent, but we can do. This age, far beyond all previous ages, is full
of powerful men, men who might, if they had the will for it, achieve
stupendous things.

The things that might be done to-day! The things indeed that are being
done! It is the latter that give one so vast a sense of the former. When
I think of the progress of physical and mechanical science, of medicine
and sanitation during the last century, when I measure the increase in
general education and average efficiency, the power now available
for human service, the merely physical increment, and compare it with
anything that has ever been at man's disposal before, and when I think
of what a little straggling, incidental, undisciplined and uncoordinated
minority of inventors, experimenters, educators, writers and organisers
has achieved this development of human possibilities, achieved it in
spite of the disregard and aimlessness of the huge majority, and the
passionate resistance of the active dull, my imagination grows giddy
with dazzling intimations of the human splendours the justly organised
state may yet attain. I glimpse for a bewildering instant the heights
that may be scaled, the splendid enterprises made possible.

But the appeal goes out now in other forms, in a book that catches at
thousands of readers for the eye of a Prince diffused. It is the
old appeal indeed for the unification of human effort, the ending of
confusions, but instead of the Machiavellian deference to a flattered
lord, a man cries out of his heart to the unseen fellowship about him.
The last written dedication of all those I burnt last night, was to no
single man, but to the socially constructive passion--in any man....

There is, moreover, a second great difference in kind between my world
and Machiavelli's. We are discovering women. It is as if they had come
across a vast interval since his time, into the very chamber of the
statesman.


2

In Machiavelli's outlook the interest of womanhood was in a region of
life almost infinitely remote from his statecraft. They were the vehicle
of children, but only Imperial Rome and the new world of to-day have
ever had an inkling of the significance that might give them in the
state. They did their work, he thought, as the ploughed earth bears its
crops. Apart from their function of fertility they gave a humorous twist
to life, stimulated worthy men to toil, and wasted the hours of Princes.
He left the thought of women outside with his other dusty things when
he went into his study to write, dismissed them from his mind. But
our modern world is burthened with its sense of the immense, now half
articulate, significance of women. They stand now, as it were, close
beside the silver candlesticks, speaking as Machiavelli writes, until he
stays his pen and turns to discuss his writing with them.

It is this gradual discovery of sex as a thing collectively portentous
that I have to mingle with my statecraft if my picture is to be true
which has turned me at length from a treatise to the telling of my own
story. In my life I have paralleled very closely the slow realisations
that are going on in the world about me. I began life ignoring women,
they came to me at first perplexing and dishonouring; only very slowly
and very late in my life and after misadventure, did I gauge the power
and beauty of the love of man and woman and learnt how it must needs
frame a justifiable vision of the ordered world. Love has brought me
to disaster, because my career had been planned regardless of its
possibility and value. But Machiavelli, it seems to me, when he
went into his study, left not only the earth of life outside but its
unsuspected soul.


3

Like Machiavelli at San Casciano, if I may take this analogy one step
further, I too am an exile. Office and leading are closed to me. The
political career that promised so much for me is shattered and ended for
ever.

I look out from this vine-wreathed veranda under the branches of a stone
pine; I see wide and far across a purple valley whose sides are terraced
and set with houses of pine and ivory, the Gulf of Liguria gleaming
sapphire blue, and cloud-like baseless mountains hanging in the sky, and
I think of lank and coaly steamships heaving on the grey rollers of the
English Channel and darkling streets wet with rain, I recall as if I
were back there the busy exit from Charing Cross, the cross and the
money-changers' offices, the splendid grime of giant London and the
crowds going perpetually to and fro, the lights by night and the urgency
and eventfulness of that great rain-swept heart of the modern world.

It is difficult to think we have left that--for many years if not for
ever. In thought I walk once more in Palace Yard and hear the clink and
clatter of hansoms and the quick quiet whirr of motors; I go in vivid
recent memories through the stir in the lobbies, I sit again at eventful
dinners in those old dining-rooms like cellars below the House--dinners
that ended with shrill division bells, I think of huge clubs swarming
and excited by the bulletins of that electoral battle that was for me
the opening opportunity. I see the stencilled names and numbers go up on
the green baize, constituency after constituency, amidst murmurs or loud
shouting....

It is over for me now and vanished. That opportunity will come no more.
Very probably you have heard already some crude inaccurate version of
our story and why I did not take office, and have formed your partial
judgement on me. And so it is I sit now at my stone table, half out of
life already, in a warm, large, shadowy leisure, splashed with sunlight
and hung with vine tendrils, with paper before me to distil such wisdom
as I can, as Machiavelli in his exile sought to do, from the things I
have learnt and felt during the career that has ended now in my divorce.

I climbed high and fast from small beginnings. I had the mind of my
party. I do not know where I might not have ended, but for this red
blaze that came out of my unguarded nature and closed my career for
ever.



CHAPTER THE SECOND ~~ BROMSTEAD AND MY FATHER


1

I dreamt first of states and cities and political things when I was a
little boy in knickerbockers.

When I think of how such things began in my mind, there comes back to me
the memory of an enormous bleak room with its ceiling going up to heaven
and its floor covered irregularly with patched and defective oilcloth
and a dingy mat or so and a "surround" as they call it, of dark stained
wood. Here and there against the wall are trunks and boxes. There are
cupboards on either side of the fireplace and bookshelves with
books above them, and on the wall and rather tattered is a large
yellow-varnished geological map of the South of England. Over the mantel
is a huge lump of white coral rock and several big fossil bones, and
above that hangs the portrait of a brainy gentleman, sliced in half and
displaying an interior of intricate detail and much vigour of coloring.
It is the floor I think of chiefly; over the oilcloth of which, assumed
to be land, spread towns and villages and forts of wooden bricks; there
are steep square hills (geologically, volumes of Orr's CYCLOPAEDIA OF
THE SCIENCES) and the cracks and spaces of the floor and the bare brown
surround were the water channels and open sea of that continent of mine.

I still remember with infinite gratitude the great-uncle to whom I
owe my bricks. He must have been one of those rare adults who have not
forgotten the chagrins and dreams of childhood. He was a prosperous west
of England builder; including my father he had three nephews, and for
each of them he caused a box of bricks to be made by an out-of-work
carpenter, not the insufficient supply of the toyshop, you understand,
but a really adequate quantity of bricks made out of oak and shaped
and smoothed, bricks about five inches by two and a half by one, and
half-bricks and quarter-bricks to correspond. There were hundreds of
them, many hundreds. I could build six towers as high as myself with
them, and there seemed quite enough for every engineering project I
could undertake. I could build whole towns with streets and houses and
churches and citadels; I could bridge every gap in the oilcloth and make
causeways over crumpled spaces (which I feigned to be morasses), and on
a keel of whole bricks it was possible to construct ships to push
over the high seas to the remotest port in the room. And a disciplined
population, that rose at last by sedulous begging on birthdays and
all convenient occasions to well over two hundred, of lead sailors and
soldiers, horse, foot and artillery, inhabited this world.

Justice has never been done to bricks and soldiers by those who write
about toys. The praises of the toy theatre have been a common theme for
essayists, the planning of the scenes, the painting and cutting out of
the caste, penny plain twopence coloured, the stink and glory of the
performance and the final conflagration. I had such a theatre once, but
I never loved it nor hoped for much from it; my bricks and soldiers were
my perpetual drama. I recall an incessant variety of interests. There
was the mystery and charm of the complicated buildings one could make,
with long passages and steps and windows through which one peeped into
their intricacies, and by means of slips of card one could make slanting
ways in them, and send marbles rolling from top to base and thence out
into the hold of a waiting ship. Then there were the fortresses and gun
emplacements and covered ways in which one's soldiers went. And there
was commerce; the shops and markets and store-rooms full of nasturtium
seed, thrift seed, lupin beans and suchlike provender from the garden;
such stuff one stored in match-boxes and pill-boxes, or packed in sacks
of old glove fingers tied up with thread and sent off by waggons along
the great military road to the beleaguered fortress on the Indian
frontier beyond the worn places that were dismal swamps. And there were
battles on the way.

That great road is still clear in my memory. I was given, I forget by
what benefactor, certain particularly fierce red Indians of lead--I have
never seen such soldiers since--and for these my father helped me to
make tepees of brown paper, and I settled them in a hitherto desolate
country under the frowning nail-studded cliffs of an ancient trunk. Then
I conquered them and garrisoned their land. (Alas! they died, no doubt
through contact with civilisation--one my mother trod on--and their
land became a wilderness again and was ravaged for a time by a clockwork
crocodile of vast proportions.) And out towards the coal-scuttle was a
region near the impassable thickets of the ragged hearthrug where lived
certain china Zulus brandishing spears, and a mountain country of
rudely piled bricks concealing the most devious and enchanting caves and
several mines of gold and silver paper. Among these rocks a number of
survivors from a Noah's Ark made a various, dangerous, albeit frequently
invalid and crippled fauna, and I was wont to increase the uncultivated
wildness of this region further by trees of privet-twigs from the garden
hedge and box from the garden borders. By these territories went
my Imperial Road carrying produce to and fro, bridging gaps in the
oilcloth, tunnelling through Encyclopaedic hills--one tunnel was three
volumes long--defended as occasion required by camps of paper tents
or brick blockhouses, and ending at last in a magnificently engineered
ascent to a fortress on the cliffs commanding the Indian reservation.

My games upon the floor must have spread over several years and
developed from small beginnings, incorporating now this suggestion and
now that. They stretch, I suppose, from seven to eleven or twelve. I
played them intermittently, and they bulk now in the retrospect far more
significantly than they did at the time. I played them in bursts, and
then forgot them for long periods; through the spring and summer I was
mostly out of doors, and school and classes caught me early. And in
the retrospect I see them all not only magnified and transfigured, but
fore-shortened and confused together. A clockwork railway, I seem to
remember, came and went; one or two clockwork boats, toy sailing ships
that, being keeled, would do nothing but lie on their beam ends on the
floor; a detestable lot of cavalrymen, undersized and gilt all over,
given me by a maiden aunt, and very much what one might expect from
an aunt, that I used as Nero used his Christians to ornament my public
buildings; and I finally melted some into fratricidal bullets, and
therewith blew the rest to flat splashes of lead by means of a brass
cannon in the garden.

I find this empire of the floor much more vivid and detailed in my
memory now than many of the owners of the skirts and legs and boots that
went gingerly across its territories. Occasionally, alas! they stooped
to scrub, abolishing in one universal destruction the slow growth of
whole days of civilised development. I still remember the hatred and
disgust of these catastrophes. Like Noah I was given warnings. Did I
disregard them, coarse red hands would descend, plucking garrisons
from fortresses and sailors from ships, jumbling them up in their wrong
boxes, clumsily so that their rifles and swords were broken, sweeping
the splendid curves of the Imperial Road into heaps of ruins, casting
the jungle growth of Zululand into the fire.

"Well, Master Dick," the voice of this cosmic calamity would say, "you
ought to have put them away last night. No! I can't wait until you've
sailed them all away in ships. I got my work to do, and do it I will."

And in no time all my continents and lands were swirling water and
swiping strokes of house-flannel.

That was the worst of my giant visitants, but my mother too, dear lady,
was something of a terror to this microcosm. She wore spring-sided
boots, a kind of boot now vanished, I believe, from the world, with dull
bodies and shiny toes, and a silk dress with flounces that were very
destructive to the more hazardous viaducts of the Imperial Road. She
was always, I seem to remember, fetching me; fetching me for a meal,
fetching me for a walk or, detestable absurdity! fetching me for a wash
and brush up, and she never seemed to understand anything whatever of
the political Systems across which she came to me. Also she forbade all
toys on Sundays except the bricks for church-building and the soldiers
for church parade, or a Scriptural use of the remains of the Noah's Ark
mixed up with a wooden Swiss dairy farm. But she really did not know
whether a thing was a church or not unless it positively bristled with
cannon, and many a Sunday afternoon have I played Chicago (with the fear
of God in my heart) under an infidel pretence that it was a new sort of
ark rather elaborately done.

Chicago, I must explain, was based upon my father's description of the
pig slaughterings in that city and certain pictures I had seen. You made
your beasts--which were all the ark lot really, provisionally conceived
as pigs--go up elaborate approaches to a central pen, from which
they went down a cardboard slide four at a time, and dropped most
satisfyingly down a brick shaft, and pitter-litter over some steep steps
to where a head slaughterman (ne Noah) strung a cotton loop round their
legs and sent them by pin hooks along a wire to a second slaughterman
with a chipped foot (formerly Mrs. Noah) who, if I remember rightly,
converted them into Army sausage by means of a portion of the inside of
an old alarum clock.

My mother did not understand my games, but my father did. He wore
bright-coloured socks and carpet slippers when he was indoors--my mother
disliked boots in the house--and he would sit down on my little chair
and survey the microcosm on the floor with admirable understanding and
sympathy.

It was he who gave me most of my toys and, I more than suspect, most
of my ideas. "Here's some corrugated iron," he would say, "suitable for
roofs and fencing," and hand me a lump of that stiff crinkled paper that
is used for packing medicine bottles. Or, "Dick, do you see the tiger
loose near the Imperial Road?--won't do for your cattle ranch." And I
would find a bright new lead tiger like a special creation at large in
the world, and demanding a hunting expedition and much elaborate effort
to get him safely housed in the city menagerie beside the captured
dragon crocodile, tamed now, and his key lost and the heart and spring
gone out of him.

And to the various irregular reading of my father I owe the inestimable
blessing of never having a boy's book in my boyhood except those of
Jules Verne. But my father used to get books for himself and me from
the Bromstead Institute, Fenimore Cooper and Mayne Reid and illustrated
histories; one of the Russo-Turkish war and one of Napier's expedition
to Abyssinia I read from end to end; Stanley and Livingstone, lives
of Wellington, Napoleon and Garibaldi, and back volumes of PUNCH, from
which I derived conceptions of foreign and domestic politics it has
taken years of adult reflection to correct. And at home permanently we
had Wood's NATURAL HISTORY, a brand-new illustrated Green's HISTORY OF
THE ENGLISH PEOPLE, Irving's COMPANIONS OF COLUMBUS, a great number
of unbound parts of some geographical work, a VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD I
think it was called, with pictures of foreign places, and Clarke's NEW
TESTAMENT with a map of Palestine, and a variety of other informing
books bought at sales. There was a Sowerby's BOTANY also, with thousands
of carefully tinted pictures of British plants, and one or two other
important works in the sitting-room. I was allowed to turn these over
and even lie on the floor with them on Sundays and other occasions of
exceptional cleanliness.

And in the attic I found one day a very old forgotten map after the
fashion of a bird's-eye view, representing the Crimea, that fascinated
me and kept me for hours navigating its waters with a pin.


2

My father was a lank-limbed man in easy shabby tweed clothes and with
his hands in his trouser pockets. He was a science teacher, taking
a number of classes at the Bromstead Institute in Kent under the old
Science and Art Department, and "visiting" various schools; and our
resources were eked out by my mother's income of nearly a hundred
pounds a year, and by his inheritance of a terrace of three palatial but
structurally unsound stucco houses near Bromstead Station.

They were big clumsy residences in the earliest Victorian style,
interminably high and with deep damp basements and downstairs
coal-cellars and kitchens that suggested an architect vindictively
devoted to the discomfort of the servant class. If so, he had
overreached himself and defeated his end, for no servant would stay
in them unless for exceptional wages or exceptional tolerance of
inefficiency or exceptional freedom in repartee. Every storey in the
house was from twelve to fifteen feet high (which would have been cool
and pleasant in a hot climate), and the stairs went steeply up, to end
at last in attics too inaccessible for occupation. The ceilings had vast
plaster cornices of classical design, fragments of which would sometimes
fall unexpectedly, and the wall-papers were bold and gigantic in pattern
and much variegated by damp and ill-mended rents.

As my father was quite unable to let more than one of these houses at a
time, and that for the most part to eccentric and undesirable tenants,
he thought it politic to live in one of the two others, and devote the
rent he received from the let one, when it was let, to the incessant
necessary repairing of all three. He also did some of the repairing
himself and, smoking a bull-dog pipe the while, which my mother would
not allow him to do in the house, he cultivated vegetables in a sketchy,
unpunctual and not always successful manner in the unoccupied gardens.
The three houses faced north, and the back of the one we occupied was
covered by a grape-vine that yielded, I remember, small green grapes
for pies in the spring, and imperfectly ripe black grapes in favourable
autumns for the purposes of dessert. The grape-vine played an important
part in my life, for my father broke his neck while he was pruning it,
when I was thirteen.

My father was what is called a man of ideas, but they were not always
good ideas. My grandfather had been a private schoolmaster and one of
the founders of the College of Preceptors, and my father had assisted
him in his school until increasing competition and diminishing
attendance had made it evident that the days of small private schools
kept by unqualified persons were numbered. Thereupon my father had
roused himself and had qualified as a science teacher under the Science
and Art Department, which in these days had charge of the scientific and
artistic education of the mass of the English population, and had thrown
himself into science teaching and the earning of government grants
therefor with great if transitory zeal and success.

I do not remember anything of my father's earlier and more energetic
time. I was the child of my parents' middle years; they married when my
father was thirty-five and my mother past forty, and I saw only the last
decadent phase of his educational career.

The Science and Art Department has vanished altogether from the
world, and people are forgetting it now with the utmost readiness and
generosity. Part of its substance and staff and spirit survive, more or
less completely digested into the Board of Education.

The world does move on, even in its government. It is wonderful how many
of the clumsy and limited governing bodies of my youth and early manhood
have given place now to more scientific and efficient machinery. When
I was a boy, Bromstead, which is now a borough, was ruled by a strange
body called a Local Board--it was the Age of Boards--and I still
remember indistinctly my father rejoicing at the breakfast-table over
the liberation of London from the corrupt and devastating control of a
Metropolitan Board of Works. Then there were also School Boards; I
was already practically in politics before the London School Board was
absorbed by the spreading tentacles of the London County Council.

It gives a measure of the newness of our modern ideas of the State to
remember that the very beginnings of public education lie within my
father's lifetime, and that many most intelligent and patriotic people
were shocked beyond measure at the State doing anything of the sort.
When he was born, totally illiterate people who could neither read a
book nor write more than perhaps a clumsy signature, were to be found
everywhere in England; and great masses of the population were getting
no instruction at all. Only a few schools flourished upon the patronage
of exceptional parents; all over the country the old endowed grammar
schools were to be found sinking and dwindling; many of them had
closed altogether. In the new great centres of population multitudes of
children were sweated in the factories, darkly ignorant and wretched
and the under-equipped and under-staffed National and British schools,
supported by voluntary contributions and sectarian rivalries, made an
ineffectual fight against this festering darkness. It was a condition
of affairs clamouring for remedies, but there was an immense amount
of indifference and prejudice to be overcome before any remedies were
possible. Perhaps some day some industrious and lucid historian
will disentangle all the muddle of impulses and antagonisms, the
commercialism, utilitarianism, obstinate conservatism, humanitarian
enthusiasm, out of which our present educational organisation arose.
I have long since come to believe it necessary that all new social
institutions should be born in confusion, and that at first they should
present chiefly crude and ridiculous aspects. The distrust of government
in the Victorian days was far too great, and the general intelligence
far too low, to permit the State to go about the new business it was
taking up in a businesslike way, to train teachers, build and equip
schools, endow pedagogic research, and provide properly written
school-books. These things it was felt MUST be provided by individual
and local effort, and since it was manifest that it was individual
and local effort that were in default, it was reluctantly agreed to
stimulate them by money payments. The State set up a machinery of
examination both in Science and Art and for the elementary schools; and
payments, known technically as grants, were made in accordance with the
examination results attained, to such schools as Providence might see
fit to send into the world. In this way it was felt the Demand would
be established that would, according to the beliefs of that time,
inevitably ensure the Supply. An industry of "Grant earning" was
created, and this would give education as a necessary by-product.

In the end this belief was found to need qualification, but
Grant-earning was still in full activity when I was a small boy. So far
as the Science and Art Department and my father are concerned, the task
of examination was entrusted to eminent scientific men, for the most
part quite unaccustomed to teaching. You see, if they also were teaching
similar classes to those they examined, it was feared that injustice
might be done. Year after year these eminent persons set questions
and employed subordinates to read and mark the increasing thousands of
answers that ensued, and having no doubt the national ideal of fairness
well developed in their minds, they were careful each year to re-read
the preceding papers before composing the current one, in order to see
what it was usual to ask. As a result of this, in the course of a
few years the recurrence and permutation of questions became almost
calculable, and since the practical object of the teaching was to teach
people not science, but how to write answers to these questions, the
industry of Grant-earning assumed a form easily distinguished from any
kind of genuine education whatever.

Other remarkable compromises had also to be made with the spirit of the
age. The unfortunate conflict between Religion and Science prevalent at
this time was mitigated, if I remember rightly, by making graduates in
arts and priests in the established church Science Teachers EX OFFICIO,
and leaving local and private enterprise to provide schools, diagrams,
books, material, according to the conceptions of efficiency prevalent in
the district. Private enterprise made a particularly good thing of the
books. A number of competing firms of publishers sprang into existence
specialising in Science and Art Department work; they set themselves to
produce text-books that should supply exactly the quantity and quality
of knowledge necessary for every stage of each of five and twenty
subjects into which desirable science was divided, and copies and models
and instructions that should give precisely the method and gestures
esteemed as proficiency in art. Every section of each book was written
in the idiom found to be most satisfactory to the examiners, and test
questions extracted from papers set in former years were appended to
every chapter. By means of these last the teacher was able to train his
class to the very highest level of grant-earning efficiency, and very
naturally he cast all other methods of exposition aside. First he posed
his pupils with questions and then dictated model replies.

That was my father's method of instruction. I attended his classes as an
elementary grant-earner from the age of ten until his death, and it is
so I remember him, sitting on the edge of a table, smothering a yawn
occasionally and giving out the infallible formulae to the industriously
scribbling class sitting in rows of desks before him. Occasionally he
would slide to his feet and go to a blackboard on an easel and draw on
that very slowly and deliberately in coloured chalks a diagram for the
class to copy in coloured pencils, and sometimes he would display a
specimen or arrange an experiment for them to see. The room in the
Institute in which he taught was equipped with a certain amount of
apparatus prescribed as necessary for subject this and subject that by
the Science and Art Department, and this my father would supplement with
maps and diagrams and drawings of his own.

But he never really did experiments, except that in the class in
systematic botany he sometimes made us tease common flowers to pieces.
He did not do experiments if he could possibly help it, because in the
first place they used up time and gas for the Bunsen burner and good
material in a ruinous fashion, and in the second they were, in his
rather careless and sketchy hands, apt to endanger the apparatus of
the Institute and even the lives of his students. Then thirdly, real
experiments involved washing up. And moreover they always turned out
wrong, and sometimes misled the too observant learner very seriously
and opened demoralising controversies. Quite early in life I acquired an
almost ineradicable sense of the unscientific perversity of Nature and
the impassable gulf that is fixed between systematic science and elusive
fact. I knew, for example, that in science, whether it be subject XII.,
Organic Chemistry, or subject XVII., Animal Physiology, when you blow
into a glass of lime-water it instantly becomes cloudy, and if you
continue to blow it clears again, whereas in truth you may blow into the
stuff from the lime-water bottle until you are crimson in the face and
painful under the ears, and it never becomes cloudy at all. And I knew,
too, that in science if you put potassium chlorate into a retort and
heat it over a Bunsen burner, oxygen is disengaged and may be collected
over water, whereas in real life if you do anything of the sort the
vessel cracks with a loud report, the potassium chlorate descends
sizzling upon the flame, the experimenter says "Oh! Damn!" with
astonishing heartiness and distinctness, and a lady student in the back
seats gets up and leaves the room.

Science is the organised conquest of Nature, and I can quite understand
that ancient libertine refusing to co-operate in her own undoing. And I
can quite understand, too, my father's preference for what he called
an illustrative experiment, which was simply an arrangement of the
apparatus in front of the class with nothing whatever by way of
material, and the Bunsen burner clean and cool, and then a slow luminous
description of just what you did put in it when you were so ill-advised
as to carry the affair beyond illustration, and just exactly what ought
anyhow to happen when you did. He had considerable powers of vivid
expression, so that in this way he could make us see all he described.
The class, freed from any unpleasant nervous tension, could draw this
still life without flinching, and if any part was too difficult to draw,
then my father would produce a simplified version on the blackboard
to be copied instead. And he would also write on the blackboard any
exceptionally difficult but grant-earning words, such as "empyreumatic"
or "botryoidal."

Some words in constant use he rarely explained. I remember once sticking
up my hand and asking him in the full flow of description, "Please, sir,
what is flocculent?"

"The precipitate is."

"Yes, sir, but what does it mean?"

"Oh! flocculent!" said my father, "flocculent! Why--" he extended his
hand and arm and twiddled his fingers for a second in the air. "Like
that," he said.

I thought the explanation sufficient, but he paused for a moment after
giving it. "As in a flock bed, you know," he added and resumed his
discourse.


3

My father, I am afraid, carried a natural incompetence in practical
affairs to an exceptionally high level. He combined practical
incompetence, practical enterprise and a thoroughly sanguine
temperament, in a manner that I have never seen paralleled in any human
being. He was always trying to do new things in the briskest manner,
under the suggestion of books or papers or his own spontaneous
imagination, and as he had never been trained to do anything whatever
in his life properly, his futilities were extensive and thorough. At one
time he nearly gave up his classes for intensive culture, so enamoured
was he of its possibilities; the peculiar pungency of the manure he got,
in pursuit of a chemical theory of his own, has scarred my olfactory
memories for a lifetime. The intensive culture phase is very clear in my
memory; it came near the end of his career and when I was between eleven
and twelve. I was mobilised to gather caterpillars on several occasions,
and assisted in nocturnal raids upon the slugs by lantern-light that
wrecked my preparation work for school next day. My father dug up both
lawns, and trenched and manured in spasms of immense vigour alternating
with periods of paralysing distaste for the garden. And for weeks he
talked about eight hundred pounds an acre at every meal.

A garden, even when it is not exasperated by intensive methods, is a
thing as exacting as a baby, its moods have to be watched; it does
not wait upon the cultivator's convenience, but has times of its own.
Intensive culture greatly increases this disposition to trouble mankind;
it makes a garden touchy and hysterical, a drugged and demoralised and
over-irritated garden. My father got at cross purposes with our two
patches at an early stage. Everything grew wrong from the first to last,
and if my father's manures intensified nothing else, they certainly
intensified the Primordial Curse. The peas were eaten in the night
before they were three inches high, the beans bore nothing but blight,
the only apparent result of a spraying of the potatoes was to develop
a PENCHANT in the cat for being ill indoors, the cucumber frames were
damaged by the catapulting of boys going down the lane at the back,
and all your cucumbers were mysteriously embittered. That lane with its
occasional passers-by did much to wreck the intensive scheme, because my
father always stopped work and went indoors if any one watched him.
His special manure was apt to arouse a troublesome spirit of inquiry in
hardy natures.

In digging his rows and shaping his patches he neglected the guiding
string and trusted to his eye altogether too much, and the consequent
obliquity and the various wind-breaks and scare-crows he erected, and
particularly an irrigation contrivance he began and never finished by
which everything was to be watered at once by means of pieces of gutter
from the roof and outhouses of Number 2, and a large and particularly
obstinate clump of elder-bushes in the abolished hedge that he had
failed to destroy entirely either by axe or by fire, combined to give
the gardens under intensive culture a singularly desolate and disorderly
appearance. He took steps towards the diversion of our house drain under
the influence of the Sewage Utilisation Society; but happily he stopped
in time. He hardly completed any of the operations he began; something
else became more urgent or simply he tired; a considerable area of the
Number 2 territory was never even dug up.

In the end the affair irritated him beyond endurance. Never was a man
less horticulturally-minded. The clamour of these vegetables he had
launched into the world for his service and assistance, wore out his
patience. He would walk into the garden the happiest of men after a
day or so of disregard, talking to me of history perhaps or social
organisation, or summarising some book he had read. He talked to me
of anything that interested him, regardless of my limitations. Then he
would begin to note the growth of the weeds. "This won't do," he would
say and pull up a handful.

More weeding would follow and the talk would become fragmentary. His
hands would become earthy, his nails black, weeds would snap off in
his careless grip, leaving the roots behind. The world would darken.
He would look at his fingers with disgusted astonishment. "CURSE these
weeds!" he would say from his heart. His discourse was at an end.

I have memories, too, of his sudden unexpected charges into the
tranquillity of the house, his hands and clothes intensively enriched.
He would come in like a whirlwind. "This damned stuff all over me and
the Agricultural Chemistry Class at six! Bah! AAAAAAH!"

My mother would never learn not to attempt to break him of swearing
on such occasions. She would remain standing a little stiffly in the
scullery refusing to assist him to the adjectival towel he sought.

"If you say such things--"

He would dance with rage and hurl the soap about. "The towel!" he would
cry, flicking suds from big fingers in every direction; "the towel! I'll
let the blithering class slide if you don't give me the towel! I'll give
up everything, I tell you--everything!"...

At last with the failure of the lettuces came the breaking point. I was
in the little arbour learning Latin irregular verbs when it happened.
I can see him still, his peculiar tenor voice still echoes in my brain,
shouting his opinion of intensive culture for all the world to hear, and
slashing away at that abominable mockery of a crop with a hoe. We had
tied them up with bast only a week or so before, and now half were
rotten and half had shot up into tall slender growths. He had the hoe in
both hands and slogged. Great wipes he made, and at each stroke he said,
"Take that!"

The air was thick with flying fragments of abortive salad. It was a
fantastic massacre. It was the French Revolution of that cold tyranny,
the vindictive overthrow of the pampered vegetable aristocrats. After he
had assuaged his passion upon them, he turned for other prey; he kicked
holes in two of our noblest marrows, flicked off the heads of half a row
of artichokes, and shied the hoe with a splendid smash into the cucumber
frame. Something of the awe of that moment returns to me as I write of
it.

"Well, my boy," he said, approaching with an expression of beneficent
happiness, "I've done with gardening. Let's go for a walk like
reasonable beings. I've had enough of this"--his face was convulsed for
an instant with bitter resentment--"Pandering to cabbages."


4

That afternoon's walk sticks in my memory for many reasons. One is
that we went further than I had ever been before; far beyond Keston and
nearly to Seven-oaks, coming back by train from Dunton Green, and the
other is that my father as he went along talked about himself, not so
much to me as to himself, and about life and what he had done with
it. He monologued so that at times he produced an effect of weird
world-forgetfulness. I listened puzzled, and at that time not
understanding many things that afterwards became plain to me. It is only
in recent years that I have discovered the pathos of that monologue; how
friendless my father was and uncompanioned in his thoughts and feelings,
and what a hunger he may have felt for the sympathy of the undeveloped
youngster who trotted by his side.

"I'm no gardener," he said, "I'm no anything. Why the devil did I start
gardening?

"I suppose man was created to mind a garden... But the Fall let us out
of that! What was I created for? God! what was I created for?...

"Slaves to matter! Minding inanimate things! It doesn't suit me, you
know. I've got no hands and no patience. I've mucked about with life.
Mucked about with life." He suddenly addressed himself to me, and for
an instant I started like an eavesdropper discovered. "Whatever you do,
boy, whatever you do, make a Plan. Make a good Plan and stick to it.
Find out what life is about--I never have--and set yourself to do
whatever you ought to do. I admit it's a puzzle....

"Those damned houses have been the curse of my life. Stucco white
elephants! Beastly cracked stucco with stains of green--black and green.
Conferva and soot.... Property, they are!... Beware of Things, Dick,
beware of Things! Before you know where you are you are waiting on them
and minding them. They'll eat your life up. Eat up your hours and your
blood and energy! When those houses came to me, I ought to have
sold them--or fled the country. I ought to have cleared out.
Sarcophagi--eaters of men! Oh! the hours and days of work, the nights
of anxiety those vile houses have cost me! The painting! It worked up
my arms; it got all over me. I stank of it. It made me ill. It isn't
living--it's minding....

"Property's the curse of life. Property! Ugh! Look at this country all
cut up into silly little parallelograms, look at all those villas we
passed just now and those potato patches and that tarred shanty and the
hedge! Somebody's minding every bit of it like a dog tied to a cart's
tail. Patching it and bothering about it. Bothering! Yapping at every
passer-by. Look at that notice-board! One rotten worried little beast
wants to keep us other rotten little beasts off HIS patch,--God knows
why! Look at the weeds in it. Look at the mended fence!... There's no
property worth having, Dick, but money. That's only good to spend.
All these things. Human souls buried under a cartload of blithering
rubbish....

"I'm not a fool, Dick. I have qualities, imagination, a sort of go. I
ought to have made a better thing of life.

"I'm sure I could have done things. Only the old people pulled my leg.
They started me wrong. They never started me at all. I only began to
find out what life was like when I was nearly forty.

"If I'd gone to a university; if I'd had any sort of sound training, if
I hadn't slipped into the haphazard places that came easiest....

"Nobody warned me. Nobody. It isn't a world we live in, Dick; it's a
cascade of accidents; it's a chaos exasperated by policemen! YOU be
warned in time, Dick. You stick to a plan. Don't wait for any one to
show you the way. Nobody will. There isn't a way till you make one. Get
education, get a good education. Fight your way to the top. It's your
only chance. I've watched you. You'll do no good at digging and property
minding. There isn't a neighbour in Bromstead won't be able to skin you
at suchlike games. You and I are the brainy unstable kind, topside or
nothing. And if ever those blithering houses come to you--don't have
'em. Give them away! Dynamite 'em--and off! LIVE, Dick! I'll get rid of
them for you if I can, Dick, but remember what I say."...

So it was my father discoursed, if not in those particular words, yet
exactly in that manner, as he slouched along the southward road, with
resentful eyes becoming less resentful as he talked, and flinging out
clumsy illustrative motions at the outskirts of Bromstead as we passed
along them. That afternoon he hated Bromstead, from its foot-tiring
pebbles up. He had no illusions about Bromstead or himself. I have
the clearest impression of him in his garden-stained tweeds with a
deer-stalker hat on the back of his head and presently a pipe sometimes
between his teeth and sometimes in his gesticulating hand, as he became
diverted by his talk from his original exasperation....

This particular afternoon is no doubt mixed up in my memory with
many other afternoons; all sorts of things my father said and did at
different times have got themselves referred to it; it filled me at the
time with a great unprecedented sense of fellowship and it has become
the symbol now for all our intercourse together. If I didn't understand
the things he said, I did the mood he was in. He gave me two very broad
ideas in that talk and the talks I have mingled with it; he gave them
to me very clearly and they have remained fundamental in my mind; one a
sense of the extraordinary confusion and waste and planlessness of the
human life that went on all about us; and the other of a great ideal of
order and economy which he called variously Science and Civilisation,
and which, though I do not remember that he ever used that word, I
suppose many people nowadays would identify with Socialism,--as the
Fabians expound it.

He was not very definite about this Science, you must understand, but
he seemed always to be waving his hand towards it,--just as his
contemporary Tennyson seems always to be doing--he belonged to his age
and mostly his talk was destructive of the limited beliefs of his time,
he led me to infer rather than actually told me that this Science was
coming, a spirit of light and order, to the rescue of a world groaning
and travailing in muddle for the want of it....


5

When I think of Bromstead nowadays I find it inseparably bound up
with the disorders of my father's gardening, and the odd patchings and
paintings that disfigured his houses. It was all of a piece with that.

Let me try and give something of the quality of Bromstead and something
of its history. It is the quality and history of a thousand places
round and about London, and round and about the other great centres of
population in the world. Indeed it is in a measure the quality of
the whole of this modern world from which we who have the statesman's
passion struggle to evolve, and dream still of evolving order.

First, then, you must think of Bromstead a hundred and fifty years ago,
as a narrow irregular little street of thatched houses strung out on
the London and Dover Road, a little mellow sample unit of a social order
that had a kind of completeness, at its level, of its own. At that
time its population numbered a little under two thousand people, mostly
engaged in agricultural work or in trades serving agriculture. There was
a blacksmith, a saddler, a chemist, a doctor, a barber, a linen-draper
(who brewed his own beer); a veterinary surgeon, a hardware shop,
and two capacious inns. Round and about it were a number of pleasant
gentlemen's seats, whose owners went frequently to London town in their
coaches along the very tolerable high-road. The church was big enough
to hold the whole population, were people minded to go to church, and
indeed a large proportion did go, and all who married were married in
it, and everybody, to begin with, was christened at its font and buried
at last in its yew-shaded graveyard. Everybody knew everybody in the
place. It was, in fact, a definite place and a real human community in
those days. There was a pleasant old market-house in the middle of the
town with a weekly market, and an annual fair at which much cheerful
merry making and homely intoxication occurred; there was a pack of
hounds which hunted within five miles of London Bridge, and the local
gentry would occasionally enliven the place with valiant cricket matches
for a hundred guineas a side, to the vast excitement of the entire
population. It was very much the same sort of place that it had been for
three or four centuries. A Bromstead Rip van Winkle from 1550 returning
in 1750 would have found most of the old houses still as he had known
them, the same trades a little improved and differentiated one from the
other, the same roads rather more carefully tended, the Inns not very
much altered, the ancient familiar market-house. The occasional wheeled
traffic would have struck him as the most remarkable difference, next
perhaps to the swaggering painted stone monuments instead of brasses
and the protestant severity of the communion-table in the parish
church,--both from the material point of view very little things. A
Rip van Winkle from 1350, again, would have noticed scarcely greater
changes; fewer clergy, more people, and particularly more people of
the middling sort; the glass in the windows of many of the houses, the
stylish chimneys springing up everywhere would have impressed him, and
suchlike details. The place would have had the same boundaries, the same
broad essential features, would have been still itself in the way that
a man is still himself after he has "filled out" a little and grown a
longer beard and changed his clothes.

But after 1750 something got hold of the world, something that was
destined to alter the scale of every human affair.

That something was machinery and a vague energetic disposition to
improve material things. In another part of England ingenious people
were beginning to use coal in smelting iron, and were producing metal
in abundance and metal castings in sizes that had hitherto been
unattainable. Without warning or preparation, increment involving
countless possibilities of further increment was coming to the strength
of horses and men. "Power," all unsuspected, was flowing like a drug
into the veins of the social body.

Nobody seems to have perceived this coming of power, and nobody had
calculated its probable consequences. Suddenly, almost inadvertently,
people found themselves doing things that would have amazed their
ancestors. They began to construct wheeled vehicles much more easily and
cheaply than they had ever done before, to make up roads and move things
about that had formerly been esteemed too heavy for locomotion, to join
woodwork with iron nails instead of wooden pegs, to achieve all sorts
of mechanical possibilities, to trade more freely and manufacture on a
larger scale, to send goods abroad in a wholesale and systematic way,
to bring back commodities from overseas, not simply spices and fine
commodities, but goods in bulk. The new influence spread to agriculture,
iron appliances replaced wooden, breeding of stock became systematic,
paper-making and printing increased and cheapened. Roofs of slate and
tile appeared amidst and presently prevailed over the original Bromstead
thatch, the huge space of Common to the south was extensively enclosed,
and what had been an ill-defined horse-track to Dover, only passable
by adventurous coaches in dry weather, became the Dover Road, and was
presently the route first of one and then of several daily coaches.
The High Street was discovered to be too tortuous for these awakening
energies, and a new road cut off its worst contortions. Residential
villas appeared occupied by retired tradesmen and widows, who esteemed
the place healthy, and by others of a strange new unoccupied class of
people who had money invested in joint-stock enterprises. First one
and then several boys' boarding-schools came, drawing their pupils from
London,--my grandfather's was one of these. London, twelve miles to the
north-west, was making itself felt more and more.

But this was only the beginning of the growth period, the first trickle
of the coming flood of mechanical power. Away in the north they were
casting iron in bigger and bigger forms, working their way to the
production of steel on a large scale, applying power in factories.
Bromstead had almost doubted in size again long before the railway came;
there was hardly any thatch left in the High Street, but instead were
houses with handsome brass-knockered front doors and several windows,
and shops with shop-fronts all of square glass panes, and the place was
lighted publicly now by oil lamps--previously only one flickering lamp
outside each of the coaching inns had broken the nocturnal darkness.
And there was talk, it long remained talk,--of gas. The gasworks came in
1834, and about that date my father's three houses must have been built
convenient for the London Road. They mark nearly the beginning of the
real suburban quality; they were let at first to City people still
engaged in business.

And then hard on the gasworks had come the railway and cheap coal; there
was a wild outbreak of brickfields upon the claylands to the east, and
the Great Growth had begun in earnest. The agricultural placidities that
had formerly come to the very borders of the High Street were broken up
north, west and south, by new roads. This enterprising person and then
that began to "run up" houses, irrespective of every other enterprising
person who was doing the same thing. A Local Board came into existence,
and with much hesitation and penny-wise economy inaugurated drainage
works. Rates became a common topic, a fact of accumulating importance.
Several chapels of zinc and iron appeared, and also a white new church
in commercial Gothic upon the common, and another of red brick in the
residential district out beyond the brickfields towards Chessington.

The population doubled again and doubled again, and became particularly
teeming in the prolific "working-class" district about the deep-rutted,
muddy, coal-blackened roads between the gasworks, Blodgett's laundries,
and the railway goods-yard. Weekly properties, that is to say small
houses built by small property owners and let by the week, sprang up
also in the Cage Fields, and presently extended right up the London
Road. A single national school in an inconvenient situation set itself
inadequately to collect subscriptions and teach the swarming, sniffing,
grimy offspring of this dingy new population to read. The villages of
Beckington, which used to be three miles to the west, and Blamely four
miles to the east of Bromstead, were experiencing similar distensions
and proliferations, and grew out to meet us. All effect of locality or
community had gone from these places long before I was born; hardly any
one knew any one; there was no general meeting place any more, the old
fairs were just common nuisances haunted by gypsies, van showmen, Cheap
Jacks and London roughs, the churches were incapable of a quarter of the
population. One or two local papers of shameless veniality reported the
proceedings of the local Bench and the local Board, compelled tradesmen
who were interested in these affairs to advertise, used the epithet
"Bromstedian" as one expressing peculiar virtues, and so maintained in
the general mind a weak tradition of some local quality that embraced
us all. Then the parish graveyard filled up and became a scandal, and
an ambitious area with an air of appetite was walled in by a Bromstead
Cemetery Company, and planted with suitably high-minded and sorrowful
varieties of conifer. A stonemason took one of the earlier villas with
a front garden at the end of the High Street, and displayed a supply
of urns on pillars and headstones and crosses in stone, marble, and
granite, that would have sufficed to commemorate in elaborate detail the
entire population of Bromstead as one found it in 1750.

The cemetery was made when I was a little boy of five or six; I was in
the full tide of building and growth from the first; the second railway
with its station at Bromstead North and the drainage followed when I was
ten or eleven, and all my childish memories are of digging and wheeling,
of woods invaded by building, roads gashed open and littered with iron
pipes amidst a fearful smell of gas, of men peeped at and seen toiling
away deep down in excavations, of hedges broken down and replaced by
planks, of wheelbarrows and builders' sheds, of rivulets overtaken and
swallowed up by drain-pipes. Big trees, and especially elms, cleared
of undergrowth and left standing amid such things, acquired a peculiar
tattered dinginess rather in the quality of needy widow women who have
seen happier days.

The Ravensbrook of my earlier memories was a beautiful stream. It came
into my world out of a mysterious Beyond, out of a garden, splashing
brightly down a weir which had once been the weir of a mill. (Above the
weir and inaccessible there were bulrushes growing in splendid clumps,
and beyond that, pampas grass, yellow and crimson spikes of hollyhock,
and blue suggestions of wonderland.) From the pool at the foot of
this initial cascade it flowed in a leisurely fashion beside a
footpath,--there were two pretty thatched cottages on the left, and here
were ducks, and there were willows on the right,--and so came to where
great trees grew on high banks on either hand and bowed closer, and at
last met overhead. This part was difficult to reach because of an old
fence, but a little boy might glimpse that long cavern of greenery by
wading. Either I have actually seen kingfishers there, or my father has
described them so accurately to me that he inserted them into my
memory. I remember them there anyhow. Most of that overhung part I never
penetrated at all, but followed the field path with my mother and met
the stream again, where beyond there were flat meadows, Roper's meadows.
The Ravensbrook went meandering across the middle of these, now between
steep banks, and now with wide shallows at the bends where the cattle
waded and drank. Yellow and purple loose-strife and ordinary rushes grew
in clumps along the bank, and now and then a willow. On rare occasions
of rapture one might see a rat cleaning his whiskers at the water's
edge. The deep places were rich with tangled weeds, and in them fishes
lurked--to me they were big fishes--water-boatmen and water-beetles
traversed the calm surface of these still deeps; in one pool were yellow
lilies and water-soldiers, and in the shoaly places hovering fleets of
small fry basked in the sunshine--to vanish in a flash at one's shadow.
In one place, too, were Rapids, where the stream woke with a start from
a dreamless brooding into foaming panic and babbled and hastened. Well
do I remember that half-mile of rivulet; all other rivers and cascades
have their reference to it for me. And after I was eleven, and before we
left Bromstead, all the delight and beauty of it was destroyed.

The volume of its water decreased abruptly--I suppose the new drainage
works that linked us up with Beckington, and made me first acquainted
with the geological quality of the London clay, had to do with
that--until only a weak uncleansing trickle remained. That at first
did not strike me as a misfortune. An adventurous small boy might walk
dryshod in places hitherto inaccessible. But hard upon that came the
pegs, the planks and carts and devastation. Roper's meadows, being no
longer in fear of floods, were now to be slashed out into parallelograms
of untidy road, and built upon with rows of working-class cottages. The
roads came,--horribly; the houses followed. They seemed to rise in
the night. People moved into them as soon as the roofs were on, mostly
workmen and their young wives, and already in a year some of these raw
houses stood empty again from defaulting tenants, with windows broken
and wood-work warping and rotting. The Ravensbrook became a dump for
old iron, rusty cans, abandoned boots and the like, and was a river
only when unusual rains filled it for a day or so with an inky flood of
surface water....

That indeed was my most striking perception in the growth of Bromstead.
The Ravensbrook had been important to my imaginative life; that way
had always been my first choice in all my walks with my mother, and its
rapid swamping by the new urban growth made it indicative of all the
other things that had happened just before my time, or were still, at a
less dramatic pace, happening. I realised that building was the enemy.
I began to understand why in every direction out of Bromstead one walked
past scaffold-poles into litter, why fragments of broken brick and
cinder mingled in every path, and the significance of the universal
notice-boards, either white and new or a year old and torn and battered,
promising sites, proffering houses to be sold or let, abusing and
intimidating passers-by for fancied trespass, and protecting rights of
way.

It is difficult to disentangle now what I understood at this time and
what I have since come to understand, but it seems to me that even
in those childish days I was acutely aware of an invading and growing
disorder. The serene rhythms of the old established agriculture, I see
now, were everywhere being replaced by cultivation under notice and
snatch crops; hedges ceased to be repaired, and were replaced by cheap
iron railings or chunks of corrugated iron; more and more hoardings
sprang up, and contributed more and more to the nomad tribes of filthy
paper scraps that flew before the wind and overspread the country.
The outskirts of Bromstead were a maze of exploitation roads that
led nowhere, that ended in tarred fences studded with nails (I don't
remember barbed wire in those days; I think the Zeitgeist did not
produce that until later), and in trespass boards that used vehement
language. Broken glass, tin cans, and ashes and paper abounded. Cheap
glass, cheap tin, abundant fuel, and a free untaxed Press had rushed
upon a world quite unprepared to dispose of these blessings when the
fulness of enjoyment was past.

I suppose one might have persuaded oneself that all this was but the
replacement of an ancient tranquillity, or at least an ancient balance,
by a new order. Only to my eyes, quickened by my father's intimations,
it was manifestly no order at all. It was a multitude of incoordinated
fresh starts, each more sweeping and destructive than the last, and none
of them ever really worked out to a ripe and satisfactory completion.
Each left a legacy of products, houses, humanity, or what not, in its
wake. It was a sort of progress that had bolted; it was change out of
hand, and going at an unprecedented pace nowhere in particular.

No, the Victorian epoch was not the dawn of a new era; it was a hasty,
trial experiment, a gigantic experiment of the most slovenly and
wasteful kind. I suppose it was necessary; I suppose all things are
necessary. I suppose that before men will discipline themselves to learn
and plan, they must first see in a hundred convincing forms the folly
and muddle that come from headlong, aimless and haphazard methods.
The nineteenth century was an age of demonstrations, some of them very
impressive demonstrations, of the powers that have come to mankind, but
of permanent achievement, what will our descendants cherish? It is hard
to estimate what grains of precious metal may not be found in a mud
torrent of human production on so large a scale, but will any one, a
hundred years from now, consent to live in the houses the Victorians
built, travel by their roads or railways, value the furnishings they
made to live among or esteem, except for curious or historical reasons,
their prevalent art and the clipped and limited literature that
satisfied their souls?

That age which bore me was indeed a world full of restricted and
undisciplined people, overtaken by power, by possessions and great
new freedoms, and unable to make any civilised use of them whatever;
stricken now by this idea and now by that, tempted first by one
possession and then another to ill-considered attempts; it was my
father's exploitation of his villa gardens on the wholesale level. The
whole of Bromstead as I remember it, and as I saw it last--it is a year
ago now--is a dull useless boiling-up of human activities, an immense
clustering of futilities. It is as unfinished as ever; the builders'
roads still run out and end in mid-field in their old fashion; the
various enterprises jumble in the same hopeless contradiction, if
anything intensified. Pretentious villas jostle slums, and public-house
and tin tabernacle glower at one another across the cat-haunted lot that
intervenes. Roper's meadows are now quite frankly a slum; back doors and
sculleries gape towards the railway, their yards are hung with tattered
washing unashamed; and there seem to be more boards by the railway every
time I pass, advertising pills and pickles, tonics and condiments, and
suchlike solicitudes of a people with no natural health nor appetite
left in them....

Well, we have to do better. Failure is not failure nor waste wasted if
it sweeps away illusion and lights the road to a plan.


6

Chaotic indiscipline, ill-adjusted effort, spasmodic aims, these give
the quality of all my Bromstead memories. The crowning one of them all
rises to desolating tragedy. I remember now the wan spring sunshine of
that Sunday morning, the stiff feeling of best clothes and aggressive
cleanliness and formality, when I and my mother returned from church to
find my father dead. He had been pruning the grape vine. He had
never had a ladder long enough to reach the sill of the third-floor
windows--at house-painting times he had borrowed one from the plumber
who mixed his paint--and he had in his own happy-go-lucky way contrived
a combination of the garden fruit ladder with a battered kitchen table
that served all sorts of odd purposes in an outhouse. He had stayed up
this arrangement by means of the garden roller, and the roller had at
the critical moment--rolled. He was lying close by the garden door with
his head queerly bent back against a broken and twisted rainwater pipe,
an expression of pacific contentment on his face, a bamboo curtain rod
with a tableknife tied to end of it, still gripped in his hand. We had
been rapping for some time at the front door unable to make him hear,
and then we came round by the door in the side trellis into the garden
and so discovered him.

"Arthur!" I remember my mother crying with the strangest break in her
voice, "What are you doing there? Arthur! And--SUNDAY!"

I was coming behind her, musing remotely, when the quality of her voice
roused me. She stood as if she could not go near him. He had always
puzzled her so, he and his ways, and this seemed only another enigma.
Then the truth dawned on her, she shrieked as if afraid of him, ran a
dozen steps back towards the trellis door and stopped and clasped her
ineffectual gloved hands, leaving me staring blankly, too astonished for
feeling, at the carelessly flung limbs.

The same idea came to me also. I ran to her. "Mother!" I cried, pale to
the depths of my spirit, "IS HE DEAD?"

I had been thinking two minutes before of the cold fruit pie that
glorified our Sunday dinner-table, and how I might perhaps get into the
tree at the end of the garden to read in the afternoon. Now an immense
fact had come down like a curtain and blotted out all my childish world.
My father was lying dead before my eyes.... I perceived that my mother
was helpless and that things must be done.

"Mother!" I said, "we must get Doctor Beaseley,--and carry him indoors."



CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ SCHOLASTIC


1

My formal education began in a small preparatory school in Bromstead.
I went there as a day boy. The charge for my instruction was mainly set
off by the periodic visits of my father with a large bag of battered
fossils to lecture to us upon geology. I was one of those fortunate
youngsters who take readily to school work, I had a good memory,
versatile interests and a considerable appetite for commendation, and
when I was barely twelve I got a scholarship at the City Merchants
School and was entrusted with a scholar's railway season ticket to
Victoria. After my father's death a large and very animated and solidly
built uncle in tweeds from Staffordshire, Uncle Minter, my mother's
sister's husband, with a remarkable accent and remarkable vowel sounds,
who had plunged into the Bromstead home once or twice for the night but
who was otherwise unknown to me, came on the scene, sold off the
three gaunt houses with the utmost gusto, invested the proceeds and my
father's life insurance money, and got us into a small villa at Penge
within sight of that immense facade of glass and iron, the Crystal
Palace. Then he retired in a mood of good-natured contempt to his native
habitat again. We stayed at Penge until my mother's death.

School became a large part of the world to me, absorbing my time and
interest, and I never acquired that detailed and intimate knowledge of
Penge and the hilly villadom round about, that I have of the town and
outskirts of Bromstead.

It was a district of very much the same character, but it was more
completely urbanised and nearer to the centre of things; there were
the same unfinished roads, the same occasional disconcerted hedges and
trees, the same butcher's horse grazing under a builder's notice-board,
the same incidental lapses into slum. The Crystal Palace grounds cut off
a large part of my walking radius to the west with impassable fences
and forbiddingly expensive turnstiles, but it added to the ordinary
spectacle of meteorology a great variety of gratuitous fireworks which
banged and flared away of a night after supper and drew me abroad to see
them better. Such walks as I took, to Croydon, Wembledon, West Wickham
and Greenwich, impressed upon me the interminable extent of London's
residential suburbs; mile after mile one went, between houses, villas,
rows of cottages, streets of shops, under railway arches, over railway
bridges. I have forgotten the detailed local characteristics--if there
were any--of much of that region altogether. I was only there two years,
and half my perambulations occurred at dusk or after dark. But with
Penge I associate my first realisations of the wonder and beauty of
twilight and night, the effect of dark walls reflecting lamplight, and
the mystery of blue haze-veiled hillsides of houses, the glare of shops
by night, the glowing steam and streaming sparks of railway trains and
railway signals lit up in the darkness. My first rambles in the evening
occurred at Penge--I was becoming a big and independent-spirited
boy--and I began my experience of smoking during these twilight prowls
with the threepenny packets of American cigarettes then just appearing
in the world.

My life centred upon the City Merchants School. Usually I caught the
eight-eighteen for Victoria, I had a midday meal and tea; four nights a
week I stayed for preparation, and often I was not back home again until
within an hour of my bedtime. I spent my half holidays at school
in order to play cricket and football. This, and a pretty voracious
appetite for miscellaneous reading which was fostered by the Penge
Middleton Library, did not leave me much leisure for local topography.
On Sundays also I sang in the choir at St. Martin's Church, and my
mother did not like me to walk out alone on the Sabbath afternoon, she
herself slumbered, so that I wrote or read at home. I must confess I was
at home as little as I could contrive.

Home, after my father's death, had become a very quiet and uneventful
place indeed. My mother had either an unimaginative temperament or her
mind was greatly occupied with private religious solicitudes, and I
remember her talking to me but little, and that usually upon topics
I was anxious to evade. I had developed my own view about low-Church
theology long before my father's death, and my meditation upon that
event had finished my secret estrangement from my mother's faith. My
reason would not permit even a remote chance of his being in hell, he
was so manifestly not evil, and this religion would not permit him a
remote chance of being out yet. When I was a little boy my mother had
taught me to read and write and pray and had done many things for me,
indeed she persisted in washing me and even in making my clothes until I
rebelled against these things as indignities. But our minds parted very
soon. She never began to understand the mental processes of my play,
she never interested herself in my school life and work, she could not
understand things I said; and she came, I think, quite insensibly to
regard me with something of the same hopeless perplexity she had felt
towards my father.

Him she must have wedded under considerable delusions. I do not think
he deceived her, indeed, nor do I suspect him of mercenariness in
their union; but no doubt he played up to her requirements in the half
ingenuous way that was and still is the quality of most wooing, and
presented himself as a very brisk and orthodox young man. I wonder why
nearly all love-making has to be fraudulent. Afterwards he must have
disappointed her cruelly by letting one aspect after another of his
careless, sceptical, experimental temperament appear. Her mind was fixed
and definite, she embodied all that confidence in church and decorum and
the assurances of the pulpit which was characteristic of the large mass
of the English people--for after all, the rather low-Church section WAS
the largest single mass--in early Victorian times. She had dreams, I
suspect, of going to church with him side by side; she in a little
poke bonnet and a large flounced crinoline, all mauve and magenta and
starched under a little lace-trimmed parasol, and he in a tall silk hat
and peg-top trousers and a roll-collar coat, and looking rather like
the Prince Consort,--white angels almost visibly raining benedictions on
their amiable progress. Perhaps she dreamt gently of much-belaced babies
and an interestingly pious (but not too dissenting or fanatical) little
girl or boy or so, also angel-haunted. And I think, too, she must have
seen herself ruling a seemly "home of taste," with a vivarium in the
conservatory that opened out of the drawing-room, or again, making
preserves in the kitchen. My father's science-teaching, his diagrams
of disembowelled humanity, his pictures of prehistoric beasts that
contradicted the Flood, his disposition towards soft shirts and loose
tweed suits, his inability to use a clothes brush, his spasmodic reading
fits and his bulldog pipes, must have jarred cruelly with her rather
unintelligent anticipations. His wild moments of violent temper when he
would swear and smash things, absurd almost lovable storms that passed
like summer thunder, must have been starkly dreadful to her. She
was constitutionally inadaptable, and certainly made no attempt to
understand or tolerate these outbreaks. She tried them by her standards,
and by her standards they were wrong. Her standards hid him from her.
The blazing things he said rankled in her mind unforgettably.

As I remember them together they chafed constantly. Her attitude
to nearly all his moods and all his enterprises was a sceptical
disapproval. She treated him as something that belonged to me and not
to her. "YOUR father," she used to call him, as though I had got him for
her.

She had married late and she had, I think, become mentally
self-subsisting before her marriage. Even in those Herne Hill days
I used to wonder what was going on in her mind, and I find that old
speculative curiosity return as I write this. She took a considerable
interest in the housework that our generally servantless condition put
upon her--she used to have a charwoman in two or three times a week--but
she did not do it with any great skill. She covered most of our
furniture with flouncey ill-fitting covers, and she cooked plainly and
without very much judgment. The Penge house, as it contained nearly
all our Bromstead things, was crowded with furniture, and is chiefly
associated in my mind with the smell of turpentine, a condiment she used
very freely upon the veneered mahogany pieces. My mother had an equal
dread of "blacks" by day and the "night air," so that our brightly clean
windows were rarely open.

She took a morning paper, and she would open it and glance at the
headlines, but she did not read it until the afternoon and then, I
think, she was interested only in the more violent crimes, and in
railway and mine disasters and in the minutest domesticities of the
Royal Family. Most of the books at home were my father's, and I do not
think she opened any of them. She had one or two volumes that dated from
her own youth, and she tried in vain to interest me in them; there was
Miss Strickland's QUEENS OF ENGLAND, a book I remember with particular
animosity, and QUEECHY and the WIDE WIDE WORLD. She made these books of
hers into a class apart by sewing outer covers upon them of calico and
figured muslin. To me in these habiliments they seemed not so much books
as confederated old ladies.

My mother was also very punctual with her religious duties, and rejoiced
to watch me in the choir.

On winter evenings she occupied an armchair on the other side of the
table at which I sat, head on hand reading, and she would be darning
stockings or socks or the like. We achieved an effect of rather stuffy
comfortableness that was soporific, and in a passive way I think she
found these among her happy times. On such occasions she was wont to put
her work down on her knees and fall into a sort of thoughtless musing
that would last for long intervals and rouse my curiosity. For like most
young people I could not imagine mental states without definite forms.

She carried on a correspondence with a number of cousins and friends,
writing letters in a slanting Italian hand and dealing mainly with
births, marriages and deaths, business starts (in the vaguest terms) and
the distresses of bankruptcy.

And yet, you know, she did have a curious intimate life of her own that
I suspected nothing of at the time, that only now becomes credible
to me. She kept a diary that is still in my possession, a diary of
fragmentary entries in a miscellaneous collection of pocket books. She
put down the texts of the sermons she heard, and queer stiff little
comments on casual visitors,--"Miss G. and much noisy shrieking talk
about games and such frivolities and CROQUAY. A. delighted and VERY
ATTENTIVE." Such little human entries abound. She had an odd way of
never writing a name, only an initial; my father is always "A.," and I
am always "D." It is manifest she followed the domestic events in the
life of the Princess of Wales, who is now Queen Mother, with peculiar
interest and sympathy. "Pray G. all may be well," she writes in one such
crisis.

But there are things about myself that I still find too poignant to tell
easily, certain painful and clumsy circumstances of my birth in very
great detail, the distresses of my infantile ailments. Then later I
find such things as this: "Heard D. s----." The "s" is evidently "swear
"--"G. bless and keep my boy from evil." And again, with the thin
handwriting shaken by distress: "D. would not go to church, and hardened
his heart and said wicked infidel things, much disrespect of the clergy.
The anthem is tiresome!!! That men should set up to be wiser than
their maker!!!" Then trebly underlined: "I FEAR HIS FATHER'S TEACHING."
Dreadful little tangle of misapprehensions and false judgments! More
comforting for me to read, "D. very kind and good. He grows more
thoughtful every day." I suspect myself of forgotten hypocrisies.

At just one point my mother's papers seem to dip deeper. I think the
death of my father must have stirred her for the first time for many
years to think for herself. Even she could not go on living in any peace
at all, believing that he had indeed been flung headlong into hell. Of
this gnawing solicitude she never spoke to me, never, and for her diary
also she could find no phrases. But on a loose half-sheet of notepaper
between its pages I find this passage that follows, written very
carefully. I do not know whose lines they are nor how she came upon
them. They run:--

     "And if there be no meeting past the grave;
      If all is darkness, silence, yet 'tis rest.
      Be not afraid ye waiting hearts that weep,
      For God still giveth His beloved sleep,
      And if an endless sleep He wills, so best."

That scrap of verse amazed me when I read it. I could even wonder if my
mother really grasped the import of what she had copied out. It affected
me as if a stone-deaf person had suddenly turned and joined in a
whispered conversation. It set me thinking how far a mind in its general
effect quite hopelessly limited, might range. After that I went through
all her diaries, trying to find something more than a conventional term
of tenderness for my father. But I found nothing. And yet somehow there
grew upon me the realisation that there had been love.... Her love for
me, on the other hand, was abundantly expressed.

I knew nothing of that secret life of feeling at the time; such
expression as it found was all beyond my schoolboy range. I did not know
when I pleased her and I did not know when I distressed her. Chiefly
I was aware of my mother as rather dull company, as a mind thorny with
irrational conclusions and incapable of explication, as one believing
quite wilfully and irritatingly in impossible things. So I suppose it
had to be; life was coming to me in new forms and with new requirements.
It was essential to our situation that we should fail to understand.
After this space of years I have come to realisations and attitudes that
dissolve my estrangement from her, I can pierce these barriers, I
can see her and feel her as a loving and feeling and desiring and
muddle-headed person. There are times when I would have her alive again,
if only that I might be kind to her for a little while and give her
some return for the narrow intense affection, the tender desires, she
evidently lavished so abundantly on me. But then again I ask how I
could make that return? And I realise the futility of such dreaming. Her
demand was rigid, and to meet it I should need to act and lie.

So she whose blood fed me, whose body made me, lies in my memory as I
saw her last, fixed, still, infinitely intimate, infinitely remote....

My own case with my mother, however, does not awaken the same regret I
feel when I think of how she misjudged and irked my father, and turned
his weaknesses into thorns for her own tormenting. I wish I could look
back without that little twinge to two people who were both in their
different quality so good. But goodness that is narrow is a pedestrian
and ineffectual goodness. Her attitude to my father seems to me one of
the essentially tragic things that have come to me personally, one of
those things that nothing can transfigure, that REMAIN sorrowful, that I
cannot soothe with any explanation, for as I remember him he was indeed
the most lovable of weak spasmodic men. But my mother had been trained
in a hard and narrow system that made evil out of many things not in
the least evil, and inculcated neither kindliness nor charity. All their
estrangement followed from that.

These cramping cults do indeed take an enormous toll of human love
and happiness, and not only that but what we Machiavellians must needs
consider, they make frightful breaches in human solidarity. I suppose I
am a deeply religious man, as men of my quality go, but I hate more
and more, as I grow older, the shadow of intolerance cast by religious
organisations. All my life has been darkened by irrational intolerance,
by arbitrary irrational prohibitions and exclusions. Mahometanism
with its fierce proselytism, has, I suppose, the blackest record of
uncharitableness, but most of the Christian sects are tainted, tainted
to a degree beyond any of the anterior paganisms, with this same hateful
quality. It is their exclusive claim that sends them wrong, the vain
ambition that inspires them all to teach a uniform one-sided God and be
the one and only gateway to salvation. Deprecation of all outside the
household of faith, an organised undervaluation of heretical goodness
and lovableness, follows, necessarily. Every petty difference is
exaggerated to the quality of a saving grace or a damning defect.
Elaborate precautions are taken to shield the believer's mind against
broad or amiable suggestions; the faithful are deterred by dark
allusions, by sinister warnings, from books, from theatres, from
worldly conversation, from all the kindly instruments that mingle human
sympathy. For only by isolating its flock can the organisation survive.

Every month there came to my mother a little magazine called, if I
remember rightly, the HOME CHURCHMAN, with the combined authority of
print and clerical commendation. It was the most evil thing that ever
came into the house, a very devil, a thin little pamphlet with
one woodcut illustration on the front page of each number; now the
uninviting visage of some exponent of the real and only doctrine and
attitudes, now some coral strand in act of welcoming the missionaries of
God's mysterious preferences, now a new church in the Victorian Gothic.
The vile rag it was! A score of vices that shun the policeman have
nothing of its subtle wickedness. It was an outrage upon the natural
kindliness of men. The contents were all admirably adjusted to keep a
spirit in prison. Their force of sustained suggestion was tremendous.
There would be dreadful intimations of the swift retribution that fell
upon individuals for Sabbath-breaking, and upon nations for weakening
towards Ritualism, or treating Roman Catholics as tolerable human
beings; there would be great rejoicings over the conversion of alleged
Jews, and terrible descriptions of the death-beds of prominent infidels
with boldly invented last words,--the most unscrupulous lying; there
would be the appallingly edifying careers of "early piety" lusciously
described, or stories of condemned criminals who traced their final ruin
unerringly to early laxities of the kind that leads people to give up
subscribing to the HOME CHURCHMAN.

Every month that evil spirit brought about a slump in our mutual love.
My mother used to read the thing and become depressed and anxious for my
spiritual welfare, used to be stirred to unintelligent pestering....


2

A few years ago I met the editor of this same HOME CHURCHMAN. It was
at one of the weekly dinners of that Fleet Street dining club, the
Blackfriars.

I heard the paper's name with a queer little shock and surveyed the
man with interest. No doubt he was only a successor of the purveyor of
discords who darkened my boyhood. It was amazing to find an influence
so terrible embodied in a creature so palpably petty. He was seated some
way down a table at right angles to the one at which I sat, a man of
mean appearance with a greyish complexion, thin, with a square nose,
a heavy wiry moustache and a big Adam's apple sticking out between the
wings of his collar. He ate with considerable appetite and unconcealed
relish, and as his jaw was underhung, he chummed and made the moustache
wave like reeds in the swell of a steamer. It gave him a conscientious
look. After dinner he a little forced himself upon me. At that time,
though the shadow of my scandal was already upon me, I still seemed to
be shaping for great successes, and he was glad to be in conversation
with me and anxious to intimate political sympathy and support. I tried
to make him talk of the HOME CHURCHMAN and the kindred publications he
ran, but he was manifestly ashamed of his job so far as I was concerned.

"One wants," he said, pitching himself as he supposed in my key, "to put
constructive ideas into our readers, but they are narrow, you know, very
narrow. Very." He made his moustache and lips express judicious regret.
"One has to consider them carefully, one has to respect their attitudes.
One dare not go too far with them. One has to feel one's way."

He chummed and the moustache bristled.

A hireling, beyond question, catering for a demand. I gathered there
was a home in Tufnell Park, and three boys to be fed and clothed and
educated....

I had the curiosity to buy a copy of his magazine afterwards, and it
seemed much the same sort of thing that had worried my mother in my
boyhood. There was the usual Christian hero, this time with mutton-chop
whiskers and a long bare upper lip. The Jesuits, it seemed, were still
hard at it, and Heaven frightfully upset about the Sunday opening of
museums and the falling birth-rate, and as touchy and vindictive as
ever. There were two vigorous paragraphs upon the utter damnableness
of the Rev. R. J. Campbell, a contagious damnableness I gathered, one
wasn't safe within a mile of Holborn Viaduct, and a foul-mouthed
attack on poor little Wilkins the novelist--who was being baited by the
moralists at that time for making one of his big women characters, not
being in holy wedlock, desire a baby and say so....

The broadening of human thought is a slow and complex process. We do go
on, we do get on. But when one thinks that people are living and dying
now, quarrelling and sulking, misled and misunderstanding, vaguely
fearful, condemning and thwarting one another in the close darknesses of
these narrow cults--Oh, God! one wants a gale out of Heaven, one wants a
great wind from the sea!


3

While I lived at Penge two little things happened to me, trivial in
themselves and yet in their quality profoundly significant. They had
this in common, that they pierced the texture of the life I was quietly
taking for granted and let me see through it into realities--realities
I had indeed known about before but never realised. Each of these
experiences left me with a sense of shock, with all the values in
my life perplexingly altered, attempting readjustment. One of these
disturbing and illuminating events was that I was robbed of a new
pocket-knife and the other that I fell in love. It was altogether
surprising to me to be robbed. You see, as an only child I had always
been fairly well looked after and protected, and the result was an
amazing confidence in the practical goodness of the people one met in
the world. I knew there were robbers in the world, just as I knew there
were tigers; that I was ever likely to meet robber or tiger face to face
seemed equally impossible.

The knife as I remember it was a particularly jolly one with all sorts
of instruments in it, tweezers and a thing for getting a stone out
of the hoof of a horse, and a corkscrew; it had cost me a carefully
accumulated half-crown, and amounted indeed to a new experience in
knives. I had had it for two or three days, and then one afternoon I
dropped it through a hole in my pocket on a footpath crossing a field
between Penge and Anerley. I heard it fall in the way one does without
at the time appreciating what had happened, then, later, before I got
home, when my hand wandered into my pocket to embrace the still dear
new possession I found it gone, and instantly that memory of something
hitting the ground sprang up into consciousness. I went back and
commenced a search. Almost immediately I was accosted by the leader of a
little gang of four or five extremely dirty and ragged boys of assorted
sizes and slouching carriage who were coming from the Anerley direction.

"Lost anythink, Matey?" said he.

I explained.

"'E's dropped 'is knife," said my interlocutor, and joined in the
search.

"What sort of 'andle was it, Matey?" said a small white-faced sniffing
boy in a big bowler hat.

I supplied the information. His sharp little face scrutinised the ground
about us.

"GOT it," he said, and pounced.

"Give it 'ere," said the big boy hoarsely, and secured it.

I walked towards him serenely confident that he would hand it over to
me, and that all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds.

"No bloomin' fear!" he said, regarding me obliquely. "Oo said it was
your knife?"

Remarkable doubts assailed me. "Of course it's my knife," I said. The
other boys gathered round me.

"This ain't your knife," said the big boy, and spat casually.

"I dropped it just now."

"Findin's keepin's, I believe," said the big boy.

"Nonsense," I said. "Give me my knife."

"'Ow many blades it got?"

"Three."

"And what sort of 'andle?"

"Bone."

"Got a corkscrew like?"

"Yes."

"Ah! This ain't your knife no'ow. See?"

He made no offer to show it to me. My breath went.

"Look here!" I said. "I saw that kid pick it up. It IS my knife."

"Rot!" said the big boy, and slowly, deliberately put my knife into his
trouser pocket.

I braced my soul for battle. All civilisation was behind me, but I doubt
if it kept the colour in my face. I buttoned my jacket and clenched my
fists and advanced on my antagonist--he had, I suppose, the advantage of
two years of age and three inches of height. "Hand over that knife," I
said.

Then one of the smallest of the band assailed me with extraordinary
vigour and swiftness from behind, had an arm round my neck and a knee in
my back before I had the slightest intimation of attack, and so got me
down. "I got 'im, Bill," squeaked this amazing little ruffian. My nose
was flattened by a dirty hand, and as I struck out and hit something
like sacking, some one kicked my elbow. Two or three seemed to be at
me at the same time. Then I rolled over and sat up to discover them all
making off, a ragged flight, footballing my cap, my City Merchants' cap,
amongst them. I leapt to my feet in a passion of indignation and pursued
them.

But I did not overtake them. We are beings of mixed composition, and I
doubt if mine was a single-minded pursuit. I knew that honour required
me to pursue, and I had a vivid impression of having just been down
in the dust with a very wiry and active and dirty little antagonist of
disagreeable odour and incredible and incalculable unscrupulousness,
kneeling on me and gripping my arm and neck. I wanted of course to be
even with him, but also I doubted if catching him would necessarily
involve that. They kicked my cap into the ditch at the end of the field,
and made off compactly along a cinder lane while I turned aside to
recover my dishonoured headdress. As I knocked the dust out of that and
out of my jacket, and brushed my knees and readjusted my very crumpled
collar, I tried to focus this startling occurrence in my mind.

I had vague ideas of going to a policeman or of complaining at a police
station, but some boyish instinct against informing prevented that. No
doubt I entertained ideas of vindictive pursuit and murderous reprisals.
And I was acutely enraged whenever I thought of my knife. The thing
indeed rankled in my mind for weeks and weeks, and altered all the
flavour of my world for me. It was the first time I glimpsed the simple
brute violence that lurks and peeps beneath our civilisation. A certain
kindly complacency of attitude towards the palpably lower classes was
qualified for ever.


4

But the other experience was still more cardinal. It was the first clear
intimation of a new motif in life, the sex motif, that was to rise and
increase and accumulate power and enrichment and interweave with and at
last dominate all my life.

It was when I was nearly fifteen this happened. It is inseparably
connected in my mind with the dusk of warm September evenings. I never
met the girl I loved by daylight, and I have forgotten her name. It was
some insignificant name.

Yet the peculiar quality of the adventure keeps it shining darkly like
some deep coloured gem in the common setting of my memories. It came as
something new and strange, something that did not join on to anything
else in my life or connect with any of my thoughts or beliefs or habits;
it was a wonder, a mystery, a discovery about myself, a discovery
about the whole world. Only in after years did sexual feeling lose that
isolation and spread itself out to illuminate and pervade and at last
possess the whole broad vision of life.

It was in that phase of an urban youth's development, the phase of the
cheap cigarette, that this thing happened. One evening I came by chance
on a number of young people promenading by the light of a row of shops
towards Beckington, and, with all the glory of a glowing cigarette
between my lips, I joined their strolling number. These twilight parades
of young people, youngsters chiefly of the lower middle-class, are one
of the odd social developments of the great suburban growths--unkindly
critics, blind to the inner meanings of things, call them, I believe,
Monkeys' Parades--the shop apprentices, the young work girls, the boy
clerks and so forth, stirred by mysterious intimations, spend their
first-earned money upon collars and ties, chiffon hats, smart lace
collars, walking-sticks, sunshades or cigarettes, and come valiantly
into the vague transfiguring mingling of gaslight and evening, to walk
up and down, to eye meaningly, even to accost and make friends. It is
a queer instinctive revolt from the narrow limited friendless homes in
which so many find themselves, a going out towards something, romance if
you will, beauty, that has suddenly become a need--a need that hitherto
has lain dormant and unsuspected. They promenade.

Vulgar!--it is as vulgar as the spirit that calls the moth abroad in the
evening and lights the body of the glow-worm in the night. I made my
way through the throng, a little contemptuously as became a public
schoolboy, my hands in my pockets--none of your cheap canes for me!--and
very careful of the lie of my cigarette upon my lips. And two girls
passed me, one a little taller than the other, with dim warm-tinted
faces under clouds of dark hair and with dark eyes like pools reflecting
stars.

I half turned, and the shorter one glanced back at me over her
shoulder--I could draw you now the pose of her cheek and neck and
shoulder--and instantly I was as passionately in love with the girl as
I have ever been before or since, as any man ever was with any woman. I
turned about and followed them, I flung away my cigarette ostentatiously
and lifted my school cap and spoke to them.

The girl answered shyly with her dark eyes on my face. What I said
and what she said I cannot remember, but I have little doubt it was
something absolutely vapid. It really did not matter; the thing was we
had met. I felt as I think a new-hatched moth must feel when suddenly
its urgent headlong searching brings it in tremulous amazement upon its
mate.

We met, covered from each other, with all the nets of civilisation
keeping us apart. We walked side by side.

It led to scarcely more than that. I think we met four or five times
altogether, and always with her nearly silent elder sister on the other
side of her. We walked on the last two occasions arm in arm, furtively
caressing each other's hands, we went away from the glare of the shops
into the quiet roads of villadom, and there we whispered instead of
talking and looked closely into one another's warm and shaded face.
"Dear," I whispered very daringly, and she answered, "Dear!" We had a
vague sense that we wanted more of that quality of intimacy and more. We
wanted each other as one wants beautiful music again or to breathe again
the scent of flowers.

And that is all there was between us. The events are nothing, the thing
that matters is the way in which this experience stabbed through the
common stuff of life and left it pierced, with a light, with a huge new
interest shining through the rent.

When I think of it I can recall even now the warm mystery of her face,
her lips a little apart, lips that I never kissed, her soft shadowed
throat, and I feel again the sensuous stir of her proximity....

Those two girls never told me their surname nor let me approach their
house. They made me leave them at the corner of a road of small houses
near Penge Station. And quite abruptly, without any intimation, they
vanished and came to the meeting place no more, they vanished as a
moth goes out of a window into the night, and left me possessed of an
intolerable want....

The affair pervaded my existence for many weeks. I could not do my work
and I could not rest at home. Night after night I promenaded up and down
that Monkeys' Parade full of an unappeasable desire, with a thwarted
sense of something just begun that ought to have gone on. I went
backwards and forwards on the way to the vanishing place, and at last
explored the forbidden road that had swallowed them up. But I never saw
her again, except that later she came to me, my symbol of womanhood, in
dreams. How my blood was stirred! I lay awake of nights whispering in
the darkness for her. I prayed for her.

Indeed that girl, who probably forgot the last vestiges of me when her
first real kiss came to her, ruled and haunted me, gave a Queen to my
imagination and a texture to all my desires until I became a man.

I generalised her at last. I suddenly discovered that poetry was about
her and that she was the key to all that had hitherto seemed nonsense
about love. I took to reading novels, and if the heroine could not
possibly be like her, dusky and warm and starlike, I put the book
aside....

I hesitate and add here one other confession. I want to tell this thing
because it seems to me we are altogether too restrained and secretive
about such matters. The cardinal thing in life sneaks in to us darkly
and shamefully like a thief in the night.

One day during my Cambridge days--it must have been in my first year
before I knew Hatherleigh--I saw in a print-shop window near the Strand
an engraving of a girl that reminded me sharply of Penge and its dusky
encounter. It was just a half length of a bare-shouldered, bare-breasted
Oriental with arms akimbo, smiling faintly. I looked at it, went my way,
then turned back and bought it. I felt I must have it. The odd thing
is that I was more than a little shamefaced about it. I did not have it
framed and hung in my room open to the criticism of my friends, but I
kept it in the drawer of my writing-table. And I kept that drawer locked
for a year. It speedily merged with and became identified with the dark
girl of Penge. That engraving became in a way my mistress. Often when I
had sported my oak and was supposed to be reading, I was sitting with it
before me.

Obeying some instinct I kept the thing very secret indeed. For a time
nobody suspected what was locked in my drawer nor what was locked in me.
I seemed as sexless as my world required.


5

These things stabbed through my life, intimations of things above and
below and before me. They had an air of being no more than incidents,
interruptions.

The broad substance of my existence at this time was the City Merchants
School. Home was a place where I slept and read, and the mooning
explorations of the south-eastern postal district which occupied the
restless evenings and spare days of my vacations mere interstices,
giving glimpses of enigmatical lights and distant spaces between the
woven threads of a school-boy's career. School life began for me every
morning at Herne Hill, for there I was joined by three or four other
boys and the rest of the way we went together. Most of the streets and
roads we traversed in our morning's walk from Victoria are still intact,
the storms of rebuilding that have submerged so much of my boyhood's
London have passed and left them, and I have revived the impression of
them again and again in recent years as I have clattered dinnerward in a
hansom or hummed along in a motor cab to some engagement. The main gate
still looks out with the same expression of ancient well-proportioned
kindliness upon St. Margaret's Close. There are imposing new science
laboratories in Chambers Street indeed, but the old playing fields are
unaltered except for the big electric trams that go droning and spitting
blue flashes along the western boundary. I know Ratten, the new Head,
very well, but I have not been inside the school to see if it has
changed at all since I went up to Cambridge.

I took all they put before us very readily as a boy, for I had a mind of
vigorous appetite, but since I have grown mentally to man's estate and
developed a more and more comprehensive view of our national process
and our national needs, I am more and more struck by the oddity of the
educational methods pursued, their aimless disconnectedness from the
constructive forces in the community. I suppose if we are to view the
public school as anything more than an institution that has just chanced
to happen, we must treat it as having a definite function towards the
general scheme of the nation, as being in a sense designed to take the
crude young male of the more or less responsible class, to correct
his harsh egotisms, broaden his outlook, give him a grasp of the
contemporary developments he will presently be called upon to influence
and control, and send him on to the university to be made a leading and
ruling social man. It is easy enough to carp at schoolmasters and set up
for an Educational Reformer, I know, but still it is impossible not
to feel how infinitely more effectually--given certain impossibilities
perhaps--the job might be done.

My memory of school has indeed no hint whatever of that quality of
elucidation it seems reasonable to demand from it. Here all about me
was London, a vast inexplicable being, a vortex of gigantic forces, that
filled and overwhelmed me with impressions, that stirred my imagination
to a perpetual vague enquiry; and my school not only offered no key
to it, but had practically no comment to make upon it at all. We were
within three miles of Westminster and Charing Cross, the government
offices of a fifth of mankind were all within an hour's stroll, great
economic changes were going on under our eyes, now the hoardings flamed
with election placards, now the Salvation Army and now the unemployed
came trailing in procession through the winter-grey streets, now the
newspaper placards outside news-shops told of battles in strange places,
now of amazing discoveries, now of sinister crimes, abject squalor and
poverty, imperial splendour and luxury, Buckingham Palace, Rotten Row,
Mayfair, the slums of Pimlico, garbage-littered streets of bawling
costermongers, the inky silver of the barge-laden Thames--such was the
background of our days. We went across St. Margaret's Close and through
the school gate into a quiet puerile world apart from all these things.
We joined in the earnest acquirement of all that was necessary for Greek
epigrams and Latin verse, and for the rest played games. We dipped down
into something clear and elegantly proportioned and time-worn and for
all its high resolve of stalwart virility a little feeble, like our
blackened and decayed portals by Inigo Jones.

Within, we were taught as the chief subjects of instruction, Latin and
Greek. We were taught very badly because the men who taught us did not
habitually use either of these languages, nobody uses them any more
now except perhaps for the Latin of a few Levantine monasteries. At the
utmost our men read them. We were taught these languages because long
ago Latin had been the language of civilisation; the one way of escape
from the narrow and localised life had lain in those days through Latin,
and afterwards Greek had come in as the vehicle of a flood of new and
amazing ideas. Once these two languages had been the sole means of
initiation to the detached criticism and partial comprehension of the
world. I can imagine the fierce zeal of our first Heads, Gardener and
Roper, teaching Greek like passionate missionaries, as a progressive
Chinaman might teach English to the boys of Pekin, clumsily,
impatiently, with rod and harsh urgency, but sincerely, patriotically,
because they felt that behind it lay revelations, the irresistible
stimulus to a new phase of history. That was long ago. A new great
world, a vaster Imperialism had arisen about the school, had assimilated
all these amazing and incredible ideas, had gone on to new and yet more
amazing developments of its own. But the City Merchants School still
made the substance of its teaching Latin and Greek, still, with no
thought of rotating crops, sowed in a dream amidst the harvesting.

There is no fierceness left in the teaching now. Just after I went up
to Trinity, Gates, our Head, wrote a review article in defence of our
curriculum. In this, among other indiscretions, he asserted that it was
impossible to write good English without an illuminating knowledge of
the classic tongues, and he split an infinitive and failed to button up
a sentence in saying so. His main argument conceded every objection
a reasonable person could make to the City Merchants' curriculum. He
admitted that translation had now placed all the wisdom of the past at
a common man's disposal, that scarcely a field of endeavour remained
in which modern work had not long since passed beyond the ancient
achievement. He disclaimed any utility. But there was, he said, a
peculiar magic in these grammatical exercises no other subjects of
instruction possessed. Nothing else provided the same strengthening and
orderly discipline for the mind.

He said that, knowing the Senior Classics he did, himself a Senior
Classic!

Yet in a dim confused way I think he was making out a case. In schools
as we knew them, and with the sort of assistant available, the sort of
assistant who has been trained entirely on the old lines, he could
see no other teaching so effectual in developing attention, restraint,
sustained constructive effort and various yet systematic adjustment. And
that was as far as his imagination could go.

It is infinitely easier to begin organised human affairs than end them;
the curriculum and the social organisation of the English public school
are the crowning instances of that. They go on because they have begun.
Schools are not only immortal institutions but reproductive ones. Our
founder, Jabez Arvon, knew nothing, I am sure, of Gates' pedagogic
values and would, I feel certain, have dealt with them disrespectfully.
But public schools and university colleges sprang into existence
correlated, the scholars went on to the universities and came back to
teach the schools, to teach as they themselves had been taught, before
they had ever made any real use of the teaching; the crowd of boys
herded together, a crowd perpetually renewed and unbrokenly the same,
adjusted itself by means of spontaneously developed institutions. In
a century, by its very success, this revolutionary innovation of
Renascence public schools had become an immense tradition woven closely
into the fabric of the national life. Intelligent and powerful people
ceased to talk Latin or read Greek, they had got what was wanted, but
that only left the schoolmaster the freer to elaborate his point. Since
most men of any importance or influence in the country had been through
the mill, it was naturally a little difficult to persuade them that
it was not quite the best and most ennobling mill the wit of man could
devise. And, moreover, they did not want their children made strange to
them. There was all the machinery and all the men needed to teach the
old subjects, and none to teach whatever new the critic might propose.
Such science instruction as my father gave seemed indeed the uninviting
alternative to the classical grind. It was certainly an altogether
inferior instrument at that time.

So it was I occupied my mind with the exact study of dead languages
for seven long years. It was the strangest of detachments. We would sit
under the desk of such a master as Topham like creatures who had fallen
into an enchanted pit, and he would do his considerable best to work us
up to enthusiasm for, let us say, a Greek play. If we flagged he would
lash himself to revive us. He would walk about the class-room mouthing
great lines in a rich roar, and asking us with a flushed face and
shining eyes if it was not "GLORIOUS." The very sight of Greek letters
brings back to me the dingy, faded, ink-splashed quality of our
class-room, the banging of books, Topham's disordered hair, the sheen of
his alpaca gown, his deep unmusical intonations and the wide striding
of his creaking boots. Glorious! And being plastic human beings we would
consent that it was glorious, and some of us even achieved an answering
reverberation and a sympathetic flush. I at times responded freely. We
all accepted from him unquestioningly that these melodies, these strange
sounds, exceeded any possibility of beauty that lay in the Gothic
intricacy, the splash and glitter, the jar and recovery, the stabbing
lights, the heights and broad distances of our English tongue. That
indeed was the chief sin of him. It was not that he was for Greek and
Latin, but that he was fiercely against every beauty that was neither
classic nor deferred to classical canons.

And what exactly did we make of it, we seniors who understood it best?
We visualised dimly through that dust and the grammatical difficulties,
the spectacle of the chorus chanting grotesquely, helping out
protagonist and antagonist, masked and buskined, with the telling of
incomprehensible parricides, of inexplicable incest, of gods faded
beyond symbolism, of that Relentless Law we did not believe in for a
moment, that no modern western European can believe in. We thought
of the characters in the unconvincing wigs and costumes of our school
performance. No Gilbert Murray had come as yet to touch these things
to life again. It was like the ghost of an antiquarian's toy theatre,
a ghost that crumbled and condensed into a gritty dust of construing as
one looked at it.

Marks, shindies, prayers and punishments, all flavoured with the
leathery stuffiness of time-worn Big Hall....

And then out one would come through our grey old gate into the evening
light and the spectacle of London hurrying like a cataract, London in
black and brown and blue and gleaming silver, roaring like the very loom
of Time. We came out into the new world no teacher has yet had the power
and courage to grasp and expound. Life and death sang all about one,
joys and fears on such a scale, in such an intricacy as never Greek
nor Roman knew. The interminable procession of horse omnibuses went
lumbering past, bearing countless people we knew not whence, we knew
not whither. Hansoms clattered, foot passengers jostled one, a thousand
appeals of shop and boarding caught the eye. The multi-coloured lights
of window and street mingled with the warm glow of the declining day
under the softly flushing London skies; the ever-changing placards,
the shouting news-vendors, told of a kaleidoscopic drama all about the
globe. One did not realise what had happened to us, but the voice
of Topham was suddenly drowned and lost, he and his minute, remote
gesticulations....

That submerged and isolated curriculum did not even join on to living
interests where it might have done so. We were left absolutely to the
hints of the newspapers, to casual political speeches, to the cartoons
of the comic papers or a chance reading of some Socialist pamphlet for
any general ideas whatever about the huge swirling world process
in which we found ourselves. I always look back with particular
exasperation to the cessation of our modern history at the year 1815.
There it pulled up abruptly, as though it had come upon something
indelicate....

But, after all, what would Topham or Flack have made of the huge
adjustments of the nineteenth century? Flack was the chief cricketer on
the staff; he belonged to that great cult which pretends that the place
of this or that county in the struggle for the championship is a matter
of supreme importance to boys. He obliged us to affect a passionate
interest in the progress of county matches, to work up unnatural
enthusiasms. What a fuss there would be when some well-trained boy,
panting as if from Marathon, appeared with an evening paper! "I say, you
chaps, Middlesex all out for a hundred and five!"

Under Flack's pressure I became, I confess, a cricket humbug of the
first class. I applied myself industriously year by year to mastering
scores and averages; I pretended that Lords or the Oval were the places
nearest Paradise for me. (I never went to either.) Through a slight
mistake about the county boundary I adopted Surrey for my loyalty,
though as a matter of fact we were by some five hundred yards or so in
Kent. It did quite as well for my purposes. I bowled rather straight and
fast, and spent endless hours acquiring the skill to bowl Flack out. He
was a bat in the Corinthian style, rich and voluminous, and succumbed
very easily to a low shooter or an unexpected Yorker, but usually he was
caught early by long leg. The difficulty was to bowl him before he got
caught. He loved to lift a ball to leg. After one had clean bowled him
at the practice nets one deliberately gave him a ball to leg just to
make him feel nice again.

Flack went about a world of marvels dreaming of leg hits. He has been
observed, going across the Park on his way to his highly respectable
club in Piccadilly, to break from profound musings into a strange brief
dance that ended with an imaginary swipe with his umbrella, a roofer,
over the trees towards Buckingham Palace. The hit accomplished, Flack
resumed his way.

Inadequately instructed foreigners would pass him in terror, needlessly
alert.


6

These schoolmasters move through my memory as always a little distant
and more than a little incomprehensible. Except when they wore flannels,
I saw them almost always in old college caps and gowns, a uniform which
greatly increased their detachment from the world of actual men. Gates,
the head, was a lean loose-limbed man, rather stupid I discovered when I
reached the Sixth and came into contact with him, but honest, simple
and very eager to be liberal-minded. He was bald, with an almost conical
baldness, with a grizzled pointed beard, small featured and, under the
stresses of a Zeitgeist that demanded liberality, with an expression of
puzzled but resolute resistance to his own unalterable opinions. He made
a tall dignified figure in his gown. In my junior days he spoke to me
only three or four times, and then he annoyed me by giving me a wrong
surname; it was a sore point because I was an outsider and not one of
the old school families, the Shoesmiths, the Naylors, the Marklows, the
Tophams, the Pevises and suchlike, who came generation after generation.
I recall him most vividly against the background of faded brown
book-backs in the old library in which we less destructive seniors were
trusted to work, with the light from the stained-glass window falling
in coloured patches on his face. It gave him the appearance of having no
colour of his own. He had a habit of scratching the beard on his cheek
as he talked, and he used to come and consult us about things and
invariably do as we said. That, in his phraseology, was "maintaining the
traditions of the school."

He had indeed an effect not of a man directing a school, but of a
man captured and directed by a school. Dead and gone Elizabethans had
begotten a monster that could carry him about in its mouth.

Yet being a man, as I say, with his hair a little stirred by a Zeitgeist
that made for change, Gates did at times display a disposition towards
developments. City Merchants had no modern side, and utilitarian spirits
were carping in the PALL MALL GAZETTE and elsewhere at the omissions
from our curriculum, and particularly at our want of German. Moreover,
four classes still worked together with much clashing and uproar in the
old Big Hall that had once held in a common tumult the entire school.
Gates used to come and talk to us older fellows about these things.

"I don't wish to innovate unduly," he used to say. "But we ought to get
in some German, you know,--for those who like it. The army men will be
wanting it some of these days."

He referred to the organisation of regular evening preparation for the
lower boys in Big Hall as a "revolutionary change," but he achieved it,
and he declared he began the replacement of the hacked wooden tables, at
which the boys had worked since Tudor days, by sloping desks with safety
inkpots and scientifically adjustable seats, "with grave misgivings."
And though he never birched a boy in his life, and was, I am convinced,
morally incapable of such a scuffle, he retained the block and birch in
the school through all his term of office, and spoke at the Headmasters'
Conference in temperate approval of corporal chastisement, comparing it,
dear soul! to the power of the sword....

I wish I could, in some measure and without tediousness, convey the
effect of his discourses to General Assembly in Big Hall. But that
is like trying to draw the obverse and reverse of a sixpence worn to
complete illegibility. His tall fine figure stood high on the days, his
thoughtful tenor filled the air as he steered his hazardous way
through sentences that dragged inconclusive tails and dropped redundant
prepositions. And he pleaded ever so urgently, ever so finely, that
what we all knew for Sin was sinful, and on the whole best avoided
altogether, and so went on with deepening notes and even with short
arresting gestures of the right arm and hand, to stir and exhort us
towards goodness, towards that modern, unsectarian goodness, goodness
in general and nothing in particular, which the Zeitgeist seemed to
indicate in those transitional years.


7

The school never quite got hold of me. Partly I think that was because
I was a day-boy and so freer than most of the boys, partly because of
a temperamental disposition to see things in my own way and have my
private dreams, partly because I was a little antagonised by the family
traditions that ran through the school. I was made to feel at first
that I was a rank outsider, and I never quite forgot it. I suffered very
little bullying, and I never had a fight--in all my time there were only
three fights--but I followed my own curiosities. I was already a
very keen theologian and politician before I was fifteen. I was also
intensely interested in modern warfare. I read the morning papers in
the Reading Room during the midday recess, never missed the illustrated
weeklies, and often when I could afford it I bought a PALL MALL GAZETTE
on my way home.

I do not think that I was very exceptional in that; most intelligent
boys, I believe, want naturally to be men, and are keenly interested
in men's affairs. There is not the universal passion for a magnified
puerility among them it is customary to assume. I was indeed a voracious
reader of everything but boys' books--which I detested--and fiction. I
read histories, travel, popular science and controversy with particular
zest, and I loved maps. School work and school games were quite
subordinate affairs for me. I worked well and made a passable figure
at games, and I do not think I was abnormally insensitive to the fine
quality of our school, to the charm of its mediaeval nucleus, its
Gothic cloisters, its scraps of Palladian and its dignified Georgian
extensions; the contrast of the old quiet, that in spite of our presence
pervaded it everywhere, with the rushing and impending London all
about it, was indeed a continual pleasure to me. But these things were
certainly not the living and central interests of my life.

I had to conceal my wider outlook to a certain extent--from the masters
even more than from the boys. Indeed I only let myself go freely with
one boy, Britten, my especial chum, the son of the Agent-General for
East Australia. We two discovered in a chance conversation A PROPOS of a
map in the library that we were both of us curious why there were Malays
in Madagascar, and how the Mecca pilgrims came from the East Indies
before steamships were available. Neither of us had suspected that
there was any one at all in the school who knew or cared a rap about the
Indian Ocean, except as water on the way to India. But Britten had come
up through the Suez Canal, and his ship had spoken a pilgrim ship on
the way. It gave him a startling quality of living knowledge. From these
pilgrims we got to a comparative treatment of religions, and from that,
by a sudden plunge, to entirely sceptical and disrespectful confessions
concerning Gates' last outbreak of simple piety in School Assembly. We
became congenial intimates from that hour.

The discovery of Britten happened to me when we were both in the Lower
Fifth. Previously there had been a watertight compartment between the
books I read and the thoughts they begot on the one hand and human
intercourse on the other. Now I really began my higher education, and
aired and examined and developed in conversation the doubts, the ideas,
the interpretations that had been forming in my mind. As we were both
day-boys with a good deal of control over our time we organised walks
and expeditions together, and my habit of solitary and rather vague
prowling gave way to much more definite joint enterprises. I went
several times to his house, he was the youngest of several brothers, one
of whom was a medical student and let us assist at the dissection of a
cat, and once or twice in vacation time he came to Penge, and we went
with parcels of provisions to do a thorough day in the grounds and
galleries of the Crystal Palace, ending with the fireworks at close
quarters. We went in a river steamboat down to Greenwich, and fired by
that made an excursion to Margate and back; we explored London docks
and Bethnal Green Museum, Petticoat Lane and all sorts of out-of-the-way
places together.

We confessed shyly to one another a common secret vice, "Phantom
warfare." When we walked alone, especially in the country, we had both
developed the same practice of fighting an imaginary battle about us
as we walked. As we went along we were generals, and our attacks pushed
along on either side, crouching and gathering behind hedges, cresting
ridges, occupying copses, rushing open spaces, fighting from house to
house. The hillsides about Penge were honeycombed in my imagination with
the pits and trenches I had created to check a victorious invader coming
out of Surrey. For him West Kensington was chiefly important as the
scene of a desperate and successful last stand of insurrectionary troops
(who had seized the Navy, the Bank and other advantages) against a
royalist army--reinforced by Germans--advancing for reasons best known
to themselves by way of Harrow and Ealing. It is a secret and solitary
game, as we found when we tried to play it together. We made a success
of that only once. All the way down to Margate we schemed defences and
assailed and fought them as we came back against the sunset. Afterwards
we recapitulated all that conflict by means of a large scale map of the
Thames and little paper ironclads in plan cut out of paper.

A subsequent revival of these imaginings was brought about by Britten's
luck in getting, through a friend of his father's, admission for us both
to the spectacle of volunteer officers fighting the war game in Caxton
Hall. We developed a war game of our own at Britten's home with nearly a
couple of hundred lead soldiers, some excellent spring cannons that shot
hard and true at six yards, hills of books and a constantly elaborated
set of rules. For some months that occupied an immense proportion of
our leisure. Some of our battles lasted several days. We kept the game a
profound secret from the other fellows. They would not have understood.

And we also began, it was certainly before we were sixteen, to write,
for the sake of writing. We liked writing. We had discovered Lamb
and the best of the middle articles in such weeklies as the SATURDAY
GAZETTE, and we imitated them. Our minds were full of dim uncertain
things we wanted to drag out into the light of expression. Britten had
got hold of IN MEMORIAM, and I had disinterred Pope's ESSAY ON MAN and
RABBI BEN EZRA, and these things had set our theological and cosmic
solicitudes talking. I was somewhere between sixteen and eighteen,
I know, when he and I walked along the Thames Embankment confessing
shamefully to one another that we had never read Lucretius. We thought
every one who mattered had read Lucretius.

When I was nearly sixteen my mother was taken ill very suddenly,
and died of some perplexing complaint that involved a post-mortem
examination; it was, I think, the trouble that has since those days
been recognised as appendicitis. This led to a considerable change in
my circumstances; the house at Penge was given up, and my Staffordshire
uncle arranged for me to lodge during school terms with a needy
solicitor and his wife in Vicars Street, S. W., about a mile and a half
from the school. So it was I came right into London; I had almost two
years of London before I went to Cambridge.

Those were our great days together. Afterwards we were torn apart;
Britten went to Oxford, and our circumstances never afterwards threw us
continuously together until the days of the BLUE WEEKLY.

As boys, we walked together, read and discussed the same books, pursued
the same enquiries. We got a reputation as inseparables and the nickname
of the Rose and the Lily, for Britten was short and thick-set with
dark close curling hair and a ruddy Irish type of face; I was lean and
fair-haired and some inches taller than he. Our talk ranged widely and
yet had certain very definite limitations. We were amazingly free with
politics and religion, we went to that little meeting-house of William
Morris's at Hammersmith and worked out the principles of Socialism
pretty thoroughly, and we got up the Darwinian theory with the help
of Britten's medical-student brother and the galleries of the Natural
History Museum in Cromwell Road. Those wonderful cases on the ground
floor illustrating mimicry, dimorphism and so forth, were new in our
times, and we went through them with earnest industry and tried over our
Darwinism in the light of that. Such topics we did exhaustively. But on
the other hand I do not remember any discussion whatever of human sex or
sexual relationships. There, in spite of intense secret curiosities, our
lips were sealed by a peculiar shyness. And I do not believe we ever had
occasion either of us to use the word "love." It was not only that we
were instinctively shy of the subject, but that we were mightily ashamed
of the extent of our ignorance and uncertainty in these matters. We
evaded them elaborately with an assumption of exhaustive knowledge.

We certainly had no shyness about theology. We marked the emancipation
of our spirits from the frightful teachings that had oppressed our
boyhood, by much indulgence in blasphemous wit. We had a secret
literature of irreverent rhymes, and a secret art of theological
caricature. Britten's father had delighted his family by reading aloud
from Dr. Richard Garnett's TWILIGHT OF THE GODS, and Britten conveyed
the precious volume to me. That and the BAB BALLADS were the inspiration
of some of our earliest lucubrations.

For an imaginative boy the first experience of writing is like a tiger's
first taste of blood, and our literary flowerings led very directly to
the revival of the school magazine, which had been comatose for some
years. But there we came upon a disappointment.


8

In that revival we associated certain other of the Sixth Form boys,
and notably one for whom our enterprise was to lay the foundations of a
career that has ended in the House of Lords, Arthur Cossington, now
Lord Paddockhurst. Cossington was at that time a rather heavy, rather
good-looking boy who was chiefly eminent in cricket, an outsider even as
we were and preoccupied no doubt, had we been sufficiently detached to
observe him, with private imaginings very much of the same quality
and spirit as our own. He was, we were inclined to think, rather a
sentimentalist, rather a poseur, he affected a concise emphatic style,
played chess very well, betrayed a belief in will-power, and earned
Britten's secret hostility, Britten being a sloven, by the invariable
neatness of his collars and ties. He came into our magazine with a
vigour that we found extremely surprising and unwelcome.

Britten and I had wanted to write. We had indeed figured our project
modestly as a manuscript magazine of satirical, liberal and brilliant
literature by which in some rather inexplicable way the vague tumult of
ideas that teemed within us was to find form and expression; Cossington,
it was manifest from the outset, wanted neither to write nor writing,
but a magazine. I remember the inaugural meeting in Shoesmith major's
study--we had had great trouble in getting it together--and how
effectually Cossington bolted with the proposal.

"I think we fellows ought to run a magazine," said Cossington. "The
school used to have one. A school like this ought to have a magazine."

"The last one died in '84," said Shoesmith from the hearthrug. "Called
the OBSERVER. Rot rather."

"Bad title," said Cossington.

"There was a TATLER before that," said Britten, sitting on the writing
table at the window that was closed to deaden the cries of the Lower
School at play, and clashing his boots together.

"We want something suggestive of City Merchants."

"CITY MERCHANDIZE," said Britten.

"Too fanciful. What of ARVONIAN? Richard Arvon was our founder, and it
seems almost a duty--"

"They call them all -usians or -onians," said Britten.

"I like CITY MERCHANDIZE," I said. "We could probably find a quotation
to suggest--oh! mixed good things."

Cossington regarded me abstractedly.

"Don't want to put the accent on the City, do we?" said Shoesmith, who
had a feeling for county families, and Naylor supported him by a murmur
of approval.

"We ought to call it the ARVONIAN," decided Cossington, "and we might
very well have underneath, 'With which is incorporated the OBSERVER.'
That picks up the old traditions, makes an appeal to old boys and all
that, and it gives us something to print under the title."

I still held out for CITY MERCHANDIZE, which had taken my fancy. "Some
of the chaps' people won't like it," said Naylor, "certain not to. And
it sounds Rum."

"Sounds Weird," said a boy who had not hitherto spoken.

"We aren't going to do anything Queer," said Shoesmith, pointedly not
looking at Britten.

The question of the title had manifestly gone against us. "Oh! HAVE it
ARVONIAN," I said.

"And next, what size shall we have?" said Cossington.

"Something like MACMILLAN'S MAGAZINE--or LONGMANS'; LONGMANS' is better
because it has a whole page, not columns. It makes no end of difference
to one's effects."

"What effects?" asked Shoesmith abruptly.

"Oh! a pause or a white line or anything. You've got to write closer for
a double column. It's nuggetty. You can't get a swing on your prose." I
had discussed this thoroughly with Britten.

"If the fellows are going to write--" began Britten.

"We ought to keep off fine writing," said Shoesmith. "It's cheek. I vote
we don't have any."

"We sha'n't get any," said Cossington, and then as an olive branch to
me, "unless Remington does a bit. Or Britten. But it's no good making
too much space for it."

"We ought to be very careful about the writing," said Shoesmith. "We
don't want to give ourselves away."

"I vote we ask old Topham to see us through," said Naylor.

Britten groaned aloud and every one regarded him. "Greek epigrams on the
fellows' names," he said. "Small beer in ancient bottles. Let's get a
stuffed broody hen to SIT on the magazine."

"We might do worse than a Greek epigram," said Cossington. "One in each
number. It--it impresses parents and keeps up our classical tradition.
And the masters CAN help. We don't want to antagonise them. Of
course--we've got to departmentalise. Writing is only one section of the
thing. The ARVONIAN has to stand for the school. There's questions
of space and questions of expense. We can't turn out a great chunk of
printed prose like--like wet cold toast and call it a magazine."

Britten writhed, appreciating the image.

"There's to be a section of sports. YOU must do that."

"I'm not going to do any fine writing," said Shoesmith.

"What you've got to do is just to list all the chaps and put a note to
their play:--'Naylor minor must pass more. Football isn't the place for
extreme individualism.' 'Ammersham shapes well as half-back.' Things
like that."

"I could do that all right," said Shoesmith, brightening and manifestly
becoming pregnant with judgments.

"One great thing about a magazine of this sort," said Cossington, "is
to mention just as many names as you can in each number. It keeps the
interest alive. Chaps will turn it over looking for their own little
bit. Then it all lights up for them."

"Do you want any reports of matches?" Shoesmith broke from his
meditation.

"Rather. With comments."

"Naylor surpassed himself and negotiated the lemon safely home," said
Shoesmith.

"Shut it," said Naylor modestly.

"Exactly," said Cossington. "That gives us three features," touching
them off on his fingers, "Epigram, Literary Section, Sports. Then we
want a section to shove anything into, a joke, a notice of anything
that's going on. So on. Our Note Book."

"Oh, Hell!" said Britten, and clashed his boots, to the silent
disapproval of every one.

"Then we want an editorial."

"A WHAT?" cried Britten, with a note of real terror in his voice.

"Well, don't we? Unless we have our Note Book to begin on the front
page. It gives a scrappy effect to do that. We want something manly and
straightforward and a bit thoughtful, about Patriotism, say, or ESPRIT
DE CORPS, or After-Life."

I looked at Britten. Hitherto we had not considered Cossington mattered
very much in the world.

He went over us as a motor-car goes over a dog. There was a sort of
energy about him, a new sort of energy to us; we had never realised
that anything of the sort existed in the world. We were hopelessly at
a disadvantage. Almost instantly we had developed a clear and detailed
vision of a magazine made up of everything that was most acceptable
in the magazines that flourished in the adult world about us, and had
determined to make it a success. He had by a kind of instinct, as it
were, synthetically plagiarised every successful magazine and breathed
into this dusty mixture the breath of life. He was elected at his own
suggestion managing director, with the earnest support of Shoesmith and
Naylor, and conducted the magazine so successfully and brilliantly that
he even got a whole back page of advertisements from the big sports shop
in Holborn, and made the printers pay at the same rate for a notice
of certain books of their own which they said they had inserted by
inadvertency to fill up space. The only literary contribution in the
first number was a column by Topham in faultless stereotyped English in
depreciation of some fancied evil called Utilitarian Studies and ending
with that noble old quotation:--


"To the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome."


And Flack crowded us out of number two with a bright little paper on the
"Humours of Cricket," and the Head himself was profusely thoughtful all
over the editorial under the heading of "The School Chapel; and How it
Seems to an Old Boy."

Britten and I found it difficult to express to each other with any grace
or precision what we felt about that magazine.



CHAPTER THE FOURTH ~~ ADOLESCENCE


1

I find it very difficult to trace how form was added to form
and interpretation followed interpretation in my ever-spreading,
ever-deepening, ever-multiplying and enriching vision of this world into
which I had been born. Every day added its impressions, its hints, its
subtle explications to the growing understanding. Day after day the
living interlacing threads of a mind weave together. Every morning now
for three weeks and more (for to-day is Thursday and I started on a
Tuesday) I have been trying to convey some idea of the factors and
early influences by which my particular scrap of subjective tapestry
was shaped, to show the child playing on the nursery floor, the son
perplexed by his mother, gazing aghast at his dead father, exploring
interminable suburbs, touched by first intimations of the sexual
mystery, coming in with a sort of confused avidity towards the centres
of the life of London. It is only by such an effort to write it down
that one realises how marvellously crowded, how marvellously analytical
and synthetic those ears must be. One begins with the little child
to whom the sky is a roof of blue, the world a screen of opaque and
disconnected facts, the home a thing eternal, and "being good" just
simple obedience to unquestioned authority; and one comes at last to
the vast world of one's adult perception, pierced deep by flaring
searchlights of partial understanding, here masked by mists, here
refracted and distorted through half translucent veils, here showing
broad prospects and limitless vistas and here impenetrably dark.

I recall phases of deep speculation, doubts and even prayers by night,
and strange occasions when by a sort of hypnotic contemplation of
nothingness I sought to pierce the web of appearances about me. It is
hard to measure these things in receding perspective, and now I cannot
trace, so closely has mood succeeded and overlaid and obliterated mood,
the phases by which an utter horror of death was replaced by the growing
realisation of its necessity and dignity. Difficulty of the imagination
with infinite space, infinite time, entangled my mind; and moral
distress for the pain and suffering of bygone ages that made all thought
of reformation in the future seem but the grimmest irony upon now
irreparable wrongs. Many an intricate perplexity of these broadening
years did not so much get settled as cease to matter. Life crowded me
away from it.

I have confessed myself a temerarious theologian, and in that
passage from boyhood to manhood I ranged widely in my search for some
permanently satisfying Truth. That, too, ceased after a time to be
urgently interesting. I came at last into a phase that endures to this
day, of absolute tranquillity, of absolute confidence in whatever that
Incomprehensible Comprehensive which must needs be the substratum of all
things, may be. Feeling OF IT, feeling BY IT, I cannot feel afraid of
it. I think I had got quite clearly and finally to that adjustment long
before my Cambridge days were done. I am sure that the evil in life is
transitory and finite like an accident or distress in the nursery; that
God is my Father and that I may trust Him, even though life hurts so
that one must needs cry out at it, even though it shows no consequence
but failure, no promise but pain....

But while I was fearless of theology I must confess it was comparatively
late before I faced and dared to probe the secrecies of sex. I was
afraid of sex. I had an instinctive perception that it would be a large
and difficult thing in my life, but my early training was all in
the direction of regarding it as an irrelevant thing, as something
disconnected from all the broad significances of life, as hostile
and disgraceful in its quality. The world was never so emasculated in
thought, I suppose, as it was in the Victorian time....

I was afraid to think either of sex or (what I have always found
inseparable from a kind of sexual emotion) beauty. Even as a boy I knew
the thing as a haunting and alluring mystery that I tried to keep away
from. Its dim presence obsessed me none the less for all the extravagant
decency, the stimulating silences of my upbringing....

The plaster Venuses and Apollos that used to adorn the vast aisle and
huge grey terraces of the Crystal Palace were the first intimations of
the beauty of the body that ever came into my life. As I write of it I
feel again the shameful attraction of those gracious forms. I used to
look at them not simply, but curiously and askance. Once at least in
my later days at Penge, I spent a shilling in admission chiefly for the
sake of them....

The strangest thing of all my odd and solitary upbringing seems to me
now that swathing up of all the splendours of the flesh, that strange
combination of fanatical terrorism and shyness that fenced me about with
prohibitions. It caused me to grow up, I will not say blankly ignorant,
but with an ignorance blurred and dishonoured by shame, by enigmatical
warnings, by cultivated aversions, an ignorance in which a fascinated
curiosity and desire struggled like a thing in a net. I knew so little
and I felt so much. There was indeed no Aphrodite at all in my youthful
Pantheon, but instead there was a mysterious and minatory gap. I have
told how at last a new Venus was born in my imagination out of gas lamps
and the twilight, a Venus with a cockney accent and dark eyes shining
out of the dusk, a Venus who was a warm, passion-stirring atmosphere
rather than incarnate in a body. And I have told, too, how I bought a
picture.

All this was a thing apart from the rest of my life, a locked avoided
chamber....

It was not until my last year at Trinity that I really broke down the
barriers of this unwholesome silence and brought my secret broodings to
the light of day. Then a little set of us plunged suddenly into what
we called at first sociological discussion. I can still recall even the
physical feeling of those first tentative talks. I remember them mostly
as occurring in the rooms of Ted Hatherleigh, who kept at the corner by
the Trinity great gate, but we also used to talk a good deal at a man's
in King's, a man named, if I remember rightly, Redmayne. The atmosphere
of Hatherleigh's rooms was a haze of tobacco smoke against a background
brown and deep. He professed himself a socialist with anarchistic
leanings--he had suffered the martyrdom of ducking for it--and a huge
French May-day poster displaying a splendid proletarian in red and black
on a barricade against a flaring orange sky, dominated his decorations.
Hatherleigh affected a fine untidiness, and all the place, even
the floor, was littered with books, for the most part open and face
downward; deeper darknesses were supplied by a discarded gown and
our caps, all conscientiously battered, Hatherleigh's flopped like an
elephant's ear and inserted quill pens supported the corners of mine;
the highlights of the picture came chiefly as reflections from his
chequered blue mugs full of audit ale. We sat on oak chairs, except the
four or five who crowded on a capacious settle, we drank a lot of beer
and were often fuddled, and occasionally quite drunk, and we all smoked
reckless-looking pipes,--there was a transient fashion among us for corn
cobs for which Mark Twain, I think, was responsible. Our little excesses
with liquor were due far more to conscience than appetite, indicated
chiefly a resolve to break away from restraints that we suspected were
keeping us off the instructive knife-edges of life. Hatherleigh was a
good Englishman of the premature type with a red face, a lot of hair, a
deep voice and an explosive plunging manner, and it was he who said one
evening--Heaven knows how we got to it--"Look here, you know, it's all
Rot, this Shutting Up about Women. We OUGHT to talk about them. What are
we going to do about them? It's got to come. We're all festering inside
about it. Let's out with it. There's too much Decency altogether about
this Infernal University!"

We rose to his challenge a little awkwardly and our first talk
was clumsy, there were flushed faces and red ears, and I remember
Hatherleigh broke out into a monologue on decency. "Modesty and
Decency," said Hatherleigh, "are Oriental vices. The Jews brought them
to Europe. They're Semitic, just like our monasticism here and the
seclusion of women and mutilating the dead on a battlefield. And all
that sort of thing."

Hatherleigh's mind progressed by huge leaps, leaps that were usually
wildly inaccurate, and for a time we engaged hotly upon the topic of
those alleged mutilations and the Semitic responsibility for decency.
Hatherleigh tried hard to saddle the Semitic race with the less elegant
war customs of the Soudan and the northwest frontier of India, and
quoted Doughty, at that time a little-known author, and Cunninghame
Graham to show that the Arab was worse than a county-town spinster in
his regard for respectability. But his case was too preposterous, and
Esmeer, with his shrill penetrating voice and his way of pointing with
all four long fingers flat together, carried the point against him. He
quoted Cato and Roman law and the monasteries of Thibet.

"Well, anyway," said Hatherleigh, escaping from our hands like an
intellectual frog, "Semitic or not, I've got no use for decency."

We argued points and Hatherleigh professed an unusually balanced and
tolerating attitude. "I don't mind a certain refinement and dignity," he
admitted generously. "What I object to is this spreading out of decency
until it darkens the whole sky, until it makes a man's father afraid to
speak of the most important things, until it makes a man afraid to look
a frank book in the face or think--even think! until it leads to our
coming to--to the business at last with nothing but a few prohibitions,
a few hints, a lot of dirty jokes and, and "--he waved a hand and seemed
to seek and catch his image in the air--"oh, a confounded buttered slide
of sentiment, to guide us. I tell you I'm going to think about it and
talk about it until I see a little more daylight than I do at present.
I'm twenty-two. Things might happen to me anywhen. You men can go out
into the world if you like, to sin like fools and marry like fools,
not knowing what you are doing and ashamed to ask. You'll take
the consequences, too, I expect, pretty meekly, sniggering a bit,
sentimentalising a bit, like--like Cambridge humorists.... I mean to
know what I'm doing."

He paused to drink, and I think I cut in with ideas of my own. But one
is apt to forget one's own share in a talk, I find, more than one does
the clear-cut objectivity of other people's, and I do not know how far
I contributed to this discussion that followed. I am, however, pretty
certain that it was then that ideal that we were pleased to call
aristocracy and which soon became the common property of our set was
developed. It was Esmeer, I know, who laid down and maintained the
proposition that so far as minds went there were really only two sorts
of man in the world, the aristocrat and the man who subdues his mind to
other people's.

"'I couldn't THINK of it, Sir,'" said Esmeer in his elucidatory tones;
"that's what a servant says. His mind even is broken in to run between
fences, and he admits it. WE'VE got to be able to think of anything.
And 'such things aren't for the Likes of Us!' That's another servant's
saying. Well, everything IS for the Likes of Us. If we see fit, that
is."

A small fresh-coloured man in grey objected.

"Well," exploded Hatherleigh, "if that isn't so what the deuce are we
up here for? Instead of working in mines? If some things aren't to be
thought about ever! We've got the privilege of all these extra years for
getting things straight in our heads, and then we won't use 'em. Good
God! what do you think a university's for?"...

Esmeer's idea came with an effect of real emancipation to several of
us. We were not going to be afraid of ideas any longer, we were going
to throw down every barrier of prohibition and take them in and see what
came of it. We became for a time even intemperately experimental, and
one of us, at the bare suggestion of an eminent psychic investigator,
took hashish and very nearly died of it within a fortnight of our great
elucidation.

The chief matter of our interchanges was of course the discussion
of sex. Once the theme had been opened it became a sore place in
our intercourse; none of us seemed able to keep away from it. Our
imaginations got astir with it. We made up for lost time and went
round it and through it and over it exhaustively. I recall prolonged
discussion of polygamy on the way to Royston, muddy November tramps to
Madingley, when amidst much profanity from Hatherleigh at the serious
treatment of so obsolete a matter, we weighed the reasons, if any, for
the institution of marriage. The fine dim night-time spaces of the Great
Court are bound up with the inconclusive finales of mighty hot-eared
wrangles; the narrows of Trinity Street and Petty Cury and Market Hill
have their particular associations for me with that spate of confession
and free speech, that almost painful goal delivery of long pent and
crappled and sometimes crippled ideas.

And we went on a reading party that Easter to a place called Pulborough
in Sussex, where there is a fishing inn and a river that goes under a
bridge. It was a late Easter and a blazing one, and we boated and bathed
and talked of being Hellenic and the beauty of the body until at moments
it seemed to us that we were destined to restore the Golden Age, by the
simple abolition of tailors and outfitters.

Those undergraduate talks! how rich and glorious they seemed, how
splendidly new the ideas that grew and multiplied in our seething minds!
We made long afternoon and evening raids over the Downs towards Arundel,
and would come tramping back through the still keen moonlight singing
and shouting. We formed romantic friendships with one another, and
grieved more or less convincingly that there were no splendid women fit
to be our companions in the world. But Hatherleigh, it seemed, had once
known a girl whose hair was gloriously red. "My God!" said Hatherleigh
to convey the quality of her; just simply and with projectile violence:
"My God!"

Benton had heard of a woman who lived with a man refusing to be married
to him--we thought that splendid beyond measure,--I cannot now imagine
why. She was "like a tender goddess," Benton said. A sort of shame
came upon us in the dark in spite of our liberal intentions when Benton
committed himself to that. And after such talk we would fall upon great
pauses of emotional dreaming, and if by chance we passed a girl in a
governess cart, or some farmer's daughter walking to the station, we
became alertly silent or obstreperously indifferent to her. For might
she not be just that one exception to the banal decency, the sickly
pointless conventionality, the sham modesty of the times in which we
lived?

We felt we stood for a new movement, not realising how perennially this
same emancipation returns to those ancient courts beside the Cam.
We were the anti-decency party, we discovered a catch phrase that we
flourished about in the Union and made our watchword, namely, "stark
fact." We hung nude pictures in our rooms much as if they had been
flags, to the earnest concern of our bedders, and I disinterred my
long-kept engraving and had it framed in fumed oak, and found for it a
completer and less restrained companion, a companion I never cared for
in the slightest degree....

This efflorescence did not prevent, I think indeed it rather helped, our
more formal university work, for most of us took firsts, and three of
us got Fellowships in one year or another. There was Benton who had a
Research Fellowship and went to Tubingen, there was Esmeer and myself
who both became Residential Fellows. I had taken the Mental and
Moral Science Tripos (as it was then), and three years later I got a
lectureship in political science. In those days it was disguised in the
cloak of Political Economy.



2


It was our affectation to be a little detached from the main stream of
undergraduate life. We worked pretty hard, but by virtue of our
beer, our socialism and suchlike heterodoxy, held ourselves to be
differentiated from the swatting reading man. None of us, except Baxter,
who was a rowing blue, a rather abnormal blue with an appetite for
ideas, took games seriously enough to train, and on the other hand
we intimated contempt for the rather mediocre, deliberately humorous,
consciously gentlemanly and consciously wild undergraduate men who
made up the mass of Cambridge life. After the manner of youth we were
altogether too hard on our contemporaries. We battered our caps and
tore our gowns lest they should seem new, and we despised these others
extremely for doing exactly the same things; we had an idea of ourselves
and resented beyond measure a similar weakness in these our brothers.

There was a type, or at least there seemed to us to be a type--I'm a
little doubtful at times now whether after all we didn't create it--for
which Hatherleigh invented the nickname the "Pinky Dinkys," intending
thereby both contempt and abhorrence in almost equal measure. The Pinky
Dinky summarised all that we particularly did not want to be, and also,
I now perceive, much of what we were and all that we secretly dreaded
becoming.

But it is hard to convey the Pinky Dinky idea, for all that it meant so
much to us. We spent one evening at least during that reading party upon
the Pinky Dinky; we sat about our one fire after a walk in the
rain--it was our only wet day--smoked our excessively virile pipes, and
elaborated the natural history of the Pinky Dinky. We improvised a
sort of Pinky Dinky litany, and Hatherleigh supplied deep notes for the
responses.

"The Pinky Dinky extracts a good deal of amusement from life," said some
one.

"Damned prig!" said Hatherleigh.

"The Pinky Dinky arises in the Union and treats the question with a
light gay touch. He makes the weird ones mad. But sometimes he cannot go
on because of the amusement he extracts."

"I want to shy books at the giggling swine," said Hatherleigh.

"The Pinky Dinky says suddenly while he is making the tea, 'We're all
being frightfully funny. It's time for you to say something now.'"

"The Pinky Dinky shakes his head and says: 'I'm afraid I shall never be
a responsible being.' And he really IS frivolous."

"Frivolous but not vulgar," said Esmeer.

"Pinky Dinkys are chaps who've had their buds nipped," said Hatherleigh.
"They're Plebs and they know it. They haven't the Guts to get hold of
things. And so they worry up all those silly little jokes of theirs to
carry it off."...

We tried bad ones for a time, viciously flavoured.

Pinky Dinkys are due to over-production of the type that ought to keep
outfitters' shops. Pinky Dinkys would like to keep outfitters' shops
with whimsy 'scriptions on the boxes and make your bill out funny, and
not be snobs to customers, no!--not even if they had titles."

"Every Pinky Dinky's people are rather good people, and better than most
Pinky Dinky's people. But he does not put on side."

"Pinky Dinkys become playful at the sight of women."

"'Croquet's my game,' said the Pinky Dinky, and felt a man
condescended."

"But what the devil do they think they're up to, anyhow?" roared old
Hatherleigh suddenly, dropping plump into bottomless despair.

We felt we had still failed to get at the core of the mystery of the
Pinky Dinky.

We tried over things about his religion. "The Pinky Dinky goes to King's
Chapel, and sits and feels in the dusk. Solemn things! Oh HUSH! He
wouldn't tell you--"

"He COULDN'T tell you."

"Religion is so sacred to him he never talks about it, never reads about
it, never thinks about it. Just feels!"

"But in his heart of hearts, oh! ever so deep, the Pinky Dinky has a
doubt--"

Some one protested.

"Not a vulgar doubt," Esmeer went on, "but a kind of hesitation whether
the Ancient of Days is really exactly what one would call good form....
There's a lot of horrid coarseness got into the world somehow. SOMEBODY
put it there.... And anyhow there's no particular reason why a man
should be seen about with Him. He's jolly Awful of course and all
that--"

"The Pinky Dinky for all his fun and levity has a clean mind."

"A thoroughly clean mind. Not like Esmeer's--the Pig!"

"If once he began to think about sex, how could he be comfortable at
croquet?"

"It's their Damned Modesty," said Hatherleigh suddenly, "that's what's
the matter with the Pinky Dinky. It's Mental Cowardice dressed up as a
virtue and taking the poor dears in. Cambridge is soaked with it; it's
some confounded local bacillus. Like the thing that gives a flavour to
Havana cigars. He comes up here to be made into a man and a ruler of
the people, and he thinks it shows a nice disposition not to take on the
job! How the Devil is a great Empire to be run with men like him?"

"All his little jokes and things," said Esmeer regarding his feet on
the fender, "it's just a nervous sniggering--because he's afraid....
Oxford's no better."

"What's he afraid of?" said I.

"God knows!" exploded Hatherleigh and stared at the fire.

"LIFE!" said Esmeer. "And so in a way are we," he added, and made a
thoughtful silence for a time.

"I say," began Carter, who was doing the Natural Science Tripos, "what
is the adult form of the Pinky Dinky?"

But there we were checked by our ignorance of the world.

"What is the adult form of any of us?" asked Benton, voicing the thought
that had arrested our flow.



3


I do not remember that we ever lifted our criticism to the dons and the
organisation of the University. I think we took them for granted. When I
look back at my youth I am always astonished by the multitude of things
that we took for granted. It seemed to us that Cambridge was in the
order of things, for all the world like having eyebrows or a vermiform
appendix. Now with the larger scepticism of middle age I can entertain
very fundamental doubts about these old universities. Indeed I had a
scheme--

I do not see what harm I can do now by laying bare the purpose of the
political combinations I was trying to effect.

My educational scheme was indeed the starting-point of all the big
project of conscious public reconstruction at which I aimed. I wanted
to build up a new educational machine altogether for the governing class
out of a consolidated system of special public service schools. I
meant to get to work upon this whatever office I was given in the new
government. I could have begun my plan from the Admiralty or the
War Office quite as easily as from the Education Office. I am firmly
convinced it is hopeless to think of reforming the old public schools
and universities to meet the needs of a modern state, they send their
roots too deep and far, the cost would exceed any good that could
possibly be effected, and so I have sought a way round this invincible
obstacle. I do think it would be quite practicable to side-track, as the
Americans say, the whole system by creating hardworking, hard-living,
modern and scientific boys' schools, first for the Royal Navy and then
for the public service generally, and as they grew, opening them to
the public without any absolute obligation to subsequent service.
Simultaneously with this it would not be impossible to develop a new
college system with strong faculties in modern philosophy, modern
history, European literature and criticism, physical and biological
science, education and sociology.

We could in fact create a new liberal education in this way, and cut the
umbilicus of the classical languages for good and all. I should have set
this going, and trusted it to correct or kill the old public schools and
the Oxford and Cambridge tradition altogether. I had men in my mind to
begin the work, and I should have found others. I should have aimed at
making a hard-trained, capable, intellectually active, proud type of
man. Everything else would have been made subservient to that. I should
have kept my grip on the men through their vacation, and somehow or
other I would have contrived a young woman to match them. I think I
could have seen to it effectually enough that they didn't get at croquet
and tennis with the vicarage daughters and discover sex in the Peeping
Tom fashion I did, and that they realised quite early in life that
it isn't really virile to reek of tobacco. I should have had military
manoeuvres, training ships, aeroplane work, mountaineering and so forth,
in the place of the solemn trivialities of games, and I should have fed
and housed my men clean and very hard--where there wasn't any audit ale,
no credit tradesmen, and plenty of high pressure douches....

I have revisited Cambridge and Oxford time after time since I came
down, and so far as the Empire goes, I want to get clear of those two
places....

Always I renew my old feelings, a physical oppression, a sense of
lowness and dampness almost exactly like the feeling of an underground
room where paper moulders and leaves the wall, a feeling of ineradicable
contagion in the Gothic buildings, in the narrow ditch-like rivers, in
those roads and roads of stuffy little villas. Those little villas
have destroyed all the good of the old monastic system and none of its
evil....

Some of the most charming people in the world live in them, but their
collective effect is below the quality of any individual among them.
Cambridge is a world of subdued tones, of excessively subtle humours, of
prim conduct and free thinking; it fears the Parent, but it has no fear
of God; it offers amidst surroundings that vary between disguises and
antiquarian charm the inflammation of literature's purple draught;
one hears there a peculiar thin scandal like no other scandal in the
world--a covetous scandal--so that I am always reminded of Ibsen in
Cambridge. In Cambridge and the plays of Ibsen alone does it seem
appropriate for the heroine before the great crisis of life to "enter,
take off her overshoes, and put her wet umbrella upon the writing
desk."...

We have to make a new Academic mind for modern needs, and the last thing
to make it out of, I am convinced, is the old Academic mind. One
might as soon try to fake the old VICTORY at Portsmouth into a line of
battleship again. Besides which the old Academic mind, like those old
bathless, damp Gothic colleges, is much too delightful in its peculiar
and distinctive way to damage by futile patching.

My heart warms to a sense of affectionate absurdity as I recall dear old
Codger, surely the most "unleaderly" of men. No more than from the old
Schoolmen, his kindred, could one get from him a School for Princes.
Yet apart from his teaching he was as curious and adorable as a good
Netsuke. Until quite recently he was a power in Cambridge, he could
make and bar and destroy, and in a way he has become the quintessence of
Cambridge in my thoughts.

I see him on his way to the morning's lecture, with his plump childish
face, his round innocent eyes, his absurdly non-prehensile fat hand
carrying his cap, his grey trousers braced up much too high, his feet a
trifle inturned, and going across the great court with a queer tripping
pace that seemed cultivated even to my naive undergraduate eye. Or I
see him lecturing. He lectured walking up and down between the desks,
talking in a fluting rapid voice, and with the utmost lucidity. If he
could not walk up and down he could not lecture. His mind and voice had
precisely the fluid quality of some clear subtle liquid; one felt it
could flow round anything and overcome nothing. And its nimble eddies
were wonderful! Or again I recall him drinking port with little muscular
movements in his neck and cheek and chin and his brows knit--very
judicial, very concentrated, preparing to say the apt just thing; it was
the last thing he would have told a lie about.

When I think of Codger I am reminded of an inscription I saw on some
occasion in Regent's Park above two eyes scarcely more limpidly innocent
than his--"Born in the Menagerie." Never once since Codger began to
display the early promise of scholarship at the age of eight or more,
had he been outside the bars. His utmost travel had been to lecture here
and lecture there. His student phase had culminated in papers of quite
exceptional brilliance, and he had gone on to lecture with a cheerful
combination of wit and mannerism that had made him a success from the
beginning. He has lectured ever since. He lectures still. Year by year
he has become plumper, more rubicund and more and more of an item for
the intelligent visitor to see. Even in my time he was pointed out to
people as part of our innumerable enrichments, and obviously he knew it.
He has become now almost the leading Character in a little donnish world
of much too intensely appreciated Characters.

He boasted he took no exercise, and also of his knowledge of port wine.
Of other wines he confessed quite frankly he had no "special knowledge."
Beyond these things he had little pride except that he claimed to have
read every novel by a woman writer that had ever entered the Union
Library. This, however, he held to be remarkable rather than ennobling,
and such boasts as he made of it were tinged with playfulness. Certainly
he had a scholar's knowledge of the works of Miss Marie Corelli, Miss
Braddon, Miss Elizabeth Glyn and Madame Sarah Grand that would have
astonished and flattered those ladies enormously, and he loved nothing
so much in his hours of relaxation as to propound and answer difficult
questions upon their books. Tusher of King's was his ineffectual rival
in this field, their bouts were memorable and rarely other than glorious
for Codger; but then Tusher spread himself too much, he also undertook
to rehearse whole pages out of Bradshaw, and tell you with all the
changes how to get from any station to any station in Great Britain by
the nearest and cheapest routes....

Codger lodged with a little deaf innocent old lady, Mrs. Araminta
Mergle, who was understood to be herself a very redoubtable Character in
the Gyp-Bedder class; about her he related quietly absurd anecdotes.
He displayed a marvellous invention in ascribing to her plausible
expressions of opinion entirely identical in import with those of the
Oxford and Harvard Pragmatists, against whom he waged a fierce obscure
war....

It was Codger's function to teach me philosophy, philosophy! the
intimate wisdom of things. He dealt in a variety of Hegelian stuff like
nothing else in the world, but marvellously consistent with itself. It
was a wonderful web he spun out of that queer big active childish brain
that had never lusted nor hated nor grieved nor feared nor passionately
loved,--a web of iridescent threads. He had luminous final theories
about Love and Death and Immortality, odd matters they seemed for him to
think about! and all his woven thoughts lay across my perception of the
realities of things, as flimsy and irrelevant and clever and beautiful,
oh!--as a dew-wet spider's web slung in the morning sunshine across the
black mouth of a gun....



4


All through those years of development I perceive now there must have
been growing in me, slowly, irregularly, assimilating to itself all
the phrases and forms of patriotism, diverting my religious impulses,
utilising my esthetic tendencies, my dominating idea, the statesman's
idea, that idea of social service which is the protagonist of my story,
that real though complex passion for Making, making widely and greatly,
cities, national order, civilisation, whose interplay with all those
other factors in life I have set out to present. It was growing in
me--as one's bones grow, no man intending it.

I have tried to show how, quite early in my life, the fact of
disorderliness, the conception of social life as being a multitudinous
confusion out of hand, came to me. One always of course simplifies these
things in the telling, but I do not think I ever saw the world at large
in any other terms. I never at any stage entertained the idea
which sustained my mother, and which sustains so many people in the
world,--the idea that the universe, whatever superficial discords it
may present, is as a matter of fact "all right," is being steered to
definite ends by a serene and unquestionable God. My mother thought that
Order prevailed, and that disorder was just incidental and foredoomed
rebellion; I feel and have always felt that order rebels against and
struggles against disorder, that order has an up-hill job, in gardens,
experiments, suburbs, everything alike; from the very beginnings of my
experience I discovered hostility to order, a constant escaping from
control.

The current of living and contemporary ideas in which my mind was
presently swimming made all in the same direction; in place of my
mother's attentive, meticulous but occasionally extremely irascible
Providence, the talk was all of the Struggle for Existence and the
survival not of the Best--that was nonsense, but of the fittest to
survive.

The attempts to rehabilitate Faith in the form of the Individualist's
LAISSEZ FAIRE never won upon me. I disliked Herbert Spencer all my life
until I read his autobiography, and then I laughed a little and loved
him. I remember as early as the City Merchants' days how Britten and I
scoffed at that pompous question-begging word "Evolution," having, so to
speak, found it out. Evolution, some illuminating talker had remarked at
the Britten lunch table, had led not only to man, but to the liver-fluke
and skunk, obviously it might lead anywhere; order came into things only
through the struggling mind of man. That lit things wonderfully for
us. When I went up to Cambridge I was perfectly clear that life was
a various and splendid disorder of forces that the spirit of man sets
itself to tame. I have never since fallen away from that persuasion.

I do not think I was exceptionally precocious in reaching these
conclusions and a sort of religious finality for myself by eighteen or
nineteen. I know men and women vary very much in these matters, just as
children do in learning to talk. Some will chatter at eighteen months
and some will hardly speak until three, and the thing has very little
to do with their subsequent mental quality. So it is with young people;
some will begin their religious, their social, their sexual interests at
fourteen, some not until far on in the twenties. Britten and I belonged
to one of the precocious types, and Cossington very probably to another.
It wasn't that there was anything priggish about any of us; we should
have been prigs to have concealed our spontaneous interests and ape the
theoretical boy.

The world of man centred for my imagination in London, it still centres
there; the real and present world, that is to say, as distinguished from
the wonder-lands of atomic and microscopic science and the stars and
future time. I had travelled scarcely at all, I had never crossed the
Channel, but I had read copiously and I had formed a very good working
idea of this round globe with its mountains and wildernesses and forests
and all the sorts and conditions of human life that were scattered over
its surface. It was all alive, I felt, and changing every day; how it
was changing, and the changes men might bring about, fascinated my mind
beyond measure.

I used to find a charm in old maps that showed The World as Known to the
Ancients, and I wish I could now without any suspicion of self-deception
write down compactly the world as it was known to me at nineteen. So
far as extension went it was, I fancy, very like the world I know now at
forty-two; I had practically all the mountains and seas, boundaries and
races, products and possibilities that I have now. But its intension was
very different. All the interval has been increasing and deepening my
social knowledge, replacing crude and second-hand impressions by felt
and realised distinctions.

In 1895--that was my last year with Britten, for I went up to Cambridge
in September--my vision of the world had much the same relation to the
vision I have to-day that an ill-drawn daub of a mask has to the direct
vision of a human face. Britten and I looked at our world and saw--what
did we see? Forms and colours side by side that we had no suspicion were
interdependent. We had no conception of the roots of things nor of the
reaction of things. It did not seem to us, for example, that business
had anything to do with government, or that money and means affected the
heroic issues of war. There were no wagons in our war game, and where
there were guns, there it was assumed the ammunition was gathered
together. Finance again was a sealed book to us; we did not so much
connect it with the broad aspects of human affairs as regard it as a
sort of intrusive nuisance to be earnestly ignored by all right-minded
men. We had no conception of the quality of politics, nor how
"interests" came into such affairs; we believed men were swayed by
purely intellectual convictions and were either right or wrong, honest
or dishonest (in which case they deserved to be shot), good or bad. We
knew nothing of mental inertia, and could imagine the opinion of a whole
nation changed by one lucid and convincing exposition. We were capable
of the most incongruous transfers from the scroll of history to our own
times, we could suppose Brixton ravaged and Hampstead burnt in civil
wars for the succession to the throne, or Cheapside a lane of death and
the front of the Mansion House set about with guillotines in the course
of an accurately transposed French Revolution. We rebuilt London by Act
of Parliament, and once in a mood of hygienic enterprise we transferred
its population EN MASSE to the North Downs by an order of the Local
Government Board. We thought nothing of throwing religious organisations
out of employment or superseding all the newspapers by freely
distributed bulletins. We could contemplate the possibility of laws
abolishing whole classes; we were equal to such a dream as the peaceful
and orderly proclamation of Communism from the steps of St. Paul's
Cathedral, after the passing of a simply worded bill,--a close and not
unnaturally an exciting division carrying the third reading. I remember
quite distinctly evolving that vision. We were then fully fifteen and we
were perfectly serious about it. We were not fools; it was simply that
as yet we had gathered no experience at all of the limits and powers of
legislation and conscious collective intention....

I think this statement does my boyhood justice, and yet I have my
doubts. It is so hard now to say what one understood and what one did
not understand. It isn't only that every day changed one's general
outlook, but also that a boy fluctuates between phases of quite adult
understanding and phases of tawdrily magnificent puerility. Sometimes
I myself was in those tumbrils that went along Cheapside to the Mansion
House, a Sydney Cartonesque figure, a white defeated Mirabean; sometimes
it was I who sat judging and condemning and ruling (sleeping in
my clothes and feeding very simply) the soul and autocrat of the
Provisional Government, which occupied, of all inconvenient places! the
General Post Office at St. Martin's-le-Grand!...

I cannot trace the development of my ideas at Cambridge, but I believe
the mere physical fact of going two hours' journey away from London gave
that place for the first time an effect of unity in my imagination. I
got outside London. It became tangible instead of being a frame almost
as universal as sea and sky.

At Cambridge my ideas ceased to live in a duologue; in exchange for
Britten, with whom, however, I corresponded lengthily, stylishly and
self-consciously for some years, I had now a set of congenial friends. I
got talk with some of the younger dons, I learnt to speak in the Union,
and in my little set we were all pretty busily sharpening each other's
wits and correcting each other's interpretations. Cambridge made
politics personal and actual. At City Merchants' we had had no sense
of effective contact; we boasted, it is true, an under secretary and a
colonial governor among our old boys, but they were never real to
us; such distinguished sons as returned to visit the old school were
allusive and pleasant in the best Pinky Dinky style, and pretended to
be in earnest about nothing but our football and cricket, to mourn the
abolition of "water," and find a shuddering personal interest in the
ancient swishing block. At Cambridge I felt for the first time that I
touched the thing that was going on. Real living statesmen came down to
debate in the Union, the older dons had been their college intimates,
their sons and nephews expounded them to us and made them real to us.
They invited us to entertain ideas; I found myself for the first time
in my life expected to read and think and discuss, my secret vice had
become a virtue.

That combination-room world is at last larger and more populous and
various than the world of schoolmasters. The Shoesmiths and Naylors who
had been the aristocracy of City Merchants' fell into their place in my
mind; they became an undistinguished mass on the more athletic side of
Pinky Dinkyism, and their hostility to ideas and to the expression
of ideas ceased to limit and trouble me. The brighter men of each
generation stay up; these others go down to propagate their tradition,
as the fathers of families, as mediocre professional men, as assistant
masters in schools. Cambridge which perfects them is by the nature
of things least oppressed by them,--except when it comes to a vote in
Convocation.

We were still in those days under the shadow of the great Victorians. I
never saw Gladstone (as I never set eyes on the old Queen), but he
had resigned office only a year before I went up to Trinity, and the
Combination Rooms were full of personal gossip about him and Disraeli
and the other big figures of the gladiatorial stage of Parlimentary
history, talk that leaked copiously into such sets as mine. The ceiling
of our guest chamber at Trinity was glorious with the arms of Sir
William Harcourt, whose Death Duties had seemed at first like a
socialist dawn. Mr. Evesham we asked to come to the Union every year,
Masters, Chamberlain and the old Duke of Devonshire; they did not come
indeed, but their polite refusals brought us all, as it were, within
personal touch of them. One heard of cabinet councils and meetings at
country houses. Some of us, pursuing such interests, went so far as to
read political memoirs and the novels of Disraeli and Mrs. Humphry Ward.
From gossip, example and the illustrated newspapers one learnt something
of the way in which parties were split, coalitions formed, how permanent
officials worked and controlled their ministers, how measures were
brought forward and projects modified.

And while I was getting the great leading figures on the political
stage, who had been presented to me in my schooldays not so much as men
as the pantomimic monsters of political caricature, while I was getting
them reduced in my imagination to the stature of humanity, and their
motives to the quality of impulses like my own, I was also acquiring in
my Tripos work a constantly developing and enriching conception of
the world of men as a complex of economic, intellectual and moral
processes....



5


Socialism is an intellectual Proteus, but to the men of my generation it
came as the revolt of the workers. Rodbertus we never heard of and
the Fabian Society we did not understand; Marx and Morris, the Chicago
Anarchists, JUSTICE and Social Democratic Federation (as it was then)
presented socialism to our minds. Hatherleigh was the leading exponent
of the new doctrines in Trinity, and the figure upon his wall of a
huge-muscled, black-haired toiler swaggering sledgehammer in hand across
a revolutionary barricade, seemed the quintessence of what he had to
expound. Landlord and capitalist had robbed and enslaved the workers,
and were driving them quite automatically to inevitable insurrection.
They would arise and the capitalist system would flee and vanish like
the mists before the morning, like the dews before the sunrise, giving
place in the most simple and obvious manner to an era of Right and
Justice and Virtue and Well Being, and in short a Perfectly Splendid
Time.

I had already discussed this sort of socialism under the guidance of
Britten, before I went up to Cambridge. It was all mixed up with ideas
about freedom and natural virtue and a great scorn for kings, titles,
wealth and officials, and it was symbolised by the red ties we wore. Our
simple verdict on existing arrangements was that they were "all wrong."
The rich were robbers and knew it, kings and princes were usurpers and
knew it, religious teachers were impostors in league with power,
the economic system was an elaborate plot on the part of the few to
expropriate the many. We went about feeling scornful of all the current
forms of life, forms that esteemed themselves solid, that were, we knew,
no more than shapes painted on a curtain that was presently to be torn
aside....

It was Hatherleigh's poster and his capacity for overstating things, I
think, that first qualified my simple revolutionary enthusiasm. Perhaps
also I had met with Fabian publications, but if I did I forget the
circumstances. And no doubt my innate constructiveness with its
practical corollary of an analytical treatment of the material supplied,
was bound to push me on beyond this melodramatic interpretation of human
affairs.

I compared that Working Man of the poster with any sort of working man
I knew. I perceived that the latter was not going to change, and indeed
could not under any stimulus whatever be expected to change, into the
former. It crept into my mind as slowly and surely as the dawn creeps
into a room that the former was not, as I had at first rather glibly
assumed, an "ideal," but a complete misrepresentation of the quality and
possibilities of things.

I do not know now whether it was during my school-days or at Cambridge
that I first began not merely to see the world as a great contrast of
rich and poor, but to feel the massive effect of that multitudinous
majority of people who toil continually, who are for ever anxious about
ways and means, who are restricted, ill clothed, ill fed and ill
housed, who have limited outlooks and continually suffer misadventures,
hardships and distresses through the want of money. My lot had fallen
upon the fringe of the possessing minority; if I did not know the want
of necessities I knew shabbiness, and the world that let me go on to a
university education intimated very plainly that there was not a thing
beyond the primary needs that my stimulated imagination might demand
that it would not be an effort for me to secure. A certain aggressive
radicalism against the ruling and propertied classes followed almost
naturally from my circumstances. It did not at first connect itself at
all with the perception of a planless disorder in human affairs that had
been forced upon me by the atmosphere of my upbringing, nor did it link
me in sympathy with any of the profounder realities of poverty. It was
a personal independent thing. The dingier people one saw in the back
streets and lower quarters of Bromstead and Penge, the drift of dirty
children, ragged old women, street loafers, grimy workers that made
the social background of London, the stories one heard of privation and
sweating, only joined up very slowly with the general propositions I was
making about life. We could become splendidly eloquent about the social
revolution and the triumph of the Proletariat after the Class war, and
it was only by a sort of inspiration that it came to me that my bedder,
a garrulous old thing with a dusty black bonnet over one eye and an
ostentatiously clean apron outside the dark mysteries that clothed her,
or the cheeky little ruffians who yelled papers about the streets, were
really material to such questions.

Directly any of us young socialists of Trinity found ourselves in
immediate contact with servants or cadgers or gyps or bedders or
plumbers or navvies or cabmen or railway porters we became unconsciously
and unthinkingly aristocrats. Our voices altered, our gestures altered.
We behaved just as all the other men, rich or poor, swatters or
sportsmen or Pinky Dinkys, behaved, and exactly as we were expected
to behave. On the whole it is a population of poor quality round about
Cambridge, rather stunted and spiritless and very difficult to idealise.
That theoretical Working Man of ours!--if we felt the clash at all we
explained it, I suppose, by assuming that he came from another part of
the country; Esmeer, I remember, who lived somewhere in the Fens, was
very eloquent about the Cornish fishermen, and Hatherleigh, who was
a Hampshire man, assured us we ought to know the Scottish miner.
My private fancy was for the Lancashire operative because of his
co-operative societies, and because what Lancashire thinks to-day
England thinks to-morrow.... And also I had never been in Lancashire.

By little increments of realisation it was that the profounder verities
of the problem of socialism came to me. It helped me very much that I
had to go down to the Potteries several times to discuss my future with
my uncle and guardian; I walked about and saw Bursley Wakes and much of
the human aspects of organised industrialism at close quarters for the
first time. The picture of a splendid Working Man cheated out of his
innate glorious possibilities, and presently to arise and dash this
scoundrelly and scandalous system of private ownership to fragments,
began to give place to a limitless spectacle of inefficiency, to a
conception of millions of people not organised as they should be, not
educated as they should be, not simply prevented from but incapable
of nearly every sort of beauty, mostly kindly and well meaning, mostly
incompetent, mostly obstinate, and easily humbugged and easily diverted.
Even the tragic and inspiring idea of Marx, that the poor were nearing
a limit of painful experience, and awakening to a sense of intolerable
wrongs, began to develop into the more appalling conception that the
poor were simply in a witless uncomfortable inconclusive way--"muddling
along"; that they wanted nothing very definitely nor very urgently, that
mean fears enslaved them and mean satisfactions decoyed them, that they
took the very gift of life itself with a spiritless lassitude, hoarding
it, being rather anxious not to lose it than to use it in any way
whatever.

The complete development of that realisation was the work of many
years. I had only the first intimations at Cambridge. But I did have
intimations. Most acutely do I remember the doubts that followed the
visit of Chris Robinson. Chris Robinson was heralded by such heroic
anticipations, and he was so entirely what we had not anticipated.

Hatherleigh got him to come, arranged a sort of meeting for him at
Redmayne's rooms in King's, and was very proud and proprietorial. It
failed to stir Cambridge at all profoundly. Beyond a futile attempt
to screw up Hatherleigh made by some inexpert duffers who used nails
instead of screws and gimlets, there was no attempt to rag. Next day
Chris Robinson went and spoke at Bennett Hall in Newnham College, and
left Cambridge in the evening amidst the cheers of twenty men or so.
Socialism was at such a low ebb politically in those days that it didn't
even rouse men to opposition.

And there sat Chris under that flamboyant and heroic Worker of the
poster, a little wrinkled grey-bearded apologetic man in ready-made
clothes, with watchful innocent brown eyes and a persistent and
invincible air of being out of his element. He sat with his stout boots
tucked up under his chair, and clung to a teacup and saucer and
looked away from us into the fire, and we all sat about on tables and
chair-arms and windowsills and boxes and anywhere except upon chairs
after the manner of young men. The only other chair whose seat was
occupied was the one containing his knitted woollen comforter and his
picturesque old beach-photographer's hat. We were all shy and didn't
know how to take hold of him now we had got him, and, which was
disconcertingly unanticipated, he was manifestly having the same
difficulty with us. We had expected to be gripped.

"I'll not be knowing what to say to these Chaps," he repeated with a
north-country quality in his speech.

We made reassuring noises.

The Ambassador of the Workers stirred his tea earnestly through an
uncomfortable pause.

"I'd best tell 'em something of how things are in Lancashire, what
with the new machines and all that," he speculated at last with red
reflections in his thoughtful eyes.

We had an inexcusable dread that perhaps he would make a mess of the
meeting.

But when he was no longer in the unaccustomed meshes of refined
conversation, but speaking with an audience before him, he became a
different man. He declared he would explain to us just exactly what
socialism was, and went on at once to an impassioned contrast of social
conditions. "You young men," he said "come from homes of luxury; every
need you feel is supplied--"

We sat and stood and sprawled about him, occupying every inch of
Redmayne's floor space except the hearthrug-platform, and we listened
to him and thought him over. He was the voice of wrongs that made us
indignant and eager. We forgot for a time that he had been shy and
seemed not a little incompetent, his provincial accent became a beauty
of his earnest speech, we were carried away by his indignations. We
looked with shining eyes at one another and at the various dons who had
dropped in and were striving to maintain a front of judicious severity.
We felt more and more that social injustice must cease, and cease
forthwith. We felt we could not sleep upon it. At the end we clapped and
murmured our applause and wanted badly to cheer.

Then like a lancet stuck into a bladder came the heckling. Denson, that
indolent, liberal-minded sceptic, did most of the questioning. He lay
contorted in a chair, with his ugly head very low, his legs crossed and
his left boot very high, and he pointed his remarks with a long thin
hand and occasionally adjusted the unstable glasses that hid his watery
eyes. "I don't want to carp," he began. "The present system, I admit,
stands condemned. Every present system always HAS stood condemned in the
minds of intelligent men. But where it seems to me you get thin, is just
where everybody has been thin, and that's when you come to the remedy."

"Socialism," said Chris Robinson, as if it answered everything, and
Hatherleigh said "Hear! Hear!" very resolutely.

"I suppose I OUGHT to take that as an answer," said Denson, getting
his shoulder-blades well down to the seat of his chair; "but I don't.
I don't, you know. It's rather a shame to cross-examine you after this
fine address of yours"--Chris Robinson on the hearthrug made acquiescent
and inviting noises--"but the real question remains how exactly are you
going to end all these wrongs? There are the administrative questions.
If you abolish the private owner, I admit you abolish a very complex
and clumsy way of getting businesses run, land controlled and things
in general administered, but you don't get rid of the need of
administration, you know."

"Democracy," said Chris Robinson.

"Organised somehow," said Denson. "And it's just the How perplexes me.
I can quite easily imagine a socialist state administered in a sort of
scrambling tumult that would be worse than anything we have got now.

"Nothing could be worse than things are now," said Chris Robinson. "I
have seen little children--"

"I submit life on an ill-provisioned raft, for example, could easily be
worse--or life in a beleagured town."

Murmurs.

They wrangled for some time, and it had the effect upon me of coming out
from the glow of a good matinee performance into the cold daylight of
late afternoon. Chris Robinson did not shine in conflict with Denson; he
was an orator and not a dialectician, and he missed Denson's points and
displayed a disposition to plunge into untimely pathos and indignation.
And Denson hit me curiously hard with one of his shafts. "Suppose," he
said, "you found yourself prime minister--"

I looked at Chris Robinson, bright-eyed and his hair a little ruffled
and his whole being rhetorical, and measured him against the huge
machine of government muddled and mysterious. Oh! but I was perplexed!

And then we took him back to Hatherleigh's rooms and drank beer and
smoked about him while he nursed his knee with hairy wristed hands that
protruded from his flannel shirt, and drank lemonade under the cartoon
of that emancipated Worker, and we had a great discursive talk with him.

"Eh! you should see our big meetings up north?" he said.

Denson had ruffled him and worried him a good deal, and ever and again
he came back to that discussion. "It's all very easy for your learned
men to sit and pick holes," he said, "while the children suffer and die.
They don't pick holes up north. They mean business."

He talked, and that was the most interesting part of it all, of his
going to work in a factory when he was twelve--"when you Chaps were all
with your mammies "--and how he had educated himself of nights until he
would fall asleep at his reading.

"It's made many of us keen for all our lives," he remarked, "all that
clemming for education. Why! I longed all through one winter to read a
bit of Darwin. I must know about this Darwin if I die for it, I said.
And I could no' get the book."

Hatherleigh made an enthusiastic noise and drank beer at him with round
eyes over the mug.

"Well, anyhow I wasted no time on Greek and Latin," said Chris Robinson.
"And one learns to go straight at a thing without splitting straws. One
gets hold of the Elementals."

(Well, did they? That was the gist of my perplexity.)

"One doesn't quibble," he said, returning to his rankling memory of
Denson, "while men decay and starve."

"But suppose," I said, suddenly dropping into opposition, "the
alternative is to risk a worse disaster--or do something patently
futile."

"I don't follow that," said Chris Robinson. "We don't propose anything
futile, so far as I can see."


6


The prevailing force in my undergraduate days was not Socialism
but Kiplingism. Our set was quite exceptional in its socialistic
professions. And we were all, you must understand, very distinctly
Imperialists also, and professed a vivid sense of the "White Man's
Burden."

It is a little difficult now to get back to the feelings of that
period; Kipling has since been so mercilessly and exhaustively mocked,
criticised and torn to shreds;--never was a man so violently exalted and
then, himself assisting, so relentlessly called down. But in the middle
nineties this spectacled and moustached little figure with its heavy
chin and its general effect of vehement gesticulation, its wild shouts
of boyish enthusiasm for effective force, its lyric delight in the
sounds and colours, in the very odours of empire, its wonderful
discovery of machinery and cotton waste and the under officer and the
engineer, and "shop" as a poetic dialect, became almost a national
symbol. He got hold of us wonderfully, he filled us with tinkling and
haunting quotations, he stirred Britten and myself to futile imitations,
he coloured the very idiom of our conversation. He rose to his climax
with his "Recessional," while I was still an undergraduate.

What did he give me exactly?

He helped to broaden my geographical sense immensely, and he provided
phrases for just that desire for discipline and devotion and organised
effort the Socialism of our time failed to express, that the current
socialist movement still fails, I think, to express. The sort of thing
that follows, for example, tore something out of my inmost nature and
gave it a shape, and I took it back from him shaped and let much of
the rest of him, the tumult and the bullying, the hysteria and the
impatience, the incoherence and inconsistency, go uncriticised for the
sake of it:--


"Keep ye the Law--be swift in all obedience--Clear the land of evil,
drive the road and bridge the ford, Make ye sure to each his own That he
reap where he hath sown; By the peace among Our peoples let men know we
serve the Lord!"


And then again, and for all our later criticism, this sticks in my mind,
sticks there now as quintessential wisdom:


     "The 'eathen in 'is blindness bows down to wood an' stone;
     'E don't obey no orders unless they is 'is own;
     'E keeps 'is side-arms awful: 'e leaves 'em all about
     An' then comes up the regiment an' pokes the 'eathen out.
          All along o' dirtiness, all along o' mess,
          All along o' doin' things rather-more-or-less,
          All along of abby-nay, kul, an' hazar-ho,
          Mind you keep your rifle an' yourself jus' so!"


It is after all a secondary matter that Kipling, not having been born
and brought up in Bromstead and Penge, and the war in South Africa
being yet in the womb of time, could quite honestly entertain the now
remarkable delusion that England had her side-arms at that time kept
anything but "awful." He learnt better, and we all learnt with him in
the dark years of exasperating and humiliating struggle that followed,
and I do not see that we fellow learners are justified in turning
resentfully upon him for a common ignorance and assumption....

South Africa seems always painted on the back cloth of my Cambridge
memories. How immense those disasters seemed at the time, disasters
our facile English world has long since contrived in any edifying or
profitable sense to forget! How we thrilled to the shouting newspaper
sellers as the first false flush of victory gave place to the
realisation of defeat. Far away there our army showed itself human,
mortal and human in the sight of all the world, the pleasant officers we
had imagined would change to wonderful heroes at the first crackling of
rifles, remained the pleasant, rather incompetent men they had always
been, failing to imagine, failing to plan and co-operate, failing to
grip. And the common soldiers, too, they were just what our streets and
country-side had made them, no sudden magic came out of the war bugles
for them. Neither splendid nor disgraceful were they,--just ill-trained
and fairly plucky and wonderfully good-tempered men--paying for it. And
how it lowered our vitality all that first winter to hear of Nicholson's
Nek, and then presently close upon one another, to realise the
bloody waste of Magersfontein, the shattering retreat from Stormberg,
Colenso--Colenso, that blundering battle, with White, as it seemed, in
Ladysmith near the point of surrender! and so through the long unfolding
catalogue of bleak disillusionments, of aching, unconcealed anxiety lest
worse should follow. To advance upon your enemy singing about his lack
of cleanliness and method went out of fashion altogether! The dirty
retrogressive Boer vanished from our scheme of illusion.

All through my middle Cambridge period, the guns boomed and the rifles
crackled away there on the veldt, and the horsemen rode and the tale of
accidents and blundering went on. Men, mules, horses, stores and money
poured into South Africa, and the convalescent wounded streamed home. I
see it in my memory as if I had looked at it through a window instead of
through the pages of the illustrated papers; I recall as if I had been
there the wide open spaces, the ragged hillsides, the open order attacks
of helmeted men in khaki, the scarce visible smoke of the guns, the
wrecked trains in great lonely places, the burnt isolated farms, and
at last the blockhouses and the fences of barbed wire uncoiling and
spreading for endless miles across the desert, netting the elusive enemy
until at last, though he broke the meshes again and again, we had him in
the toils. If one's attention strayed in the lecture-room it wandered to
those battle-fields.

And that imagined panorama of war unfolds to an accompaniment of yelling
newsboys in the narrow old Cambridge streets, of the flicker of papers
hastily bought and torn open in the twilight, of the doubtful reception
of doubtful victories, and the insensate rejoicings at last that seemed
to some of us more shameful than defeats....



7


A book that stands out among these memories, that stimulated me
immensely so that I forced it upon my companions, half in the spirit of
propaganda and half to test it by their comments, was Meredith's ONE OF
OUR CONQUERORS. It is one of the books that have made me. In that I got
a supplement and corrective of Kipling. It was the first detached and
adverse criticism of the Englishman I had ever encountered. It must have
been published already nine or ten years when I read it. The country
had paid no heed to it, had gone on to the expensive lessons of the War
because of the dull aversion our people feel for all such intimations,
and so I could read it as a book justified. The war endorsed its every
word for me, underlined each warning indication of the gigantic dangers
that gathered against our system across the narrow seas. It discovered
Europe to me, as watching and critical.

But while I could respond to all its criticisms of my country's
intellectual indolence, of my country's want of training and discipline
and moral courage, I remember that the idea that on the continent there
were other peoples going ahead of us, mentally alert while we fumbled,
disciplined while we slouched, aggressive and preparing to bring our
Imperial pride to a reckoning, was extremely novel and distasteful to
me. It set me worrying of nights. It put all my projects for social and
political reconstruction upon a new uncomfortable footing. It made them
no longer merely desirable but urgent. Instead of pride and the love
of making one might own to a baser motive. Under Kipling's sway I had a
little forgotten the continent of Europe, treated it as a mere envious
echo to our own world-wide display. I began now to have a disturbing
sense as it were of busy searchlights over the horizon....

One consequence of the patriotic chagrin Meredith produced in me was an
attempt to belittle his merit. "It isn't a good novel, anyhow," I said.

The charge I brought against it was, I remember, a lack of unity. It
professed to be a study of the English situation in the early nineties,
but it was all deflected, I said, and all the interest was confused by
the story of Victor Radnor's fight with society to vindicate the woman
he had loved and never married. Now in the retrospect and with a mind
full of bitter enlightenment, I can do Meredith justice, and admit the
conflict was not only essential but cardinal in his picture, that the
terrible inflexibility of the rich aunts and the still more terrible
claim of Mrs. Burman Radnor, the "infernal punctilio," and Dudley
Sowerby's limitations, were the central substance of that inalertness
the book set itself to assail. So many things have been brought together
in my mind that were once remotely separated. A people that will not
valiantly face and understand and admit love and passion can understand
nothing whatever. But in those days what is now just obvious truth to me
was altogether outside my range of comprehension....



8


As I seek to recapitulate the interlacing growth of my apprehension of
the world, as I flounder among the half-remembered developments that
found me a crude schoolboy and left me a man, there comes out, as if
it stood for all the rest, my first holiday abroad. That did not happen
until I was twenty-two. I was a fellow of Trinity, and the Peace of
Vereeniging had just been signed.

I went with a man named Willersley, a man some years senior to myself,
who had just missed a fellowship and the higher division of the Civil
Service, and who had become an enthusiastic member of the London School
Board, upon which the cumulative vote and the support of the "advanced"
people had placed him. He had, like myself, a small independent income
that relieved him of any necessity to earn a living, and he had a
kindred craving for social theorising and some form of social service.
He had sought my acquaintance after reading a paper of mine (begotten
by the visit of Chris Robinson) on the limits of pure democracy. It had
marched with some thoughts of his own.

We went by train to Spiez on the Lake of Thun, then up the Gemmi,
and thence with one or two halts and digressions and a little modest
climbing we crossed over by the Antrona pass (on which we were
benighted) into Italy, and by way of Domo D'ossola and the Santa Maria
Maggiore valley to Cannobio, and thence up the lake to Locarno (where,
as I shall tell, we stayed some eventful days) and so up the Val Maggia
and over to Airolo and home.

As I write of that long tramp of ours, something of its freshness and
enlargement returns to me. I feel again the faint pleasant excitement of
the boat train, the trampling procession of people with hand baggage and
laden porters along the platform of the Folkestone pier, the scarcely
perceptible swaying of the moored boat beneath our feet. Then, very
obvious and simple, the little emotion of standing out from the homeland
and seeing the long white Kentish cliffs recede. One walked about the
boat doing one's best not to feel absurdly adventurous, and presently a
movement of people directed one's attention to a white lighthouse on a
cliff to the east of us, coming up suddenly; and then one turned to scan
the little different French coast villages, and then, sliding by in a
pale sunshine came a long wooden pier with oddly dressed children upon
it, and the clustering town of Boulogne.

One took it all with the outward calm that became a young man of nearly
three and twenty, but one was alive to one's finger-tips with pleasing
little stimulations. The custom house examination excited one, the
strangeness of a babble in a foreign tongue; one found the French of
City Merchants' and Cambridge a shy and viscous flow, and then one was
standing in the train as it went slowly through the rail-laid street to
Boulogne Ville, and one looked out at the world in French, porters in
blouses, workmen in enormous purple trousers, police officers in peaked
caps instead of helmets and romantically cloaked, big carts, all on
two wheels instead of four, green shuttered casements instead of
sash windows, and great numbers of neatly dressed women in economical
mourning.

"Oh! there's a priest!" one said, and was betrayed into suchlike artless
cries.

It was a real other world, with different government and different
methods, and in the night one was roused from uneasy slumbers and
sat blinking and surly, wrapped up in one's couverture and with one's
oreiller all awry, to encounter a new social phenomenon, the German
official, so different in manner from the British; and when one woke
again after that one had come to Bale, and out one tumbled to get coffee
in Switzerland....

I have been over that route dozens of times since, but it still revives
a certain lingering youthfulness, a certain sense of cheerful release in
me.

I remember that I and Willersley became very sociological as we ran on
to Spiez, and made all sorts of generalisations from the steeply sloping
fields on the hillsides, and from the people we saw on platforms and
from little differences in the way things were done.

The clean prosperity of Bale and Switzerland, the big clean stations,
filled me with patriotic misgivings, as I thought of the vast dirtiness
of London, the mean dirtiness of Cambridgeshire. It came to me that
perhaps my scheme of international values was all wrong, that quite
stupendous possibilities and challenges for us and our empire might be
developing here--and I recalled Meredith's Skepsey in France with a new
understanding.

Willersley had dressed himself in a world-worn Norfolk suit of greenish
grey tweeds that ended unfamiliarly at his rather impending, spectacled,
intellectual visage. I didn't, I remember, like the contrast of him with
the drilled Swiss and Germans about us. Convict coloured stockings
and vast hobnail boots finished him below, and all his luggage was a
borrowed rucksac that he had tied askew. He did not want to shave in
the train, but I made him at one of the Swiss stations--I dislike
these Oxford slovenlinesses--and then confound him! he cut himself and
bled....

Next morning we were breathing a thin exhilarating air that seemed to
have washed our very veins to an incredible cleanliness, and
eating hard-boiled eggs in a vast clear space of rime-edged rocks,
snow-mottled, above a blue-gashed glacier. All about us the monstrous
rock surfaces rose towards the shining peaks above, and there were
winding moraines from which the ice had receded, and then dark
clustering fir trees far below.

I had an extraordinary feeling of having come out of things, of being
outside.

"But this is the round world!" I said, with a sense of never having
perceived it before; "this is the round world!"



9


That holiday was full of big comprehensive effects; the first view of
the Rhone valley and the distant Valaisian Alps, for example, which we
saw from the shoulder of the mountain above the Gemmi, and the early
summer dawn breaking over Italy as we moved from our night's crouching
and munched bread and chocolate and stretched our stiff limbs among the
tumbled and precipitous rocks that hung over Lake Cingolo, and surveyed
the winding tiring rocky track going down and down to Antronapiano.

And our thoughts were as comprehensive as our impressions. Willersley's
mind abounded in historical matter; he had an inaccurate abundant habit
of topographical reference; he made me see and trace and see again the
Roman Empire sweep up these winding valleys, and the coming of the first
great Peace among the warring tribes of men....

In the retrospect each of us seems to have been talking about our
outlook almost continually. Each of us, you see, was full of the same
question, very near and altogether predominant to us, the question:
"What am I going to do with my life?" He saw it almost as importantly as
I, but from a different angle, because his choice was largely made and
mine still hung in the balance.

"I feel we might do so many things," I said, "and everything that calls
one, calls one away from something else."

Willersley agreed without any modest disavowals.

"We have got to think out," he said, "just what we are and what we are
up to. We've got to do that now. And then--it's one of those questions
it is inadvisable to reopen subsequently."

He beamed at me through his glasses. The sententious use of long words
was a playful habit with him, that and a slight deliberate humour,
habits occasional Extension Lecturing was doing very much to intensify.

"You've made your decision?"

He nodded with a peculiar forward movement of his head.

"How would you put it?"

"Social Service--education. Whatever else matters or doesn't matter, it
seems to me there is one thing we MUST have and increase, and that
is the number of people who can think a little--and have"--he beamed
again--"an adequate sense of causation."

"You're sure it's worth while."

"For me--certainly. I don't discuss that any more."

"I don't limit myself too narrowly," he added. "After all, the work is
all one. We who know, we who feel, are building the great modern state,
joining wall to wall and way to way, the new great England rising out
of the decaying old... we are the real statesmen--I like that use of
'statesmen.'..."

"Yes," I said with many doubts. "Yes, of course...."

Willersley is middle-aged now, with silver in his hair and a deepening
benevolence in his always amiable face, and he has very fairly kept his
word. He has lived for social service and to do vast masses of
useful, undistinguished, fertilising work. Think of the days of
arid administrative plodding and of contention still more arid and
unrewarded, that he must have spent! His little affectations of gesture
and manner, imitative affectations for the most part, have increased,
and the humorous beam and the humorous intonations have become a thing
he puts on every morning like an old coat. His devotion is mingled with
a considerable whimsicality, and they say he is easily flattered by
subordinates and easily offended into opposition by colleagues; he has
made mistakes at times and followed wrong courses, still there he is,
a flat contradiction to all the ordinary doctrine of motives, a man who
has foregone any chances of wealth and profit, foregone any easier paths
to distinction, foregone marriage and parentage, in order to serve the
community. He does it without any fee or reward except his personal
self-satisfaction in doing this work, and he does it without any hope
of future joys and punishments, for he is an implacable Rationalist. No
doubt he idealises himself a little, and dreams of recognition. No
doubt he gets his pleasure from a sense of power, from the spending
and husbanding of large sums of public money, and from the inevitable
proprietorship he must feel in the fair, fine, well-ordered schools he
has done so much to develop. "But for me," he can say, "there would have
been a Job about those diagrams, and that subject or this would have
been less ably taught."...

The fact remains that for him the rewards have been adequate, if not to
content at any rate to keep him working. Of course he covets the
notice of the world he has served, as a lover covets the notice of his
mistress. Of course he thinks somewhere, somewhen, he will get credit.
Only last year I heard some men talking of him, and they were noting,
with little mean smiles, how he had shown himself self-conscious while
there was talk of some honorary degree-giving or other; it would, I have
no doubt, please him greatly if his work were to flower into a crimson
gown in some Academic parterre. Why shouldn't it? But that is incidental
vanity at the worst; he goes on anyhow. Most men don't.

But we had our walk twenty years and more ago now. He was oldish even
then as a young man, just as he is oldish still in middle age. Long
may his industrious elderliness flourish for the good of the world! He
lectured a little in conversation then; he lectures more now and listens
less, toilsomely disentangling what you already understand, giving you
in detail the data you know; these are things like callosities that come
from a man's work.

Our long three weeks' talk comes back to me as a memory of ideas and
determinations slowly growing, all mixed up with a smell of wood smoke
and pine woods and huge precipices and remote gleams of snow-fields and
the sound of cascading torrents rushing through deep gorges far below.
It is mixed, too, with gossips with waitresses and fellow travellers,
with my first essays in colloquial German and Italian, with disputes
about the way to take, and other things that I will tell of in another
section. But the white passion of human service was our dominant theme.
Not simply perhaps nor altogether unselfishly, but quite honestly, and
with at least a frequent self-forgetfulness, did we want to do fine and
noble things, to help in their developing, to lessen misery, to broaden
and exalt life. It is very hard--perhaps it is impossible--to present
in a page or two the substance and quality of nearly a month's
conversation, conversation that is casual and discursive in form, that
ranges carelessly from triviality to immensity, and yet is constantly
resuming a constructive process, as workmen on a wall loiter and jest
and go and come back, and all the while build.

We got it more and more definite that the core of our purpose beneath
all its varied aspects must needs be order and discipline. "Muddle,"
said I, "is the enemy." That remains my belief to this day. Clearness
and order, light and foresight, these things I know for Good. It was
muddle had just given us all the still freshly painful disasters and
humiliations of the war, muddle that gives us the visibly sprawling
disorder of our cities and industrial country-side, muddle that gives us
the waste of life, the limitations, wretchedness and unemployment of the
poor. Muddle! I remember myself quoting Kipling--


    "All along o' dirtiness, all along o' mess,
     All along o' doin' things rather-more-or-less."


"We build the state," we said over and over again. "That is what we are
for--servants of the new reorganisation!"

We planned half in earnest and half Utopianising, a League of Social
Service.

We talked of the splendid world of men that might grow out of such
unpaid and ill-paid work as we were setting our faces to do. We spoke
of the intricate difficulties, the monstrous passive resistances, the
hostilities to such a development as we conceived our work subserved,
and we spoke with that underlying confidence in the invincibility of the
causes we adopted that is natural to young and scarcely tried men.

We talked much of the detailed life of politics so far as it was known
to us, and there Willersley was more experienced and far better informed
than I; we discussed possible combinations and possible developments,
and the chances of some great constructive movement coming from
the heart-searchings the Boer war had occasioned. We would sink to
gossip--even at the Suetonius level. Willersley would decline towards
illuminating anecdotes that I capped more or less loosely from my
private reading. We were particularly wise, I remember, upon the
management of newspapers, because about that we knew nothing whatever.
We perceived that great things were to be done through newspapers. We
talked of swaying opinion and moving great classes to massive action.

Men are egotistical even in devotion. All our splendid projects were
thickset with the first personal pronoun. We both could write, and all
that we said in general terms was reflected in the particular in our
minds; it was ourselves we saw, and no others, writing and speaking
that moving word. We had already produced manuscript and passed the
initiations of proof reading; I had been a frequent speaker in the
Union, and Willersley was an active man on the School Board. Our feet
were already on the lower rungs that led up and up. He was six and
twenty, and I twenty-two. We intimated our individual careers in terms
of bold expectation. I had prophetic glimpses of walls and hoardings
clamorous with "Vote for Remington," and Willersley no doubt saw himself
chairman of this committee and that, saying a few slightly ironical
words after the declaration of the poll, and then sitting friendly
beside me on the government benches. There was nothing impossible in
such dreams. Why not the Board of Education for him? My preference at
that time wavered between the Local Government Board--I had great ideas
about town-planning, about revisions of municipal areas and re-organised
internal transit--and the War Office. I swayed strongly towards the
latter as the journey progressed. My educational bias came later.

The swelling ambitions that have tramped over Alpine passes! How many
of them, like mine, have come almost within sight of realisation before
they failed?

There were times when we posed like young gods (of unassuming exterior),
and times when we were full of the absurdest little solicitudes about
our prospects. There were times when one surveyed the whole world of
men as if it was a little thing at one's feet, and by way of contrast
I remember once lying in bed--it must have been during this holiday,
though I cannot for the life of me fix where--and speculating whether
perhaps some day I might not be a K. C. B., Sir Richard Remington, K. C.
B., M. P.

But the big style prevailed....

We could not tell from minute to minute whether we were planning for
a world of solid reality, or telling ourselves fairy tales about this
prospect of life. So much seemed possible, and everything we could think
of so improbable. There were lapses when it seemed to me I could never
be anything but just the entirely unimportant and undistinguished young
man I was for ever and ever. I couldn't even think of myself as five and
thirty.

Once I remember Willersley going over a list of failures, and why
they had failed--but young men in the twenties do not know much about
failures.



10


Willersley and I professed ourselves Socialists, but by this time I knew
my Rodbertus as well as my Marx, and there was much in our socialism
that would have shocked Chris Robinson as much as anything in life could
have shocked him. Socialism as a simple democratic cry we had done with
for ever. We were socialists because Individualism for us meant muddle,
meant a crowd of separated, undisciplined little people all obstinately
and ignorantly doing things jarringly, each one in his own way.
"Each," I said quoting words of my father's that rose apt in my memory,
"snarling from his own little bit of property, like a dog tied to a
cart's tail."

"Essentially," said Willersley, "essentially we're for conscription, in
peace and war alike. The man who owns property is a public official and
has to behave as such. That's the gist of socialism as I understand it."

"Or be dismissed from his post," I said, "and replaced by some better
sort of official. A man's none the less an official because he's
irresponsible. What he does with his property affects people just the
same. Private! No one is really private but an outlaw...."

Order and devotion were the very essence of our socialism, and a
splendid collective vigour and happiness its end. We projected an ideal
state, an organised state as confident and powerful as modern science,
as balanced and beautiful as a body, as beneficent as sunshine, the
organised state that should end muddle for ever; it ruled all our ideals
and gave form to all our ambitions.

Every man was to be definitely related to that, to have his predominant
duty to that. Such was the England renewed we had in mind, and how to
serve that end, to subdue undisciplined worker and undisciplined wealth
to it, and make the Scientific Commonweal, King, was the continuing
substance of our intercourse.



11


Every day the wine of the mountains was stronger in our blood, and the
flush of our youth deeper. We would go in the morning sunlight along
some narrow Alpine mule-path shouting large suggestions for national
reorganisation, and weighing considerations as lightly as though the
world was wax in our hands. "Great England," we said in effect, over
and over again, "and we will be among the makers! England renewed! The
country has been warned; it has learnt its lesson. The disasters and
anxieties of the war have sunk in. England has become serious.... Oh!
there are big things before us to do; big enduring things!"

One evening we walked up to the loggia of a little pilgrimage church,
I forget its name, that stands out on a conical hill at the head of a
winding stair above the town of Locarno. Down below the houses clustered
amidst a confusion of heat-bitten greenery. I had been sitting silently
on the parapet, looking across to the purple mountain masses where
Switzerland passes into Italy, and the drift of our talk seemed suddenly
to gather to a head.

I broke into speech, giving form to the thoughts that had been
accumulating. My words have long since passed out of my memory, the
phrases of familiar expression have altered for me, but the substance
remains as clear as ever. I said how we were in our measure emperors
and kings, men undriven, free to do as we pleased with life; we classed
among the happy ones, our bread and common necessities were given us for
nothing, we had abilities,--it wasn't modesty but cowardice to behave
as if we hadn't--and Fortune watched us to see what we might do with
opportunity and the world.

"There are so many things to do, you see," began Willersley, in his
judicial lecturer's voice.

"So many things we may do," I interrupted, "with all these years before
us.... We're exceptional men. It's our place, our duty, to do things."

"Here anyhow," I said, answering the faint amusement of his face; "I've
got no modesty. Everything conspires to set me up. Why should I run
about like all those grubby little beasts down there, seeking nothing
but mean little vanities and indulgencies--and then take credit for
modesty? I KNOW I am capable. I KNOW I have imagination. Modesty! I know
if I don't attempt the very biggest things in life I am a damned shirk.
The very biggest! Somebody has to attempt them. I feel like a loaded gun
that is only a little perplexed because it has to find out just where to
aim itself...."

The lake and the frontier villages, a white puff of steam on the distant
railway to Luino, the busy boats and steamers trailing triangular wakes
of foam, the long vista eastward towards battlemented Bellinzona, the
vast mountain distances, now tinged with sunset light, behind this
nearer landscape, and the southward waters with remote coast towns
shining dimly, waters that merged at last in a luminous golden haze,
made a broad panoramic spectacle. It was as if one surveyed the
world,--and it was like the games I used to set out upon my nursery
floor. I was exalted by it; I felt larger than men. So kings should
feel.

That sense of largeness came to me then, and it has come to me since,
again and again, a splendid intimation or a splendid vanity. Once, I
remember, when I looked at Genoa from the mountain crest behind the
town and saw that multitudinous place in all its beauty of width and
abundance and clustering human effort, and once as I was steaming past
the brown low hills of Staten Island towards the towering vigour and
clamorous vitality of New York City, that mood rose to its quintessence.
And once it came to me, as I shall tell, on Dover cliffs. And a hundred
times when I have thought of England as our country might be, with no
wretched poor, no wretched rich, a nation armed and ordered, trained and
purposeful amidst its vales and rivers, that emotion of collective ends
and collective purposes has returned to me. I felt as great as humanity.
For a brief moment I was humanity, looking at the world I had made and
had still to make....



12


And mingled with these dreams of power and patriotic service there was
another series of a different quality and a different colour, like the
antagonistic colour of a shot silk. The white life and the red life,
contrasted and interchanged, passing swiftly at a turn from one to
another, and refusing ever to mingle peacefully one with the other. I
was asking myself openly and distinctly: what are you going to do
for the world? What are you going to do with yourself? and with an
increasing strength and persistence Nature in spite of my averted
attention was asking me in penetrating undertones: what are you going
to do about this other fundamental matter, the beauty of girls and women
and your desire for them?

I have told of my sisterless youth and the narrow circumstances of my
upbringing. It made all women-kind mysterious to me. If it had not been
for my Staffordshire cousins I do not think I should have known any
girls at all until I was twenty. Of Staffordshire I will tell a little
later. But I can remember still how through all those ripening years,
the thought of women's beauty, their magic presence in the world beside
me and the unknown, untried reactions of their intercourse, grew upon me
and grew, as a strange presence grows in a room when one is occupied by
other things. I busied myself and pretended to be wholly occupied, and
there the woman stood, full half of life neglected, and it seemed to my
averted mind sometimes that she was there clad and dignified and divine,
and sometimes Aphrodite shining and commanding, and sometimes that Venus
who stoops and allures.

This travel abroad seemed to have released a multitude of things in my
mind; the clear air, the beauty of the sunshine, the very blue of
the glaciers made me feel my body and quickened all those disregarded
dreams. I saw the sheathed beauty of women's forms all about me, in the
cheerful waitresses at the inns, in the pedestrians one encountered
in the tracks, in the chance fellow travellers at the hotel tables.
"Confound it!" said I, and talked all the more zealously of that greater
England that was calling us.

I remember that we passed two Germans, an old man and a tall fair girl,
father and daughter, who were walking down from Saas. She came swinging
and shining towards us, easy and strong. I worshipped her as she
approached.

"Gut Tag!" said Willersley, removing his hat.

"Morgen!" said the old man, saluting.

I stared stockishly at the girl, who passed with an indifferent face.

That sticks in my mind as a picture remains in a room, it has kept there
bright and fresh as a thing seen yesterday, for twenty years....

I flirted hesitatingly once or twice with comely serving girls, and was
a little ashamed lest Willersley should detect the keen interest I took
in them, and then as we came over the pass from Santa Maria Maggiore to
Cannobio, my secret preoccupation took me by surprise and flooded me and
broke down my pretences.

The women in that valley are very beautiful--women vary from valley
to valley in the Alps and are plain and squat here and divinities five
miles away--and as we came down we passed a group of five or six of them
resting by the wayside. Their burthens were beside them, and one like
Ceres held a reaping hook in her brown hand. She watched us approaching
and smiled faintly, her eyes at mine.

There was some greeting, and two of them laughed together.

We passed.

"Glorious girls they were," said Willersley, and suddenly an immense
sense of boredom enveloped me. I saw myself striding on down that
winding road, talking of politics and parties and bills of parliament
and all sorts of dessicated things. That road seemed to me to wind on
for ever down to dust and infinite dreariness. I knew it for a way of
death. Reality was behind us.

Willersley set himself to draw a sociological moral. "I'm not so
sure," he said in a voice of intense discriminations, "after all, that
agricultural work isn't good for women."

"Damn agricultural work!" I said, and broke out into a vigorous cursing
of all I held dear. "Fettered things we are!" I cried. "I wonder why I
stand it!"

"Stand what?"

"Why don't I go back and make love to those girls and let the world and
you and everything go hang? Deep breasts and rounded limbs--and we poor
emasculated devils go tramping by with the blood of youth in us!..."

"I'm not quite sure, Remington," said Willersley, looking at me with
a deliberately quaint expression over his glasses, "that picturesque
scenery is altogether good for your morals."

That fever was still in my blood when we came to Locarno.



13


Along the hot and dusty lower road between the Orrido of Traffiume and
Cannobio Willersley had developed his first blister. And partly because
of that and partly because there was a bag at the station that gave us
the refreshment of clean linen and partly because of the lazy lower air
into which we had come, we decided upon three or four days' sojourn in
the Empress Hotel.

We dined that night at a table-d'hote, and I found myself next to an
Englishwoman who began a conversation that was resumed presently in the
hotel lounge. She was a woman of perhaps thirty-three or thirty-four,
slenderly built, with a warm reddish skin and very abundant fair
golden hair, the wife of a petulant-looking heavy-faced man of perhaps
fifty-three, who smoked a cigar and dozed over his coffee and
presently went to bed. "He always goes to bed like that," she confided
startlingly. "He sleeps after all his meals. I never knew such a man to
sleep."

Then she returned to our talk, whatever it was.

We had begun at the dinner table with itineraries and the usual
topographical talk, and she had envied our pedestrian travel. "My
husband doesn't walk," she said. "His heart is weak and he cannot manage
the hills."

There was something friendly and adventurous in her manner; she conveyed
she liked me, and when presently Willersley drifted off to write
letters our talk sank at once to easy confidential undertones. I felt
enterprising, and indeed it is easy to be daring with people one has
never seen before and may never see again. I said I loved beautiful
scenery and all beautiful things, and the pointing note in my voice made
her laugh. She told me I had bold eyes, and so far as I can remember I
said she made them bold. "Blue they are," she remarked, smiling archly.
"I like blue eyes." Then I think we compared ages, and she said she was
the Woman of Thirty, "George Moore's Woman of Thirty."

I had not read George Moore at the time, but I pretended to understand.

That, I think, was our limit that evening. She went to bed, smiling
good-night quite prettily down the big staircase, and I and Willersley
went out to smoke in the garden. My head was full of her, and I found it
necessary to talk about her. So I made her a problem in sociology. "Who
the deuce are these people?" I said, "and how do they get a living? They
seem to have plenty of money. He strikes me as being--Willersley, what
is a drysalter? I think he's a retired drysalter."

Willersley theorised while I thought of the woman and that provocative
quality of dash she had displayed. The next day at lunch she and I met
like old friends. A huge mass of private thinking during the interval
had been added to our effect upon one another. We talked for a time of
insignificant things.

"What do you do," she asked rather quickly, "after lunch? Take a
siesta?"

"Sometimes," I said, and hung for a moment eye to eye.

We hadn't a doubt of each other, but my heart was beating like a steamer
propeller when it lifts out of the water.

"Do you get a view from your room?" she asked after a pause.

"It's on the third floor, Number seventeen, near the staircase. My
friend's next door."

She began to talk of books. She was interested in Christian Science,
she said, and spoke of a book. I forget altogether what that book was
called, though I remember to this day with the utmost exactness the
purplish magenta of its cover. She said she would lend it to me and
hesitated.

Willersley wanted to go for an expedition across the lake that
afternoon, but I refused. He made some other proposals that I rejected
abruptly. "I shall write in my room," I said.

"Why not write down here?"

"I shall write in my room," I snarled like a thwarted animal, and he
looked at me curiously. "Very well," he said; "then I'll make some notes
and think about that order of ours out under the magnolias."

I hovered about the lounge for a time buying postcards and feverishly
restless, watching the movements of the other people. Finally I went up
to my room and sat down by the windows, staring out. There came a
little tap at the unlocked door and in an instant, like the go of a taut
bowstring, I was up and had it open.

"Here is that book," she said, and we hesitated.

"COME IN!" I whispered, trembling from head to foot.

"You're just a boy," she said in a low tone.

I did not feel a bit like a lover, I felt like a burglar with the
safe-door nearly opened. "Come in," I said almost impatiently, for
anyone might be in the passage, and I gripped her wrist and drew her
towards me.

"What do you mean?" she answered with a faint smile on her lips, and
awkward and yielding.

I shut the door behind her, still holding her with one hand, then turned
upon her--she was laughing nervously--and without a word drew her to me
and kissed her. And I remember that as I kissed her she made a little
noise almost like the purring miaow with which a cat will greet one and
her face, close to mine, became solemn and tender.

She was suddenly a different being from the discontented wife who had
tapped a moment since on my door, a woman transfigured....

That evening I came down to dinner a monster of pride, for behold! I
was a man. I felt myself the most wonderful and unprecedented of
adventurers. It was hard to believe that any one in the world before
had done as much. My mistress and I met smiling, we carried things off
admirably, and it seemed to me that Willersley was the dullest old dog
in the world. I wanted to give him advice. I wanted to give him derisive
pokes. After dinner and coffee in the lounge I was too excited and
hilarious to go to bed, I made him come with me down to the cafe under
the arches by the pier, and there drank beer and talked extravagant
nonsense about everything under the sun, in order not to talk about the
happenings of the afternoon. All the time something shouted within me:
"I am a man! I am a man!"...

"What shall we do to-morrow?" said he.

"I'm for loafing," I said. "Let's row in the morning and spend to-morrow
afternoon just as we did to-day."

"They say the church behind the town is worth seeing."

"We'll go up about sunset; that's the best time for it. We can start
about five."

We heard music, and went further along the arcade to discover a place
where girls in operatic Swiss peasant costume were singing and dancing
on a creaking, protesting little stage. I eyed their generous display
of pink neck and arm with the seasoned eye of a man who has lived in the
world. Life was perfectly simple and easy, I felt, if one took it the
right way.

Next day Willersley wanted to go on, but I delayed. Altogether I kept
him back four days. Then abruptly my mood changed, and we decided
to start early the following morning. I remember, though a little
indistinctly, the feeling of my last talk with that woman whose surname,
odd as it may seem, either I never learnt or I have forgotten. (Her
christian name was Milly.) She was tired and rather low-spirited, and
disposed to be sentimental, and for the first time in our intercourse I
found myself liking her for the sake of her own personality. There was
something kindly and generous appearing behind the veil of naive and
uncontrolled sensuality she had worn. There was a curious quality of
motherliness in her attitude to me that something in my nature answered
and approved. She didn't pretend to keep it up that she had yielded to
my initiative. "I've done you no harm," she said a little doubtfully, an
odd note for a man's victim! And, "we've had a good time. You have liked
me, haven't you?"

She interested me in her lonely dissatisfied life; she was childless and
had no hope of children, and her husband was the only son of a rich
meat salesman, very mean, a mighty smoker--"he reeks of it," she said,
"always"--and interested in nothing but golf, billiards (which he played
very badly), pigeon shooting, convivial Free Masonry and Stock Exchange
punting. Mostly they drifted about the Riviera. Her mother had contrived
her marriage when she was eighteen. They were the first samples I ever
encountered of the great multitude of functionless property owners which
encumbers modern civilisation--but at the time I didn't think much of
that aspect of them....

I tell all this business as it happened without comment, because I
have no comment to make. It was all strange to me, strange rather than
wonderful, and, it may be, some dream of beauty died for ever in those
furtive meetings; it happened to me, and I could scarcely have been
more irresponsible in the matter or controlled events less if I had
been suddenly pushed over a cliff into water. I swam, of course--finding
myself in it. Things tested me, and I reacted, as I have told. The bloom
of my innocence, if ever there had been such a thing, was gone. And here
is the remarkable thing about it; at the time and for some days I was
over-weeningly proud; I have never been so proud before or since; I felt
I had been promoted to virility; I was unable to conceal my exultation
from Willersley. It was a mood of shining shameless ungracious
self-approval. As he and I went along in the cool morning sunshine by
the rice fields in the throat of the Val Maggia a silence fell between
us.

"You know?" I said abruptly,--"about that woman?"

Willersley did not answer for a moment. He looked at me over the corner
of his spectacles.

"Things went pretty far?" he asked.

"Oh! all the way!" and I had a twinge of fatuous pride in my
unpremeditated achievement.

"She came to your room?"

I nodded.

"I heard her. I heard her whispering.... The whispering and rustling and
so on. I was in my room yesterday.... Any one might have heard you."

I went on with my head in the air.

"You might have been caught, and that would have meant endless trouble.
You might have incurred all sorts of consequences. What did you know
about her?... We have wasted four days in that hot close place. When we
found that League of Social Service we were talking about," he said
with a determined eye upon me, "chastity will be first among the virtues
prescribed."

"I shall form a rival league," I said a little damped. "I'm hanged if I
give up a single desire in me until I know why."

He lifted his chin and stared before him through his glasses at nothing.
"There are some things," he said, "that a man who means to work--to do
great public services--MUST turn his back upon. I'm not discussing the
rights or wrongs of this sort of thing. It happens to be the conditions
we work under. It will probably always be so. If you want to experiment
in that way, if you want even to discuss it,--out you go from political
life. You must know that's so.... You're a strange man, Remington, with
a kind of kink in you. You've a sort of force. You might happen to do
immense things.... Only--"

He stopped. He had said all that he had forced himself to say.

"I mean to take myself as I am," I said. "I'm going to get experience
for humanity out of all my talents--and bury nothing."

Willersley twisted his face to its humorous expression. "I doubt if
sexual proclivities," he said drily, "come within the scope of the
parable."

I let that go for a little while. Then I broke out. "Sex!" said I, "is
a fundamental thing in life. We went through all this at Trinity. I'm
going to look at it, experience it, think about it--and get it square
with the rest of life. Career and Politics must take their chances of
that. It's part of the general English slackness that they won't look
this in the face. Gods! what a muffled time we're coming out of! Sex
means breeding, and breeding is a necessary function in a nation.
The Romans broke up upon that. The Americans fade out amidst their
successes. Eugenics--"

"THAT wasn't Eugenics," said Willersley.

"It was a woman," I said after a little interval, feeling oddly that
I had failed altogether to answer him, and yet had a strong dumb case
against him.




BOOK THE SECOND: MARGARET



CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ MARGARET IN STAFFORDSHIRE


1

I must go back a little way with my story. In the previous book I
have described the kind of education that happens to a man of my class
nowadays, and it has been convenient to leap a phase in my experience
that I must now set out at length. I want to tell in this second
hook how I came to marry, and to do that I must give something of the
atmosphere in which I first met my wife and some intimations of the
forces that went to her making. I met her in Staffordshire while I was
staying with that uncle of whom I have already spoken, the uncle who
sold my father's houses and settled my mother in Penge. Margaret was
twenty then and I was twenty-two.

It was just before the walking tour in Switzerland that opened up
so much of the world to me. I saw her once, for an afternoon, and
circumstances so threw her up in relief that I formed a very vivid
memory of her. She was in the sharpest contrast with the industrial
world about her; she impressed me as a dainty blue flower might do,
come upon suddenly on a clinker heap. She remained in my mind at once a
perplexing interrogation and a symbol....

But first I must tell of my Staffordshire cousins and the world that
served as a foil for her.



2


I first went to stay with my cousins when I was an awkward youth of
sixteen, wearing deep mourning for my mother. My uncle wanted to talk
things over with me, he said, and if he could, to persuade me to go into
business instead of going up to Cambridge.

I remember that visit on account of all sorts of novel things, but
chiefly, I think, because it was the first time I encountered anything
that deserves to be spoken of as wealth. For the first time in my life
I had to do with people who seemed to have endless supplies of money,
unlimited good clothes, numerous servants; whose daily life was made
up of things that I had hitherto considered to be treats or exceptional
extravagances. My cousins of eighteen and nineteen took cabs, for
instance, with the utmost freedom, and travelled first-class in the
local trains that run up and down the district of the Five Towns with an
entire unconsciousness of the magnificence, as it seemed to me, of such
a proceeding.

The family occupied a large villa in Newcastle, with big lawns before
it and behind, a shrubbery with quite a lot of shrubs, a coach house
and stable, and subordinate dwelling-places for the gardener and the
coachman. Every bedroom contained a gas heater and a canopied brass
bedstead, and had a little bathroom attached equipped with the porcelain
baths and fittings my uncle manufactured, bright and sanitary and
stamped with his name, and the house was furnished throughout with
chairs and tables in bright shining wood, soft and prevalently
red Turkish carpets, cosy corners, curtained archways, gold-framed
landscapes, overmantels, a dining-room sideboard like a palace with
a large Tantalus, and electric light fittings of a gay and expensive
quality. There was a fine billiard-room on the ground floor with three
comfortable sofas and a rotating bookcase containing an excellent
collection of the English and American humorists from THREE MEN IN
A BOAT to the penultimate Mark Twain. There was also a conservatory
opening out of the dining-room, to which the gardener brought potted
flowers in their season....

My aunt was a little woman with a scared look and a cap that would
get over one eye, not very like my mother, and nearly eight years her
junior; she was very much concerned with keeping everything nice, and
unmercifully bullied by my two cousins, who took after their father and
followed the imaginations of their own hearts. They were tall, dark,
warmly flushed girls handsome rather than pretty. Gertrude, the eldest
and tallest, had eyes that were almost black; Sibyl was of a stouter
build, and her eyes, of which she was shamelessly proud, were dark blue.
Sibyl's hair waved, and Gertrude's was severely straight. They treated
me on my first visit with all the contempt of the adolescent girl for a
boy a little younger and infinitely less expert in the business of life
than herself. They were very busy with the writings of notes and certain
mysterious goings and comings of their own, and left me very much to
my own devices. Their speech in my presence was full of unfathomable
allusions. They were the sort of girls who will talk over and through an
uninitiated stranger with the pleasantest sense of superiority.

I met them at breakfast and at lunch and at the half-past six o'clock
high tea that formed the third chief meal of the day. I heard them
rattling off the compositions of Chaminade and Moskowski, with great
decision and effect, and hovered on the edge of tennis foursomes
where it was manifest to the dullest intelligence that my presence was
unnecessary. Then I went off to find some readable book in the place,
but apart from miscellaneous popular novels, some veterinary works, a
number of comic books, old bound volumes of THE ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS
and a large, popular illustrated History of England, there was very
little to be found. My aunt talked to me in a casual feeble way, chiefly
about my mother's last illness. The two had seen very little of each
other for many years; she made no secret of it that the ineligible
qualities of my father were the cause of the estrangement. The only
other society in the house during the day was an old and rather decayed
Skye terrier in constant conflict with what were no doubt imaginary
fleas. I took myself off for a series of walks, and acquired a
considerable knowledge of the scenery and topography of the Potteries.

It puzzled my aunt that I did not go westward, where it was country-side
and often quite pretty, with hedgerows and fields and copses
and flowers. But always I went eastward, where in a long valley
industrialism smokes and sprawls. That was the stuff to which I turned
by nature, to the human effort, and the accumulation and jar of men's
activities. And in such a country as that valley social and economic
relations were simple and manifest. Instead of the limitless confusion
of London's population, in which no man can trace any but the most
slender correlation between rich and poor, in which everyone seems
disconnected and adrift from everyone, you can see here the works,
the potbank or the ironworks or what not, and here close at hand the
congested, meanly-housed workers, and at a little distance a small
middle-class quarter, and again remoter, the big house of the employer.
It was like a very simplified diagram--after the untraceable confusion
of London.

I prowled alone, curious and interested, through shabby back streets of
mean little homes; I followed canals, sometimes canals of mysteriously
heated waters with ghostly wisps of steam rising against blackened walls
or a distant prospect of dustbin-fed vegetable gardens, I saw the women
pouring out from the potbanks, heard the hooters summoning the toilers
to work, lost my way upon slag heaps as big as the hills of the south
country, dodged trains at manifestly dangerous level crossings, and
surveyed across dark intervening spaces, the flaming uproar, the
gnome-like activities of iron foundries. I heard talk of strikes and
rumours of strikes, and learnt from the columns of some obscure labour
paper I bought one day, of the horrors of the lead poisoning that was in
those days one of the normal risks of certain sorts of pottery workers.
Then back I came, by the ugly groaning and clanging steam train of that
period, to my uncle's house and lavish abundance of money and more or
less furtive flirtations and the tinkle of Moskowski and Chaminade.
It was, I say, diagrammatic. One saw the expropriator and the
expropriated--as if Marx had arranged the picture. It was as jumbled and
far more dingy and disastrous than any of the confusions of building and
development that had surrounded my youth at Bromstead and Penge, but
it had a novel quality of being explicable. I found great virtue in the
word "exploitation."

There stuck in my mind as if it was symbolical of the whole thing the
twisted figure of a man, whose face had been horribly scalded--I can't
describe how, except that one eye was just expressionless white--and
he ground at an organ bearing a card which told in weak and bitterly
satirical phrasing that he had been scalded by the hot water from
the tuyeres of the blast furnace of Lord Pandram's works. He had been
scalded and quite inadequately compensated and dismissed. And Lord
Pandram was worth half a million.

That upturned sightless white eye of his took possession of my
imagination. I don't think that even then I was swayed by any crude
melodramatic conception of injustice. I was quite prepared to believe
the card wasn't a punctiliously accurate statement of fact, and that
a case could be made out for Lord Pandram. Still there in the muddy
gutter, painfully and dreadfully, was the man, and he was smashed and
scalded and wretched, and he ground his dismal hurdygurdy with a weary
arm, calling upon Heaven and the passer-by for help, for help and some
sort of righting--one could not imagine quite what. There he was as a
fact, as a by-product of the system that heaped my cousins with trinkets
and provided the comic novels and the abundant cigars and spacious
billiard-room of my uncle's house. I couldn't disconnect him and them.

My uncle on his part did nothing to conceal the state of war that
existed between himself and his workers, and the mingled contempt and
animosity he felt from them.



3


Prosperity had overtaken my uncle. So quite naturally he believed that
every man who was not as prosperous as he was had only himself to blame.
He was rich and he had left school and gone into his father's business
at fifteen, and that seemed to him the proper age at which everyone's
education should terminate. He was very anxious to dissuade me from
going up to Cambridge, and we argued intermittently through all my
visit.

I had remembered him as a big and buoyant man, striding destructively
about the nursery floor of my childhood, and saluting my existence by
slaps, loud laughter, and questions about half herrings and half eggs
subtly framed to puzzle and confuse my mind. I didn't see him for some
years until my father's death, and then he seemed rather smaller,
though still a fair size, yellow instead of red and much less radiantly
aggressive. This altered effect was due not so much to my own changed
perspectives, I fancy, as to the facts that he was suffering for
continuous cigar smoking, and being taken in hand by his adolescent
daughters who had just returned from school.

During my first visit there was a perpetual series of--the only word is
rows, between them and him. Up to the age of fifteen or thereabouts, he
had maintained his ascendancy over them by simple old-fashioned physical
chastisement. Then after an interlude of a year it had dawned upon them
that power had mysteriously departed from him. He had tried stopping
their pocket money, but they found their mother financially amenable;
besides which it was fundamental to my uncle's attitude that he should
give them money freely. Not to do so would seem like admitting a
difficulty in making it. So that after he had stopped their allowances
for the fourth time Sybil and Gertrude were prepared to face beggary
without a qualm. It had been his pride to give them the largest
allowance of any girls at the school, not even excepting the
granddaughter of Fladden the Borax King, and his soul recoiled from this
discipline as it had never recoiled from the ruder method of the
earlier phase. Both girls had developed to a high pitch in their mutual
recriminations a gift for damaging retort, and he found it an altogether
deadlier thing than the power of the raised voice that had always
cowed my aunt. Whenever he became heated with them, they frowned as if
involuntarily, drew in their breath sharply, said: "Daddy, you really
must not say--" and corrected his pronunciation. Then, at a great
advantage, they resumed the discussion....

My uncle's views about Cambridge, however, were perfectly clear and
definite. It was waste of time and money. It was all damned foolery.
Did they make a man a better business man? Not a bit of it. He gave
instances. It spoilt a man for business by giving him "false ideas."
Some men said that at college a man formed useful friendships. What use
were friendships to a business man? He might get to know lords, but, as
my uncle pointed out, a lord's requirements in his line of faience were
little greater than a common man's. If college introduced him to hotel
proprietors there might be something in it. Perhaps it helped a man into
Parliament, Parliament still being a confused retrogressive corner
in the world where lawyers and suchlike sheltered themselves from the
onslaughts of common-sense behind a fog of Latin and Greek and twaddle
and tosh; but I wasn't the sort to go into Parliament, unless I meant to
be a lawyer. Did I mean to be a lawyer? It cost no end of money, and
was full of uncertainties, and there were no judges nor great solicitors
among my relations. "Young chaps think they get on by themselves," said
my uncle. "It isn't so. Not unless they take their coats off. I took
mine off before I was your age by nigh a year."

We were at cross purposes from the outset, because I did not think men
lived to make money; and I was obtuse to the hints he was throwing out
at the possibilities of his own potbank, not willfully obtuse, but just
failing to penetrate his meaning. Whatever City Merchants had or had
not done for me, Flack, Topham and old Gates had certainly barred my
mistaking the profitable production and sale of lavatory basins and
bathroom fittings for the highest good. It was only upon reflection that
it dawned upon me that the splendid chance for a young fellow with my
uncle, "me, having no son of my own," was anything but an illustration
for comparison with my own chosen career.

I still remember very distinctly my uncle's talk,--he loved to speak
"reet Staffordshire"--his rather flabby face with the mottled complexion
that told of crude ill-regulated appetites, his clumsy gestures--he kept
emphasising his points by prodding at me with his finger--the ill-worn,
costly, grey tweed clothes, the watch chain of plain solid gold, and
soft felt hat thrust back from his head. He tackled me first in the
garden after lunch, and then tried to raise me to enthusiasm by taking
me to his potbank and showing me its organisation, from the dusty
grinding mills in which whitened men worked and coughed, through the
highly ventilated glazing room in which strangely masked girls looked
ashamed of themselves,--"They'll risk death, the fools, to show their
faces to a man," said my uncle, quite audibly--to the firing kilns and
the glazing kilns, and so round the whole place to the railway siding
and the gratifying spectacle of three trucks laden with executed orders.

Then we went up a creaking outside staircase to his little office, and
he showed off before me for a while, with one or two subordinates and
the telephone.

"None of your Gas," he said, "all this. It's Real every bit of it. Hard
cash and hard glaze."

"Yes," I said, with memories of a carelessly read pamphlet in my mind,
and without any satirical intention, "I suppose you MUST use lead in
your glazes?"

Whereupon I found I had tapped the ruling grievance of my uncle's
life. He hated leadless glazes more than he hated anything, except
the benevolent people who had organised the agitation for their use.
"Leadless glazes ain't only fit for buns," he said. "Let me tell you, my
boy--"

He began in a voice of bland persuasiveness that presently warmed to
anger, to explain the whole matter. I hadn't the rights of the matter
at all. Firstly, there was practically no such thing as lead poisoning.
Secondly, not everyone was liable to lead poisoning, and it would
be quite easy to pick out the susceptible types--as soon as they had
it--and put them to other work. Thirdly, the evil effects of
lead poisoning were much exaggerated. Fourthly, and this was in a
particularly confidential undertone, many of the people liked to get
lead poisoning, especially the women, because it caused abortion.
I might not believe it, but he knew it for a fact. Fifthly, the
work-people simply would not learn the gravity of the danger, and would
eat with unwashed hands, and incur all sorts of risks, so that as my
uncle put it: "the fools deserve what they get." Sixthly, he and several
associated firms had organised a simple and generous insurance scheme
against lead-poisoning risks. Seventhly, he never wearied in rational
(as distinguished from excessive, futile and expensive) precautions
against the disease. Eighthly, in the ill-equipped shops of his minor
competitors lead poisoning was a frequent and virulent evil, and people
had generalised from these exceptional cases. The small shops, he
hazarded, looking out of the cracked and dirty window at distant
chimneys, might be advantageously closed....

"But what's the good of talking?" said my uncle, getting off the table
on which he had been sitting. "Seems to me there'll come a time when a
master will get fined if he don't run round the works blowing his girls
noses for them. That's about what it'll come to."

He walked to the black mantelpiece and stood on the threadbare rug, and
urged me not to be misled by the stories of prejudiced and interested
enemies of our national industries.

"They'll get a strike one of these days, of employers, and then we'll
see a bit," he said. "They'll drive Capital abroad and then they'll
whistle to get it back again."...

He led the way down the shaky wooden steps and cheered up to tell me
of his way of checking his coal consumption. He exchanged a ferocious
greeting with one or two workpeople, and so we came out of the factory
gates into the ugly narrow streets, paved with a peculiarly hard
diapered brick of an unpleasing inky-blue colour, and bordered with the
mean and squalid homes of his workers. Doors stood open and showed grimy
interiors, and dirty ill-clad children played in the kennel.

We passed a sickly-looking girl with a sallow face, who dragged her
limbs and peered at us dimly with painful eyes. She stood back, as
partly blinded people will do, to allow us to pass, although there was
plenty of room for us.

I glanced back at her.

"THAT'S ploombism," said my uncle casually.

"What?" said I.

"Ploombism. And the other day I saw a fool of a girl, and what d'you
think? She'd got a basin that hadn't been fired, a cracked piece of
biscuit it was, up on the shelf over her head, just all over glaze,
killing glaze, man, and she was putting up her hand if you please, and
eating her dinner out of it. Got her dinner in it!

"Eating her dinner out of it," he repeated in loud and bitter tones, and
punched me hard in the ribs.

"And then they comes to THAT--and grumbles. And the fools up in
Westminster want you to put in fans here and fans there--the Longton
fools have.... And then eating their dinners out of it all the time!"...

At high tea that night--my uncle was still holding out against evening
dinner--Sibyl and Gertrude made what was evidently a concerted demand
for a motor-car.

"You've got your mother's brougham," he said, "that's good enough for
you." But he seemed shaken by the fact that some Burslem rival was
launching out with the new invention. "He spoils his girls," he
remarked. "He's a fool," and became thoughtful.

Afterwards he asked me to come to him into his study; it was a room with
a writing-desk and full of pieces of earthenware and suchlike litter,
and we had our great row about Cambridge.

"Have you thought things over, Dick?" he said.

"I think I'll go to Trinity, Uncle," I said firmly. "I want to go to
Trinity. It is a great college."

He was manifestly chagrined. "You're a fool," he said.

I made no answer.

"You're a damned fool," he said. "But I suppose you've got to do it. You
could have come here--That don't matter, though, now... You'll have your
time and spend your money, and be a poor half-starved clergyman, mucking
about with the women all the day and afraid to have one of your own
ever, or you'll be a schoolmaster or some such fool for the rest of your
life. Or some newspaper chap. That's what you'll get from Cambridge. I'm
half a mind not to let you. Eh? More than half a mind...."

"You've got to do the thing you can," he said, after a pause, "and
likely it's what you're fitted for."



4


I paid several short visits to Staffordshire during my Cambridge days,
and always these relations of mine produced the same effect of hardness.
My uncle's thoughts had neither atmosphere nor mystery. He lived in
a different universe from the dreams of scientific construction that
filled my mind. He could as easily have understood Chinese poetry. His
motives were made up of intense rivalries with other men of his class
and kind, a few vindictive hates springing from real and fancied
slights, a habit of acquisition that had become a second nature, a keen
love both of efficiency and display in his own affairs. He seemed to
me to have no sense of the state, no sense and much less any love of
beauty, no charity and no sort of religious feeling whatever. He had
strong bodily appetites, he ate and drank freely, smoked a great deal,
and occasionally was carried off by his passions for a "bit of a spree"
to Birmingham or Liverpool or Manchester. The indulgences of these
occasions were usually followed by a period of reaction, when he was
urgent for the suppression of nudity in the local Art Gallery and a
harsh and forcible elevation of the superficial morals of the valley.
And he spoke of the ladies who ministered to the delights of his
jolly-dog period, when he spoke of them at all, by the unprintable
feminine equivalent. My aunt he treated with a kindly contempt and
considerable financial generosity, but his daughters tore his heart; he
was so proud of them, so glad to find them money to spend, so resolved
to own them, so instinctively jealous of every man who came near them.

My uncle has been the clue to a great number of men for me. He was an
illuminating extreme. I have learnt what not to expect from them through
him, and to comprehend resentments and dangerous sudden antagonisms I
should have found incomprehensible in their more complex forms, if I had
not first seen them in him in their feral state.

With his soft felt hat at the back of his head, his rather heavy, rather
mottled face, his rationally thick boots and slouching tweed-clad form,
a little round-shouldered and very obstinate looking, he strolls through
all my speculations sucking his teeth audibly, and occasionally throwing
out a shrewd aphorism, the intractable unavoidable ore of the new
civilisation.

Essentially he was simple. Generally speaking, he hated and despised in
equal measure whatever seemed to suggest that he personally was not
the most perfect human being conceivable. He hated all education after
fifteen because he had had no education after fifteen, he hated all
people who did not have high tea until he himself under duress gave up
high tea, he hated every game except football, which he had played and
could judge, he hated all people who spoke foreign languages because he
knew no language but Staffordshire, he hated all foreigners because he
was English, and all foreign ways because they were not his ways. Also
he hated particularly, and in this order, Londoner's, Yorkshiremen,
Scotch, Welch and Irish, because they were not "reet Staffordshire," and
he hated all other Staffordshire men as insufficiently "reet." He wanted
to have all his own women inviolate, and to fancy he had a call upon
every other woman in the world. He wanted to have the best cigars and
the best brandy in the world to consume or give away magnificently, and
every one else to have inferior ones. (His billiard table was an extra
large size, specially made and very inconvenient.) And he hated Trade
Unions because they interfered with his autocratic direction of his
works, and his workpeople because they were not obedient and untiring
mechanisms to do his bidding. He was, in fact, a very naive, vigorous
human being. He was about as much civilised, about as much tamed to the
ideas of collective action and mutual consideration as a Central African
negro.

There are hordes of such men as he throughout all the modern industrial
world. You will find the same type with the slightest modifications in
the Pas de Calais or Rhenish Prussia or New Jersey or North Italy. No
doubt you would find it in New Japan. These men have raised themselves
up from the general mass of untrained, uncultured, poorish people in a
hard industrious selfish struggle. To drive others they have had first
to drive themselves. They have never yet had occasion nor leisure to
think of the state or social life as a whole, and as for dreams or
beauty, it was a condition of survival that they should ignore such
cravings. All the distinctive qualities of my uncle can be thought of as
dictated by his conditions; his success and harshness, the extravagances
that expressed his pride in making money, the uncongenial luxury that
sprang from rivalry, and his self-reliance, his contempt for broad
views, his contempt for everything that he could not understand.

His daughters were the inevitable children of his life. Queer girls they
were! Curiously "spirited" as people phrase it, and curiously limited.
During my Cambridge days I went down to Staffordshire several times. My
uncle, though he still resented my refusal to go into his business, was
also in his odd way proud of me. I was his nephew and poor relation, and
yet there I was, a young gentleman learning all sorts of unremunerative
things in the grandest manner, "Latin and mook," while the sons of his
neighhours, not nephews merely, but sons, stayed unpolished in their
native town. Every time I went down I found extensive changes and
altered relations, and before I had settled down to them off I went
again. I don't think I was one person to them; I was a series of
visitors. There is a gulf of ages between a gaunt schoolboy of sixteen
in unbecoming mourning and two vividly self-conscious girls of eighteen
and nineteen, but a Cambridge "man" of two and twenty with a first and
good tennis and a growing social experience, is a fair contemporary for
two girls of twenty-three and twenty-four.

A motor-car appeared, I think in my second visit, a bottle-green
affair that opened behind, had dark purple cushions, and was controlled
mysteriously by a man in shiny black costume and a flat cap. The high
tea had been shifted to seven and rechristened dinner, but my uncle
would not dress nor consent to have wine; and after one painful
experiment, I gathered, and a scene, he put his foot down and prohibited
any but high-necked dresses.

"Daddy's perfectly impossible," Sybil told me.

The foot had descended vehemently! "My own daughters!" he had said,
"dressed up like--"--and had arrested himself and fumbled and decided to
say--"actresses, and showin' their fat arms for every fool to stare
at!" Nor would he have any people invited to dinner. He didn't, he had
explained, want strangers poking about in his house when he came home
tired. So such calling as occurred went on during his absence in the
afternoon.

One of the peculiarities of the life of these ascendant families of
the industrial class to which wealth has come, is its tremendous
insulations. There were no customs of intercourse in the Five Towns. All
the isolated prosperities of the district sprang from economising, hard
driven homes, in which there was neither time nor means for hospitality.
Social intercourse centred very largely upon the church or chapel,
and the chapels were better at bringing people together than the
Establishment to which my cousins belonged. Their chief outlet to the
wider world lay therefore through the acquaintances they had formed at
school, and through two much less prosperous families of relations who
lived at Longton and Hanley. A number of gossiping friendships with old
school mates were "kept up," and my cousins would "spend the afternoon"
or even spend the day with these; such occasions led to other encounters
and interlaced with the furtive correspondences and snatched meetings
that formed the emotional thread of their lives. When the billiard table
had been new, my uncle had taken to asking in a few approved friends for
an occasional game, but mostly the billiard-room was for glory and the
girls. Both of them played very well. They never, so far as I know,
dined out, and when at last after bitter domestic conflicts they began
to go to dances, they went with the quavering connivance of my aunt,
and changed into ball frocks at friends' houses on the way. There was a
tennis club that formed a convenient afternoon rendezvous, and I recall
that in the period of my earlier visits the young bloods of the district
found much satisfaction in taking girls for drives in dog-carts and
suchlike high-wheeled vehicles, a disposition that died in tangled
tandems at the apparition of motor-car's.

My aunt and uncle had conceived no plans in life for their daughters at
all. In the undifferentiated industrial community from which they had
sprung, girls got married somehow, and it did not occur to them that
the concentration of property that had made them wealthy, had cut their
children off from the general social sea in which their own awkward
meeting had occurred, without necessarily opening any other world in
exchange. My uncle was too much occupied with the works and his business
affairs and his private vices to philosophise about his girls; he wanted
them just to keep girls, preferably about sixteen, and to be a sort
of animated flowers and make home bright and be given things. He was
irritated that they would not remain at this, and still more irritated
that they failed to suppress altogether their natural interest in young
men. The tandems would be steered by weird and devious routes to evade
the bare chance of his bloodshot eye. My aunt seemed to have no ideas
whatever about what was likely to happen to her children. She had indeed
no ideas about anything; she took her husband and the days as they came.

I can see now the pathetic difficulty of my cousins' position in life;
the absence of any guidance or instruction or provision for their
development. They supplemented the silences of home by the conversation
of schoolfellows and the suggestions of popular fiction. They had to
make what they could out of life with such hints as these. The church
was far too modest to offer them any advice. It was obtruded upon my
mind upon my first visit that they were both carrying on correspondences
and having little furtive passings and seeings and meetings with the
mysterious owners of certain initials, S. and L. K., and, if I remember
rightly, "the R. N." brothers and cousins, I suppose, of their friends.
The same thing was going on, with a certain intensification, at my next
visit, excepting only that the initials were different. But when I
came again their methods were maturer or I was no longer a negligible
quantity, and the notes and the initials were no longer flaunted quite
so openly in my face.

My cousins had worked it out from the indications of their universe that
the end of life is to have a "good time." They used the phrase. That
and the drives in dog-carts were only the first of endless points of
resemblance between them and the commoner sort of American girl. When
some years ago I paid my first and only visit to America I seemed to
recover my cousins' atmosphere as soon as I entered the train at Euston.
There were three girls in my compartment supplied with huge decorated
cases of sweets, and being seen off by a company of friends, noisily
arch and eager about the "steamer letters" they would get at Liverpool;
they were the very soul-sisters of my cousins. The chief elements of a
good time, as my cousins judged it, as these countless thousands of rich
young women judge it, are a petty eventfulness, laughter, and to feel
that you are looking well and attracting attention. Shopping is one of
its leading joys. You buy things, clothes and trinkets for yourself and
presents for your friends. Presents always seemed to be flying about
in that circle; flowers and boxes of sweets were common currency. My
cousins were always getting and giving, my uncle caressed them with
parcels and cheques. They kissed him and he exuded sovereigns as a
stroked APHIS exudes honey. It was like the new language of the Academy
of Lagado to me, and I never learnt how to express myself in it, for
nature and training make me feel encumbered to receive presents and
embarrassed in giving them. But then, like my father, I hate and
distrust possessions.

Of the quality of their private imagination I never learnt anything; I
suppose it followed the lines of the fiction they read and was romantic
and sentimental. So far as marriage went, the married state seemed at
once very attractive and dreadfully serious to them, composed in equal
measure of becoming important and becoming old. I don't know what they
thought about children. I doubt if they thought about them at all. It
was very secret if they did.

As for the poor and dingy people all about them, my cousins were always
ready to take part in a Charitable Bazaar. They were unaware of any
economic correlation of their own prosperity and that circumambient
poverty, and they knew of Trade Unions simply as disagreeable external
things that upset my uncle's temper. They knew of nothing wrong in
social life at all except that there were "Agitators." It surprised them
a little, I think, that Agitators were not more drastically put down.
But they had a sort of instinctive dread of social discussion as of
something that might breach the happiness of their ignorance....



5


My cousins did more than illustrate Marx for me; they also undertook a
stage of my emotional education. Their method in that as in everything
else was extremely simple, but it took my inexperience by surprise.

It must have been on my third visit that Sybil took me in hand. Hitherto
I seemed to have seen her only in profile, but now she became almost
completely full face, manifestly regarded me with those violet eyes
of hers. She passed me things I needed at breakfast--it was the first
morning of my visit--before I asked for them.

When young men are looked at by pretty cousins, they become intensely
aware of those cousins. It seemed to me that I had always admired
Sybil's eyes very greatly, and that there was something in her
temperament congenial to mine. It was odd I had not noted it on my
previous visits.

We walked round the garden somewhen that morning, and talked about
Cambridge. She asked quite a lot of questions about my work and my
ambitions. She said she had always felt sure I was clever.

The conversation languished a little, and we picked some flowers for the
house. Then she asked if I could run. I conceded her various starts and
we raced up and down the middle garden path. Then, a little breathless,
we went into the new twenty-five guinea summer-house at the end of the
herbaceous border.

We sat side by side, pleasantly hidden from the house, and she became
anxious about her hair, which was slightly and prettily disarranged, and
asked me to help her with the adjustment of a hairpin. I had never in my
life been so near the soft curly hair and the dainty eyebrow and eyelid
and warm soft cheek of a girl, and I was stirred--

It stirs me now to recall it.

I became a battleground of impulses and inhibitions.

"Thank you," said my cousin, and moved a little away from me.

She began to talk about friendship, and lost her thread and forgot the
little electric stress between us in a rather meandering analysis of her
principal girl friends.

But afterwards she resumed her purpose.

I went to bed that night with one proposition overshadowing everything
else in my mind, namely, that kissing my cousin Sybil was a difficult,
but not impossible, achievement. I do not recall any shadow of a doubt
whether on the whole it was worth doing. The thing had come into my
existence, disturbing and interrupting its flow exactly as a fever does.
Sybil had infected me with herself.

The next day matters came to a crisis in the little upstairs
sitting-room which had been assigned me as a study during my visit.
I was working up there, or rather trying to work in spite of the
outrageous capering of some very primitive elements in my brain, when
she came up to me, under a transparent pretext of looking for a book.

I turned round and then got up at the sight of her. I quite forget what
our conversation was about, but I know she led me to believe I might
kiss her. Then when I attempted to do so she averted her face.

"How COULD you?" she said; "I didn't mean that!"

That remained the state of our relations for two days. I developed a
growing irritation with and resentment against cousin Sybil, combined
with an intense desire to get that kiss for which I hungered and
thirsted. Cousin Sybil went about in the happy persuasion that I was
madly in love with her, and her game, so far as she was concerned,
was played and won. It wasn't until I had fretted for two days that
I realised that I was being used for the commonest form of excitement
possible to a commonplace girl; that dozens perhaps of young men had
played the part of Tantalus at cousin Sybil's lips. I walked about my
room at nights, damning her and calling her by terms which on the whole
she rather deserved, while Sybil went to sleep pitying "poor old Dick!"

"Damn it!" I said, "I WILL be equal with you."

But I never did equalise the disadvantage, and perhaps it's as well, for
I fancy that sort of revenge cuts both people too much for a rational
man to seek it....

"Why are men so silly?" said cousin Sybil next morning, wriggling back
with down-bent head to release herself from what should have been a
compelling embrace.

"Confound it!" I said with a flash of clear vision. "You STARTED this
game."

"Oh!"

She stood back against a hedge of roses, a little flushed and excited
and interested, and ready for the delightful defensive if I should renew
my attack.

"Beastly hot for scuffling," I said, white with anger. "I don't know
whether I'm so keen on kissing you, Sybil, after all. I just thought you
wanted me to."

I could have whipped her, and my voice stung more than my words.

Our eyes met; a real hatred in hers leaping up to meet mine.

"Let's play tennis," I said, after a moment's pause.

"No," she answered shortly, "I'm going indoors."

"Very well."

And that ended the affair with Sybil.

I was still in the full glare of this disillusionment when Gertrude
awoke from some preoccupation to an interest in my existence. She
developed a disposition to touch my hand by accident, and let her
fingers rest in contact with it for a moment,--she had pleasant soft
hands;--she began to drift into summer houses with me, to let her arm
rest trustfully against mine, to ask questions about Cambridge. They
were much the same questions that Sybil had asked. But I controlled
myself and maintained a profile of intelligent and entirely civil
indifference to her blandishments.

What Gertrude made of it came out one evening in some talk--I forget
about what--with Sybil.

"Oh, Dick!" said Gertrude a little impatiently, "Dick's Pi."

And I never disillusioned her by any subsequent levity from this theory
of my innate and virginal piety.



6


It was against this harsh and crude Staffordshire background that
I think I must have seen Margaret for the first time. I say I think
because it is quite possible that we had passed each other in the
streets of Cambridge, no doubt with that affectation of mutual disregard
which was once customary between undergraduates and Newnham girls. But
if that was so I had noted nothing of the slender graciousness that
shone out so pleasingly against the bleaker midland surroundings.

She was a younger schoolfellow of my cousins', and the step-daughter
of Seddon, a prominent solicitor of Burslem. She was not only not in
my cousins' generation but not in their set, she was one of a small
hardworking group who kept immaculate note-books, and did as much as is
humanly possible of that insensate pile of written work that the Girls'
Public School movement has inflicted upon school-girls. She really
learnt French and German admirably and thoroughly, she got as far in
mathematics as an unflinching industry can carry any one with no great
natural aptitude, and she went up to Bennett Hall, Newnham, after the
usual conflict with her family, to work for the History Tripos.

There in her third year she made herself thoroughly ill through
overwork, so ill that she had to give up Newnham altogether and go
abroad with her stepmother. She made herself ill, as so many girls do
in those university colleges, through the badness of her home and school
training. She thought study must needs be a hard straining of the mind.
She worried her work, she gave herself no leisure to see it as a whole,
she felt herself not making headway and she cut her games and exercise
in order to increase her hours of toil, and worked into the night. She
carried a knack of laborious thoroughness into the blind alleys and
inessentials of her subject. It didn't need the badness of the food for
which Bennett Hall is celebrated and the remarkable dietary of nocturnal
cocoa, cakes and soft biscuits with which the girls have supplemented
it, to ensure her collapse. Her mother brought her home, fretting and
distressed, and then finding her hopelessly unhappy at home, took her
and her half-brother, a rather ailing youngster of ten who died three
years later, for a journey to Italy.

Italy did much to assuage Margaret's chagrin. I think all three of them
had a very good time there. At home Mr. Seddon, her step-father, played
the part of a well-meaning blight by reason of the moods that arose
from nervous dyspepsia. They went to Florence, equipped with various
introductions and much sound advice from sympathetic Cambridge friends,
and having acquired an ease in Italy there, went on to Siena, Orvieto,
and at last Rome. They returned, if I remember rightly, by Pisa,
Genoa, Milan and Paris. Six months or more they had had abroad, and now
Margaret was back in Burslem, in health again and consciously a very
civilised person.

New ideas were abroad, it was Maytime and a spring of abundant
flowers--daffodils were particularly good that year--and Mrs. Seddon
celebrated her return by giving an afternoon reception at short notice,
with the clear intention of letting every one out into the garden if the
weather held.

The Seddons had a big old farmhouse modified to modern ideas of comfort
on the road out towards Misterton, with an orchard that had been rather
pleasantly subdued from use to ornament. It had rich blossoming cherry
and apple trees. Large patches of grass full of nodding yellow trumpets
had been left amidst the not too precisely mown grass, which was as
it were grass path with an occasional lapse into lawn or glade. And
Margaret, hatless, with the fair hair above her thin, delicately pink
face very simply done, came to meet our rather too consciously dressed
party,--we had come in the motor four strong, with my aunt in grey silk.
Margaret wore a soft flowing flowered blue dress of diaphanous material,
all unconnected with the fashion and tied with pretty ribbons, like a
slenderer, unbountiful Primavera.

It was one of those May days that ape the light and heat of summer, and
I remember disconnectedly quite a number of brightly lit figures and
groups walking about, and a white gate between orchard and garden and a
large lawn with an oak tree and a red Georgian house with a verandah and
open French windows, through which the tea drinking had come out upon
the moss-edged flagstones even as Mrs. Seddon had planned.

The party was almost entirely feminine except for a little curate with
a large head, a good voice and a radiant manner, who was obviously
attracted by Margaret, and two or three young husbands still
sufficiently addicted to their wives to accompany them. One of them
I recall as a quite romantic figure with abundant blond curly hair on
which was poised a grey felt hat encircled by a refined black band. He
wore, moreover, a loose rich shot silk tie of red and purple, a long
frock coat, grey trousers and brown shoes, and presently he removed his
hat and carried it in one hand. There were two tennis-playing youths
besides myself. There was also one father with three daughters in
anxious control, a father of the old school scarcely half broken
in, reluctant, rebellious and consciously and conscientiously "reet
Staffordshire." The daughters were all alert to suppress the possible
plungings, the undesirable humorous impulses of this almost feral guest.
They nipped his very gestures in the bud. The rest of the people were
mainly mothers with daughters--daughters of all ages, and a scattering
of aunts, and there was a tendency to clotting, parties kept together
and regarded parties suspiciously. Mr. Seddon was in hiding, I think,
all the time, though not formally absent.

Matters centred upon the tea in the long room of the French windows,
where four trim maids went to and fro busily between the house and the
clumps of people seated or standing before it; and tennis and croquet
were intermittently visible and audible beyond a bank of rockwork rich
with the spikes and cups and bells of high spring.

Mrs. Seddon presided at the tea urn, and Margaret partly assisted and
partly talked to me and my cousin Sibyl--Gertrude had found a disused
and faded initial and was partnering him at tennis in a state of gentle
revival--while their mother exercised a divided chaperonage from a seat
near Mrs. Seddon. The little curate, stirring a partially empty cup of
tea, mingled with our party, and preluded, I remember, every observation
he made by a vigorous resumption of stirring.

We talked of Cambridge, and Margaret kept us to it. The curate was a
Selwyn man and had taken a pass degree in theology, but Margaret had
come to Gaylord's lecturers in Trinity for a term before her breakdown,
and understood these differences. She had the eagerness of an exile
to hear the old familiar names of places and personalities. We capped
familiar anecdotes and were enthusiastic about Kings' Chapel and the
Backs, and the curate, addressing himself more particularly to Sibyl,
told a long confused story illustrative of his disposition to reckless
devilry (of a pure-minded kindly sort) about upsetting two canoes quite
needlessly on the way to Grantchester.

I can still see Margaret as I saw her that afternoon, see her fresh fair
face, with the little obliquity of the upper lip, and her brow always
slightly knitted, and her manner as of one breathlessly shy but
determined. She had rather open blue eyes, and she spoke in an even
musical voice with the gentlest of stresses and the ghost of a lisp.
And it was true, she gathered, that Cambridge still existed. "I went
to Grantchester," she said, "last year, and had tea under the
apple-blossom. I didn't think then I should have to come down." (It was
that started the curate upon his anecdote.)

"I've seen a lot of pictures, and learnt a lot about them--at the Pitti
and the Brera,--the Brera is wonderful--wonderful places,--but it isn't
like real study," she was saying presently.... "We bought bales of
photographs," she said.

I thought the bales a little out of keeping.

But fair-haired and quite simply and yet graciously and fancifully
dressed, talking of art and beautiful things and a beautiful land, and
with so much manifest regret for learning denied, she seemed a
different kind of being altogether from my smart, hard, high-coloured,
black-haired and resolutely hatted cousin; she seemed translucent beside
Gertrude. Even the little twist and droop of her slender body was a
grace to me.

I liked her from the moment I saw her, and set myself to interest and
please her as well as I knew how.

We recalled a case of ragging that had rustled the shrubs of Newnham,
and then Chris Robinson's visit--he had given a talk to Bennett Hall
also--and our impression of him.

"He disappointed me, too," said Margaret.

I was moved to tell Margaret something of my own views in the matter of
social progress, and she listened--oh! with a kind of urged attention,
and her brow a little more knitted, very earnestly. The little curate
desisted from the appendices and refuse heaps and general debris of his
story, and made himself look very alert and intelligent.

"We did a lot of that when I was up in the eighties," he said. "I'm glad
Imperialism hasn't swamped you fellows altogether."

Gertrude, looking bright and confident, came to join our talk from the
shrubbery; the initial, a little flushed and evidently in a state of
refreshed relationship, came with her, and a cheerful lady in pink
and more particularly distinguished by a pink bonnet joined our little
group. Gertrude had been sipping admiration and was not disposed to play
a passive part in the talk.

"Socialism!" she cried, catching the word. "It's well Pa isn't here. He
has Fits when people talk of socialism. Fits!"

The initial laughed in a general kind of way.

The curate said there was socialism AND socialism, and looked at
Margaret to gauge whether he had been too bold in this utterance. But
she was all, he perceived, for broad-mindness, and he stirred himself
(and incidentally his tea) to still more liberality of expression. He
said the state of the poor was appalling, simply appalling; that there
were times when he wanted to shatter the whole system, "only," he said,
turning to me appealingly, "What have we got to put in its place?"

"The thing that exists is always the more evident alternative," I said.

The little curate looked at it for a moment. "Precisely," he said
explosively, and turned stirring and with his head a little on one side,
to hear what Margaret was saying.

Margaret was saying, with a swift blush and an effect of daring, that
she had no doubt she was a socialist.

"And wearing a gold chain!" said Gertrude, "And drinking out of
eggshell! I like that!"

I came to Margaret's rescue. "It doesn't follow that because one's a
socialist one ought to dress in sackcloth and ashes."

The initial coloured deeply, and having secured my attention by prodding
me slightly with the wrist of the hand that held his teacup, cleared his
throat and suggested that "one ought to be consistent."

I perceived we were embarked upon a discussion of the elements. We began
an interesting little wrangle one of those crude discussions of general
ideas that are dear to the heart of youth. I and Margaret supported one
another as socialists, Gertrude and Sybil and the initial maintained
an anti-socialist position, the curate attempted a cross-bench position
with an air of intending to come down upon us presently with a casting
vote. He reminded us of a number of useful principles too often
overlooked in argument, that in a big question like this there was much
to be said on both sides, that if every one did his or her duty to every
one about them there would be no difficulty with social problems at all,
that over and above all enactments we needed moral changes in people
themselves. My cousin Gertrude was a difficult controversialist to
manage, being unconscious of inconsistency in statement and absolutely
impervious to reply. Her standpoint was essentially materialistic;
she didn't see why she shouldn't have a good time because other people
didn't; they would have a good time, she was sure, if she didn't. She
said that if we did give up everything we had to other people, they
wouldn't very likely know what to do with it. She asked if we were so
fond of work-people, why we didn't go and live among them, and expressed
the inflexible persuasion that if we HAD socialism, everything would
be just the same again in ten years' time. She also threw upon us the
imputation of ingratitude for a beautiful world by saying that so far as
she was concerned she didn't want to upset everything. She was contented
with things as they were, thank you.

The discussion led in some way that I don't in the least recall now, and
possibly by abrupt transitions, to a croquet foursome in which Margaret
involved the curate without involving herself, and then stood beside me
on the edge of the lawn while the others played. We watched silently for
a moment.

"I HATE that sort of view," she said suddenly in a confidential
undertone, with her delicate pink flush returning.

"It's want of imagination," I said.

"To think we are just to enjoy ourselves," she went on; "just to go on
dressing and playing and having meals and spending money!" She seemed
to be referring not simply to my cousins, but to the whole world of
industry and property about us. "But what is one to do?" she asked. "I
do wish I had not had to come down. It's all so pointless here. There
seems to be nothing going forward, no ideas, no dreams. No one here
seems to feel quite what I feel, the sort of need there is for MEANING
in things. I hate things without meaning."

"Don't you do--local work?"

"I suppose I shall. I suppose I must find something. Do you think--if
one were to attempt some sort of propaganda?"

"Could you--?" I began a little doubtfully.

"I suppose I couldn't," she answered, after a thoughtful moment. "I
suppose it would come to nothing. And yet I feel there is so much to
be done for the world, so much one ought to be doing.... I want to do
something for the world."

I can see her now as she stood there with her brows nearly frowning, her
blue eyes looking before her, her mouth almost petulant. "One feels that
there are so many things going on--out of one's reach," she said.

I went back in the motor-car with my mind full of her, the quality of
delicate discontent, the suggestion of exile. Even a kind of weakness in
her was sympathetic. She told tremendously against her background. She
was, I say, like a protesting blue flower upon a cinder heap. It is
curious, too, how she connects and mingles with the furious quarrel
I had with my uncle that very evening. That came absurdly. Indirectly
Margaret was responsible. My mind was running on ideas she had revived
and questions she had set clamouring, and quite inadvertently in my
attempt to find solutions I talked so as to outrage his profoundest
feelings....



7


What a preposterous shindy that was!

I sat with him in the smoking-room, propounding what I considered to
be the most indisputable and non-contentious propositions
conceivable--until, to my infinite amazement, he exploded and called me
a "damned young puppy."

It was seismic.

"Tremendously interesting time," I said, "just in the beginning of
making a civilisation."

"Ah!" he said, with an averted face, and nodded, leaning forward over
his cigar.

I had not the remotest thought of annoying him.

"Monstrous muddle of things we have got," I said, "jumbled streets, ugly
population, ugly factories--"

"You'd do a sight better if you had to do with it," said my uncle,
regarding me askance.

"Not me. But a world that had a collective plan and knew where it meant
to be going would do a sight better, anyhow. We're all swimming in a
flood of ill-calculated chances--"

"You'll be making out I organised that business down there--by
chance--next," said my uncle, his voice thick with challenge.

I went on as though I was back in Trinity.

"There's a lot of chance in the making of all great businesses," I said.

My uncle remarked that that showed how much I knew about businesses.
If chance made businesses, why was it that he always succeeded and grew
while those fools Ackroyd and Sons always took second place? He showed
a disposition to tell the glorious history of how once Ackroyd's
overshadowed him, and how now he could buy up Ackroyd's three times
over. But I wanted to get out what was in my mind.

"Oh!" I said, "as between man and man and business and business, some
of course get the pull by this quality or that--but it's forces quite
outside the individual case that make the big part of any success
under modern conditions. YOU never invented pottery, nor any process in
pottery that matters a rap in your works; it wasn't YOUR foresight that
joined all England up with railways and made it possible to organise
production on an altogether different scale. You really at the utmost
can't take credit for much more than being the sort of man who happened
to fit what happened to be the requirements of the time, and who
happened to be in a position to take advantage of them--"

It was then my uncle cried out and called me a damned young puppy, and
became involved in some unexpected trouble of his own.

I woke up as it were from my analysis of the situation to discover him
bent over a splendid spittoon, cursing incoherently, retching a little,
and spitting out the end of his cigar which he had bitten off in his
last attempt at self-control, and withal fully prepared as soon as he
had cleared for action to give me just all that he considered to be the
contents of his mind upon the condition of mine.

Well, why shouldn't I talk my mind to him? He'd never had an outside
view of himself for years, and I resolved to stand up to him. We went
at it hammer and tongs! It became clear that he supposed me to be a
Socialist, a zealous, embittered hater of all ownership--and also an
educated man of the vilest, most pretentiously superior description.
His principal grievance was that I thought I knew everything; to that he
recurred again and again....

We had been maintaining an armed truce with each other since my resolve
to go up to Cambridge, and now we had out all that had accumulated
between us. There had been stupendous accumulations....

The particular things we said and did in that bawling encounter matter
nothing at all in this story. I can't now estimate how near we came
to fisticuffs. It ended with my saying, after a pungent reminder of
benefits conferred and remembered, that I didn't want to stay another
hour in his house. I went upstairs, in a state of puerile fury, to
pack and go off to the Railway Hotel, while he, with ironical civility,
telephoned for a cab.

"Good riddance!" shouted my uncle, seeing me off into the night.

On the face of it our row was preposterous, but the underlying reality
of our quarrel was the essential antagonism, it seemed to me, in all
human affairs, the antagonism between ideas and the established method,
that is to say, between ideas and the rule of thumb. The world I hate
is the rule-of-thumb world, the thing I and my kind of people exist
for primarily is to battle with that, to annoy it, disarrange it,
reconstruct it. We question everything, disturb anything that cannot
give a clear justification to our questioning, because we believe
inherently that our sense of disorder implies the possibility of a
better order. Of course we are detestable. My uncle was of that other
vaster mass who accept everything for the thing it seems to be, hate
enquiry and analysis as a tramp hates washing, dread and resist change,
oppose experiment, despise science. The world is our battleground; and
all history, all literature that matters, all science, deals with this
conflict of the thing that is and the speculative "if" that will destroy
it.

But that is why I did not see Margaret Seddon again for five years.



CHAPTER THE SECOND ~~ MARGARET IN LONDON



1


I was twenty-seven when I met Margaret again, and the intervening
five years had been years of vigorous activity for me, if not of very
remarkable growth. When I saw her again, I could count myself a grown
man. I think, indeed, I counted myself more completely grown than I was.
At any rate, by all ordinary standards, I had "got on" very well, and
my ideas, if they had not changed very greatly, had become much more
definite and my ambitions clearer and bolder.

I had long since abandoned my fellowship and come to London. I had
published two books that had been talked about, written several
articles, and established a regular relationship with the WEEKLY REVIEW
and the EVENING GAZETTE. I was a member of the Eighty Club and learning
to adapt the style of the Cambridge Union to larger uses. The London
world had opened out to me very readily. I had developed a pleasant
variety of social connections. I had made the acquaintance of Mr.
Evesham, who had been attracted by my NEW RULER, and who talked about
it and me, and so did a very great deal to make a way for me into the
company of prominent and amusing people. I dined out quite frequently.
The glitter and interest of good London dinner parties became a common
experience. I liked the sort of conversation one got at them extremely,
the little glow of duologues burning up into more general discussions,
the closing-in of the men after the going of the women, the sage,
substantial masculine gossiping, the later resumption of effective talk
with some pleasant woman, graciously at her best. I had a wide range
of houses; Cambridge had linked me to one or two correlated sets of
artistic and literary people, and my books and Mr. Evesham and opened
to me the big vague world of "society." I wasn't aggressive nor
particularly snobbish nor troublesome, sometimes I talked well, and if I
had nothing interesting to say I said as little as possible, and I had
a youthful gravity of manner that was liked by hostesses. And the other
side of my nature that first flared through the cover of restraints at
Locarno, that too had had opportunity to develop along the line London
renders practicable. I had had my experiences and secrets and adventures
among that fringe of ill-mated or erratic or discredited women the
London world possesses. The thing had long ago ceased to be a matter of
magic or mystery, and had become a question of appetites and excitement,
and among other things the excitement of not being found out.

I write rather doubtfully of my growing during this period. Indeed I
find it hard to judge whether I can say that I grew at all in any real
sense of the word, between three and twenty and twenty-seven. It seems
to me now to have been rather a phase of realisation and clarification.
All the broad lines of my thought were laid down, I am sure, by the date
of my Locarno adventure, but in those five years I discussed things over
and over again with myself and others, filled out with concrete fact
forms I had at first apprehended sketchily and conversationally,
measured my powers against my ideals and the forces in the world about
me. It was evident that many men no better than myself and with no
greater advantages than mine had raised themselves to influential and
even decisive positions in the worlds of politics and thought. I was
gathering the confidence and knowledge necessary to attack the world in
the large manner; I found I could write, and that people would let
me write if I chose, as one having authority and not as the scribes.
Socially and politically and intellectually I knew myself for an honest
man, and that quite without any deliberation on my part this showed
and made things easy for me. People trusted my good faith from the
beginning--for all that I came from nowhere and had no better position
than any adventurer.

But the growth process was arrested, I was nothing bigger at
twenty-seven than at twenty-two, however much saner and stronger, and
any one looking closely into my mind during that period might well have
imagined growth finished altogether. It is particularly evident to me
now that I came no nearer to any understanding of women during that
time. That Locarno affair was infinitely more to me than I had supposed.
It ended something--nipped something in the bud perhaps--took me at a
stride from a vague, fine, ignorant, closed world of emotion to intrigue
and a perfectly definite and limited sensuality. It ended my youth, and
for a time it prevented my manhood. I had never yet even peeped at the
sweetest, profoundest thing in the world, the heart and meaning of a
girl, or dreamt with any quality of reality of a wife or any such thing
as a friend among womanhood. My vague anticipation of such things in
life had vanished altogether. I turned away from their possibility. It
seemed to me I knew what had to be known about womankind. I wanted to
work hard, to get on to a position in which I could develop and forward
my constructive projects. Women, I thought, had nothing to do with that.
It seemed clear I could not marry for some years; I was attractive to
certain types of women, I had vanity enough to give me an agreeable
confidence in love-making, and I went about seeking a convenient
mistress quite deliberately, some one who should serve my purpose and
say in the end, like that kindly first mistress of mine, "I've done you
no harm," and so release me. It seemed the only wise way of disposing
of urgencies that might otherwise entangle and wreck the career I was
intent upon.

I don't apologise for, or defend my mental and moral phases. So it was
I appraised life and prepared to take it, and so it is a thousand
ambitious men see it to-day....

For the rest these five years were a period of definition. My political
conceptions were perfectly plain and honest. I had one constant desire
ruling my thoughts. I meant to leave England and the empire better
ordered than I found it, to organise and discipline, to build up a
constructive and controlling State out of my world's confusions. We
had, I saw, to suffuse education with public intention, to develop a new
better-living generation with a collectivist habit of thought, to link
now chaotic activities in every human affair, and particularly to catch
that escaped, world-making, world-ruining, dangerous thing, industrial
and financial enterprise, and bring it back to the service of the
general good. I had then the precise image that still serves me as a
symbol for all I wish to bring about, the image of an engineer building
a lock in a swelling torrent--with water pressure as his only source of
power. My thoughts and acts were habitually turned to that enterprise;
it gave shape and direction to all my life. The problem that most
engaged my mind during those years was the practical and personal
problem of just where to apply myself to serve this almost innate
purpose. How was I, a child of this confusion, struggling upward through
the confusion, to take hold of things? Somewhere between politics and
literature my grip must needs be found, but where? Always I seem to
have been looking for that in those opening years, and disregarding
everything else to discover it.



2


The Baileys, under whose auspices I met Margaret again, were in the
sharpest contrast with the narrow industrialism of the Staffordshire
world. They were indeed at the other extreme of the scale, two active
self-centred people, excessively devoted to the public service. It was
natural I should gravitate to them, for they seemed to stand for the
maturer, more disciplined, better informed expression of all I was then
urgent to attempt to do. The bulk of their friends were politicians or
public officials, they described themselves as publicists--a vague yet
sufficiently significant term. They lived and worked in a hard little
house in Chambers Street, Westminster, and made a centre for quite an
astonishing amount of political and social activity.

Willersley took me there one evening. The place was almost pretentiously
matter-of-fact and unassuming. The narrow passage-hall, papered with
some ancient yellowish paper, grained to imitate wood, was choked with
hats and cloaks and an occasional feminine wrap. Motioned rather than
announced by a tall Scotch servant woman, the only domestic I ever
remember seeing there, we made our way up a narrow staircase past the
open door of a small study packed with blue-books, to discover Altiora
Bailey receiving before the fireplace in her drawing-room. She was a
tall commanding figure, splendid but a little untidy in black silk and
red beads, with dark eyes that had no depths, with a clear hard voice
that had an almost visible prominence, aquiline features and straight
black hair that was apt to get astray, that was now astray like the
head feathers of an eagle in a gale. She stood with her hands behind her
back, and talked in a high tenor of a projected Town Planning Bill with
Blupp, who was practically in those days the secretary of the local
Government Board. A very short broad man with thick ears and fat white
hands writhing intertwined behind him, stood with his back to us, eager
to bark interruptions into Altiora's discourse. A slender girl in pale
blue, manifestly a young political wife, stood with one foot on the
fender listening with an expression of entirely puzzled propitiation.
A tall sandy-bearded bishop with the expression of a man in a trance
completed this central group.

The room was one of those long apartments once divided by folding doors,
and reaching from back to front, that are common upon the first floors
of London houses. Its walls were hung with two or three indifferent
water colours, there was scarcely any furniture but a sofa or so and a
chair, and the floor, severely carpeted with matting, was crowded with
a curious medley of people, men predominating. Several were in evening
dress, but most had the morning garb of the politician; the women were
either severely rational or radiantly magnificent. Willersley pointed
out to me the wife of the Secretary of State for War, and I recognised
the Duchess of Clynes, who at that time cultivated intellectuality. I
looked round, identifying a face here or there, and stepping back trod
on some one's toe, and turned to find it belonged to the Right Hon. G.
B. Mottisham, dear to the PUNCH caricaturists. He received my apology
with that intentional charm that is one of his most delightful traits,
and resumed his discussion. Beside him was Esmeer of Trinity, whom I had
not seen since my Cambridge days....

Willersley found an ex-member of the School Board for whom he had
affinities, and left me to exchange experiences and comments upon the
company with Esmeer. Esmeer was still a don; but he was nibbling, he
said, at certain negotiations with the TIMES that might bring him
down to London. He wanted to come to London. "We peep at things from
Cambridge," he said.

"This sort of thing," I said, "makes London necessary. It's the oddest
gathering."

"Every one comes here," said Esmeer. "Mostly we hate them like
poison--jealousy--and little irritations--Altiora can be a horror at
times--but we HAVE to come."

"Things are being done?"

"Oh!--no doubt of it. It's one of the parts of the British
machinery--that doesn't show.... But nobody else could do it.

"Two people," said Esmeer, "who've planned to be a power--in an original
way. And by Jove! they've done it!"

I did not for some time pick out Oscar Bailey, and then Esmeer
showed him to me in elaborately confidential talk in a corner with a
distinguished-looking stranger wearing a ribbon. Oscar had none of the
fine appearance of his wife; he was a short sturdy figure with a rounded
protruding abdomen and a curious broad, flattened, clean-shaven face
that seemed nearly all forehead. He was of Anglo-Hungarian extraction,
and I have always fancied something Mongolian in his type. He peered
up with reddish swollen-looking eyes over gilt-edged glasses that were
divided horizontally into portions of different refractive power, and he
talking in an ingratiating undertone, with busy thin lips, an eager lisp
and nervous movements of the hand.

People say that thirty years before at Oxford he was almost exactly the
same eager, clever little man he was when I first met him. He had come
up to Balliol bristling with extraordinary degrees and prizes captured
in provincial and Irish and Scotch universities--and had made a name for
himself as the most formidable dealer in exact fact the rhetoricians
of the Union had ever had to encounter. From Oxford he had gone on to a
position in the Higher Division of the Civil Service, I think in the
War Office, and had speedily made a place for himself as a political
journalist. He was a particularly neat controversialist, and very full
of political and sociological ideas. He had a quite astounding memory
for facts and a mastery of detailed analysis, and the time afforded
scope for these gifts. The later eighties were full of politico-social
discussion, and he became a prominent name upon the contents list of the
NINETEENTH CENTURY, the FORTNIGHTLY and CONTEMPORARY chiefly as a half
sympathetic but frequently very damaging critic of the socialism of that
period. He won the immense respect of every one specially interested in
social and political questions, he soon achieved the limited distinction
that is awarded such capacity, and at that I think he would have
remained for the rest of his life if he had not encountered Altiora.

But Altiora Macvitie was an altogether exceptional woman, an
extraordinary mixture of qualities, the one woman in the world who could
make something more out of Bailey than that. She had much of the
vigour and handsomeness of a slender impudent young man, and an
unscrupulousness altogether feminine. She was one of those women who
are waiting in--what is the word?--muliebrity. She had courage and
initiative and a philosophical way of handling questions, and she could
be bored by regular work like a man. She was entirely unfitted for her
sex's sphere. She was neither uncertain, coy nor hard to please, and
altogether too stimulating and aggressive for any gentleman's hours of
ease. Her cookery would have been about as sketchy as her handwriting,
which was generally quite illegible, and she would have made, I feel
sure, a shocking bad nurse. Yet you mustn't imagine she was an inelegant
or unbeautiful woman, and she is inconceivable to me in high collars or
any sort of masculine garment. But her soul was bony, and at the base
of her was a vanity gaunt and greedy! When she wasn't in a state of
personal untidiness that was partly a protest against the waste of hours
exacted by the toilet and partly a natural disinclination, she had a
gypsy splendour of black and red and silver all her own. And somewhen in
the early nineties she met and married Bailey.

I know very little about her early years. She was the only daughter of
Sir Deighton Macvitie, who applied the iodoform process to cotton,
and only his subsequent unfortunate attempts to become a Cotton King
prevented her being a very rich woman. As it was she had a tolerable
independence. She came into prominence as one of the more able of the
little shoal of young women who were led into politico-philanthropic
activities by the influence of the earlier novels of Mrs. Humphry
Ward--the Marcella crop. She went "slumming" with distinguished vigour,
which was quite usual in those days--and returned from her experiences
as an amateur flower girl with clear and original views about the
problem--which is and always had been unusual. She had not married, I
suppose because her standards were high, and men are cowards and with an
instinctive appetite for muliebrity. She had kept house for her father
by speaking occasionally to the housekeeper, butler and cook her mother
had left her, and gathering the most interesting dinner parties she
could, and had married off four orphan nieces in a harsh and successful
manner. After her father's smash and death she came out as a writer
upon social questions and a scathing critic of the Charity Organisation
Society, and she was three and thirty and a little at loose ends when
she met Oscar Bailey, so to speak, in the CONTEMPORARY REVIEW. The
lurking woman in her nature was fascinated by the ease and precision
with which the little man rolled over all sorts of important and
authoritative people, she was the first to discover a sort of
imaginative bigness in his still growing mind, the forehead perhaps
carried him off physically, and she took occasion to meet and subjugate
him, and, so soon as he had sufficiently recovered from his abject
humility and a certain panic at her attentions, marry him.

This had opened a new phase in the lives of Bailey and herself. The two
supplemented each other to an extraordinary extent. Their subsequent
career was, I think, almost entirely her invention. She was aggressive,
imaginative, and had a great capacity for ideas, while he was almost
destitute of initiative, and could do nothing with ideas except remember
and discuss them. She was, if not exact, at least indolent, with a
strong disposition to save energy by sketching--even her handwriting
showed that--while he was inexhaustibly industrious with a relentless
invariable calligraphy that grew larger and clearer as the years passed
by. She had a considerable power of charming; she could be just as nice
to people--and incidentally just as nasty--as she wanted to be. He was
always just the same, a little confidential and SOTTO VOCE, artlessly
rude and egoistic in an undignified way. She had considerable social
experience, good social connections, and considerable social ambition,
while he had none of these things. She saw in a flash her opportunity
to redeem his defects, use his powers, and do large, novel, rather
startling things. She ran him. Her marriage, which shocked her friends
and relations beyond measure--for a time they would only speak of Bailey
as "that gnome"--was a stroke of genius, and forthwith they proceeded
to make themselves the most formidable and distinguished couple
conceivable. P. B. P., she boasted, was engraved inside their wedding
rings, Pro Bono Publico, and she meant it to be no idle threat. She had
discovered very early that the last thing influential people will do is
to work. Everything in their lives tends to make them dependent upon a
supply of confidently administered detail. Their business is with the
window and not the stock behind, and in the end they are dependent upon
the stock behind for what goes into the window. She linked with that the
fact that Bailey had a mind as orderly as a museum, and an invincible
power over detail. She saw that if two people took the necessary pains
to know the facts of government and administration with precision, to
gather together knowledge that was dispersed and confused, to be able to
say precisely what had to be done and what avoided in this eventuality
or that, they would necessarily become a centre of reference for all
sorts of legislative proposals and political expedients, and she went
unhesitatingly upon that.

Bailey, under her vigorous direction, threw up his post in the
Civil Service and abandoned sporadic controversies, and they devoted
themselves to the elaboration and realisation of this centre of public
information she had conceived as their role. They set out to study
the methods and organisation and realities of government in the most
elaborate manner. They did the work as no one had ever hitherto dreamt
of doing it. They planned the research on a thoroughly satisfying scale,
and arranged their lives almost entirely for it. They took that house
in Chambers Street and furnished it with severe economy, they discovered
that Scotch domestic who is destined to be the guardian and tyrant of
their declining years, and they set to work. Their first book, "The
Permanent Official," fills three plump volumes, and took them and their
two secretaries upwards of four years to do. It is an amazingly good
book, an enduring achievement. In a hundred directions the history and
the administrative treatment of the public service was clarified for all
time....

They worked regularly every morning from nine to twelve, they lunched
lightly but severely, in the afternoon they "took exercise" or Bailey
attended meetings of the London School Board, on which he served, he
said, for the purposes of study--he also became a railway director
for the same end. In the late afternoon Altiora was at home to various
callers, and in the evening came dinner or a reception or both.

Her dinners and gatherings were a very important feature in their
scheme. She got together all sorts of interesting people in or about
the public service, she mixed the obscurely efficient with the
ill-instructed famous and the rudderless rich, got together in one room
more of the factors in our strange jumble of a public life than had ever
met easily before. She fed them with a shameless austerity that kept the
conversation brilliant, on a soup, a plain fish, and mutton or boiled
fowl and milk pudding, with nothing to drink but whisky and soda, and
hot and cold water, and milk and lemonade. Everybody was soon very glad
indeed to come to that. She boasted how little her housekeeping cost
her, and sought constantly for fresh economies that would enable her,
she said, to sustain an additional private secretary. Secretaries were
the Baileys' one extravagance, they loved to think of searches going
on in the British Museum, and letters being cleared up and precis made
overhead, while they sat in the little study and worked together, Bailey
with a clockwork industry, and Altiora in splendid flashes between
intervals of cigarettes and meditation. "All efficient public careers,"
said Altiora, "consist in the proper direction of secretaries."

"If everything goes well I shall have another secretary next year,"
Altiora told me. "I wish I could refuse people dinner napkins. Imagine
what it means in washing! I dare most things.... But as it is, they
stand a lot of hardship here."

"There's something of the miser in both these people," said Esmeer, and
the thing was perfectly true. For, after all, the miser is nothing more
than a man who either through want of imagination or want of suggestion
misapplies to a base use a natural power of concentration upon one end.
The concentration itself is neither good nor evil, but a power that
can be used in either way. And the Baileys gathered and reinvested
usuriously not money, but knowledge of the utmost value in human
affairs. They produced an effect of having found themselves--completely.
One envied them at times extraordinarily. I was attracted, I was
dazzled--and at the same time there was something about Bailey's big
wrinkled forehead, his lisping broad mouth, the gestures of his hands
and an uncivil preoccupation I could not endure....



3


Their effect upon me was from the outset very considerable.

Both of them found occasion on that first visit of mine to talk to
me about my published writings and particularly about my then just
published book THE NEW RULER, which had interested them very much. It
fell in indeed so closely with their own way of thinking that I doubt if
they ever understood how independently I had arrived at my conclusions.
It was their weakness to claim excessively. That irritation, however,
came later. We discovered each other immensely; for a time it produced a
tremendous sense of kindred and co-operation.

Altiora, I remember, maintained that there existed a great army of such
constructive-minded people as ourselves--as yet undiscovered by one
another.

"It's like boring a tunnel through a mountain," said Oscar, "and
presently hearing the tapping of the workers from the other end."

"If you didn't know of them beforehand," I said, "it might be a rather
badly joined tunnel."

"Exactly," said Altiora with a high note, "and that's why we all want to
find out each other...."

They didn't talk like that on our first encounter, but they urged me to
lunch with them next day, and then it was we went into things. A woman
Factory Inspector and the Educational Minister for New Banksland and his
wife were also there, but I don't remember they made any contribution
to the conversation. The Baileys saw to that. They kept on at me in an
urgent litigious way.

"We have read your book," each began--as though it had been a joint
function. "And we consider--"

"Yes," I protested, "I think--"

 That was a secondary matter.

"They did not consider," said Altiora, raising her voice and going right
over me, "that I had allowed sufficiently for the inevitable development
of an official administrative class in the modern state."

"Nor of its importance," echoed Oscar.

That, they explained in a sort of chorus, was the cardinal idea of their
lives, what they were up to, what they stood for. "We want to suggest to
you," they said--and I found this was a stock opening of theirs--"that
from the mere necessities of convenience elected bodies MUST avail
themselves more and more of the services of expert officials. We have
that very much in mind. The more complicated and technical affairs
become, the less confidence will the elected official have in himself.
We want to suggest that these expert officials must necessarily develop
into a new class and a very powerful class in the community. We want to
organise that. It may be THE power of the future. They will necessarily
have to have very much of a common training. We consider ourselves as
amateur unpaid precursors of such a class."...

The vision they displayed for my consideration as the aim of
public-spirited endeavour, seemed like a harder, narrower, more
specialised version of the idea of a trained and disciplined state that
Willersley and I had worked out in the Alps. They wanted things more
organised, more correlated with government and a collective purpose,
just as we did, but they saw it not in terms of a growing collective
understanding, but in terms of functionaries, legislative change, and
methods of administration....

It wasn't clear at first how we differed. The Baileys were very anxious
to win me to co-operation, and I was quite prepared at first to identify
their distinctive expressions with phrases of my own, and so we came
very readily into an alliance that was to last some years, and break at
last very painfully. Altiora manifestly liked me, I was soon discussing
with her the perplexity I found in placing myself efficiently in the
world, the problem of how to take hold of things that occupied my
thoughts, and she was sketching out careers for my consideration, very
much as an architect on his first visit sketches houses, considers
requirements, and puts before you this example and that of the more or
less similar thing already done....



4


It is easy to see how much in common there was between the Baileys and
me, and how natural it was that I should become a constant visitor at
their house and an ally of theirs in many enterprises. It is not nearly
so easy to define the profound antagonism of spirit that also held
between us. There was a difference in texture, a difference in quality.
How can I express it? The shapes of our thoughts were the same, but the
substance quite different. It was as if they had made in china or cast
iron what I had made in transparent living matter. (The comparison is
manifestly from my point of view.) Certain things never seemed to show
through their ideas that were visible, refracted perhaps and distorted,
but visible always through mine.

I thought for a time the essential difference lay in our relation to
beauty. With me beauty is quite primary in life; I like truth, order
and goodness, wholly because they are beautiful or lead straight to
beautiful consequences. The Baileys either hadn't got that or they
didn't see it. They seemed at times to prefer things harsh and ugly.
That puzzled me extremely. The esthetic quality of many of their
proposals, the "manners" of their work, so to speak, were at times as
dreadful as--well, War Office barrack architecture. A caricature by
its exaggerated statements will sometimes serve to point a truth by
antagonising falsity and falsity. I remember talking to a prominent
museum official in need of more public funds for the work he had in
hand. I mentioned the possibility of enlisting Bailey's influence.

"Oh, we don't want Philistines like that infernal Bottle-Imp running
us," he said hastily, and would hear of no concerted action for the end
he had in view. "I'd rather not have the extension.

"You see," he went on to explain, "Bailey's wanting in the essentials."

"What essentials?" said I.

"Oh! he'd be like a nasty oily efficient little machine for some merely
subordinate necessity among all my delicate stuff. He'd do all we wanted
no doubt in the way of money and powers--and he'd do it wrong and mess
the place for ever. Hands all black, you know. He's just a means. Just a
very aggressive and unmanageable means. This isn't a plumber's job...."

I stuck to my argument.

"I don't LIKE him," said the official conclusively, and it seemed to me
at the time he was just blind prejudice speaking....

I came nearer the truth of the matter as I came to realise that
our philosophies differed profoundly. That isn't a very curable
difference,--once people have grown up. Theirs was a philosophy devoid
of FINESSE. Temperamentally the Baileys were specialised, concentrated,
accurate, while I am urged either by some Inner force or some entirely
assimilated influence in my training, always to round off and shadow
my outlines. I hate them hard. I would sacrifice detail to modelling
always, and the Baileys, it seemed to me, loved a world as flat and
metallic as Sidney Cooper's cows. If they had the universe in hand I
know they would take down all the trees and put up stamped tin green
shades and sunlight accumulators. Altiora thought trees hopelessly
irregular and sea cliffs a great mistake.... I got things clearer as
time went on. Though it was an Hegelian mess of which I had partaken at
Codger's table by way of a philosophical training, my sympathies have
always been Pragmatist. I belong almost by nature to that school of
Pragmatism that, following the medieval Nominalists, bases itself upon
a denial of the reality of classes, and of the validity of general
laws. The Baileys classified everything. They were, in the scholastic
sense--which so oddly contradicts the modern use of the word "Realists."
They believed classes were REAL and independent of their individuals.
This is the common habit of all so-called educated people who have no
metaphysical aptitude and no metaphysical training. It leads them to a
progressive misunderstanding of the world. It was a favourite trick
of Altiora's to speak of everybody as a "type"; she saw men as samples
moving; her dining-room became a chamber of representatives. It gave
a tremendously scientific air to many of their generalisations, using
"scientific" in its nineteenth-century uncritical Herbert Spencer sense,
an air that only began to disappear when you thought them over again in
terms of actuality and the people one knew....

At the Baileys' one always seemed to be getting one's hands on the very
strings that guided the world. You heard legislation projected to affect
this "type" and that; statistics marched by you with sin and shame and
injustice and misery reduced to quite manageable percentages, you found
men who were to frame or amend bills in grave and intimate exchange
with Bailey's omniscience, you heard Altiora canvassing approaching
resignations and possible appointments that might make or mar a
revolution in administrative methods, and doing it with a vigorous
directness that manifestly swayed the decision; and you felt you were
in a sort of signal box with levers all about you, and the world outside
there, albeit a little dark and mysterious beyond the window, running
on its lines in ready obedience to these unhesitating lights, true and
steady to trim termini.

And then with all this administrative fizzle, this pseudo-scientific
administrative chatter, dying away in your head, out you went into the
limitless grimy chaos of London streets and squares, roads and avenues
lined with teeming houses, each larger than the Chambers Street house
and at least equally alive, you saw the chaotic clamour of hoardings,
the jumble of traffic, the coming and going of mysterious myriads,
you heard the rumble of traffic like the noise of a torrent; a vague
incessant murmur of cries and voices, wanton crimes and accidents bawled
at you from the placards; imperative unaccountable fashions swaggered
triumphant in dazzling windows of the shops; and you found yourself
swaying back to the opposite conviction that the huge formless spirit
of the world it was that held the strings and danced the puppets on the
Bailey stage....

Under the lamps you were jostled by people like my Staffordshire uncle
out for a spree, you saw shy youths conversing with prostitutes, you
passed young lovers pairing with an entire disregard of the social
suitability of the "types" they might blend or create, you saw men
leaning drunken against lamp-posts whom you knew for the "type" that
will charge with fixed bayonets into the face of death, and you found
yourself unable to imagine little Bailey achieving either drunkenness or
the careless defiance of annihilation. You realised that quite a lot of
types were underrepresented in Chambers Street, that feral and obscure
and altogether monstrous forces must be at work, as yet altogether
unassimilated by those neat administrative reorganisations.



5


Altiora, I remember, preluded Margaret's reappearance by announcing her
as a "new type."

I was accustomed to go early to the Baileys' dinners in those days, for
a preliminary gossip with Altiora in front of her drawing-room fire. One
got her alone, and that early arrival was a little sign of appreciation
she valued. She had every woman's need of followers and servants.

"I'm going to send you down to-night," she said, "with a very
interesting type indeed--one of the new generation of serious gals.
Middle-class origin--and quite well off. Rich in fact. Her step-father
was a solicitor and something of an ENTREPRENEUR towards the end, I
fancy--in the Black Country. There was a little brother died, and she's
lost her mother quite recently. Quite on her own, so to speak. She's
never been out into society very much, and doesn't seem really very
anxious to go.... Not exactly an intellectual person, you know, but
quiet, and great force of character. Came up to London on her own and
came to us--someone had told her we were the sort of people to advise
her--to ask what to do. I'm sure she'll interest you."

"What CAN people of that sort do?" I asked. "Is she capable of
investigation?"

Altiora compressed her lips and shook her head. She always did shake her
head when you asked that of anyone.

"Of course what she ought to do," said Altiora, with her silk dress
pulled back from her knee before the fire, and with a lift of her voice
towards a chuckle at her daring way of putting things, "is to marry a
member of Parliament and see he does his work.... Perhaps she will.
It's a very exceptional gal who can do anything by herself--quite
exceptional. The more serious they are--without being exceptional--the
more we want them to marry."

Her exposition was truncated by the entry of the type in question.

"Well!" cried Altiora turning, and with a high note of welcome, "HERE
you are!"

Margaret had gained in dignity and prettiness by the lapse of five
years, and she was now very beautifully and richly and simply dressed.
Her fair hair had been done in some way that made it seem softer and
more abundant than it was in my memory, and a gleam of purple velvet-set
diamonds showed amidst its mist of little golden and brown lines.
Her dress was of white and violet, the last trace of mourning for her
mother, and confessed the gracious droop of her tall and slender body.
She did not suggest Staffordshire at all, and I was puzzled for a moment
to think where I had met her. Her sweetly shaped mouth with the
slight obliquity of the lip and the little kink in her brow were
extraordinarily familiar to me. But she had either been prepared
by Altiora or she remembered my name. "We met," she said, "while my
step-father was alive--at Misterton. You came to see us"; and instantly
I recalled the sunshine between the apple blossom and a slender pale
blue girlish shape among the daffodils, like something that had sprung
from a bulb itself. I recalled at once that I had found her very
interesting, though I did not clearly remember how it was she had
interested me.

Other guests arrived--it was one of Altiora's boldly blended mixtures of
people with ideas and people with influence or money who might perhaps
be expected to resonate to them. Bailey came down late with an air of
hurry, and was introduced to Margaret and said absolutely nothing to
her--there being no information either to receive or impart and nothing
to do--but stood snatching his left cheek until I rescued him and her,
and left him free to congratulate the new Lady Snape on her husband's K.
C. B.

I took Margaret down. We achieved no feats of mutual expression, except
that it was abundantly clear we were both very pleased and interested
to meet again, and that we had both kept memories of each other. We made
that Misterton tea-party and the subsequent marriages of my cousins
and the world of Burslem generally, matter for quite an agreeable
conversation until at last Altiora, following her invariable custom,
called me by name imperatively out of our duologue. "Mr. Remington," she
said, "we want your opinion--" in her entirely characteristic effort to
get all the threads of conversation into her own hands for the climax
that always wound up her dinners. How the other women used to hate those
concluding raids of hers! I forget most of the other people at that
dinner, nor can I recall what the crowning rally was about. It didn't in
any way join on to my impression of Margaret.

In the drawing-room of the matting floor I rejoined her, with Altiora's
manifest connivance, and in the interval I had been thinking of our
former meeting.

"Do you find London," I asked, "give you more opportunity for doing
things and learning things than Burslem?"

She showed at once she appreciated my allusion to her former
confidences. "I was very discontented then," she said and paused. "I've
really only been in London for a few months. It's so different. In
Burslem, life seems all business and getting--without any reason. One
went on and it didn't seem to mean anything. At least anything that
mattered.... London seems to be so full of meanings--all mixed up
together."

She knitted her brows over her words and smiled appealingly at the end
as if for consideration for her inadequate expression, appealingly and
almost humorously.

I looked understandingly at her. "We have all," I agreed, "to come to
London."

"One sees so much distress," she added, as if she felt she had
completely omitted something, and needed a codicil.

"What are you doing in London?"

"I'm thinking of studying. Some social question. I thought perhaps I
might go and study social conditions as Mrs. Bailey did, go perhaps as
a work-girl or see the reality of living in, but Mrs. Bailey thought
perhaps it wasn't quite my work."

"Are you studying?"

"I'm going to a good many lectures, and perhaps I shall take up a
regular course at the Westminster School of Politics and Sociology. But
Mrs. Bailey doesn't seem to believe very much in that either."

Her faintly whimsical smile returned. "I seem rather indefinite," she
apologised, "but one does not want to get entangled in things one can't
do. One--one has so many advantages, one's life seems to be such a trust
and such a responsibility--"

She stopped.

"A man gets driven into work," I said.

"It must be splendid to be Mrs. Bailey," she replied with a glance of
envious admiration across the room.

"SHE has no doubts, anyhow," I remarked.

"She HAD," said Margaret with the pride of one who has received great
confidences.



6


"You've met before?" said Altiora, a day or so later.

I explained when.

"You find her interesting?"

I saw in a flash that Altiora meant to marry me to Margaret.

Her intention became much clearer as the year developed. Altiora was
systematic even in matters that evade system. I was to marry Margaret,
and freed from the need of making an income I was to come into
politics--as an exponent of Baileyism. She put it down with the other
excellent and advantageous things that should occupy her summer holiday.
It was her pride and glory to put things down and plan them out in
detail beforehand, and I'm not quite sure that she did not even mark
off the day upon which the engagement was to be declared. If she did,
I disappointed her. We didn't come to an engagement, in spite of the
broadest hints and the glaring obviousness of everything, that summer.

Every summer the Baileys went out of London to some house they hired
or borrowed, leaving their secretaries toiling behind, and they went
on working hard in the mornings and evenings and taking exercise in the
open air in the afternoon. They cycled assiduously and went for long
walks at a trot, and raided and studied (and incidentally explained
themselves to) any social "types" that lived in the neighbourhood. One
invaded type, resentful under research, described them with a dreadful
aptness as Donna Quixote and Sancho Panza--and himself as a harmless
windmill, hurting no one and signifying nothing. She did rather tilt
at things. This particular summer they were at a pleasant farmhouse in
level country near Pangbourne, belonging to the Hon. Wilfrid Winchester,
and they asked me to come down to rooms in the neighbourhood--Altiora
took them for a month for me in August--and board with them upon
extremely reasonable terms; and when I got there I found Margaret
sitting in a hammock at Altiora's feet. Lots of people, I gathered, were
coming and going in the neighbourhood, the Ponts were in a villa on the
river, and the Rickhams' houseboat was to moor for some days; but these
irruptions did not impede a great deal of duologue between Margaret and
myself.

Altiora was efficient rather than artistic in her match-making. She sent
us off for long walks together--Margaret was a fairly good walker--she
exhumed some defective croquet things and incited us to croquet, not
understanding that detestable game is the worst stimulant for lovers
in the world. And Margaret and I were always getting left about, and
finding ourselves for odd half-hours in the kitchen-garden with nothing
to do except talk, or we were told with a wave of the hand to run away
and amuse each other.

Altiora even tried a picnic in canoes, knowing from fiction rather than
imagination or experience the conclusive nature of such excursions. But
there she fumbled at the last moment, and elected at the river's brink
to share a canoe with me. Bailey showed so much zeal and so little
skill--his hat fell off and he became miraculously nothing but
paddle-clutching hands and a vast wrinkled brow--that at last he had to
be paddled ignominiously by Margaret, while Altiora, after a phase of
rigid discretion, as nearly as possible drowned herself--and me no doubt
into the bargain--with a sudden lateral gesture of the arm to emphasise
the high note with which she dismissed the efficiency of the Charity
Organisation Society. We shipped about an inch of water and sat in it
for the rest of the time, an inconvenience she disregarded heroically.
We had difficulties in landing Oscar from his frail craft upon the ait
of our feasting,--he didn't balance sideways and was much alarmed, and
afterwards, as Margaret had a pain in her back, I took him in my canoe,
let him hide his shame with an ineffectual but not positively harmful
paddle, and towed the other by means of the joined painters. Still it
was the fault of the inadequate information supplied in the books and
not of Altiora that that was not the date of my betrothal.

I find it not a little difficult to state what kept me back from
proposing marriage to Margaret that summer, and what urged me forward
at last to marry her. It is so much easier to remember one's resolutions
than to remember the moods and suggestions that produced them.

Marrying and getting married was, I think, a pretty simple affair to
Altiora; it was something that happened to the adolescent and unmarried
when you threw them together under the circumstances of health, warmth
and leisure. It happened with the kindly and approving smiles of the
more experienced elders who had organised these proximities. The young
people married, settled down, children ensued, and father and mother
turned their minds, now decently and properly disillusioned, to other
things. That to Altiora was the normal sexual life, and she believed it
to be the quality of the great bulk of the life about her.

One of the great barriers to human understanding is the wide
temperamental difference one finds in the values of things relating to
sex. It is the issue upon which people most need training in charity and
imaginative sympathy. Here are no universal standards at all, and indeed
for no single man nor woman does there seem to be any fixed standard, so
much do the accidents of circumstances and one's physical phases affect
one's interpretations. There is nothing in the whole range of sexual
fact that may not seem supremely beautiful or humanly jolly or
magnificently wicked or disgusting or trivial or utterly insignificant,
according to the eye that sees or the mood that colours. Here is
something that may fill the skies and every waking hour or be almost
completely banished from a life. It may be everything on Monday and less
than nothing on Saturday. And we make our laws and rules as though in
these matters all men and women were commensurable one with another,
with an equal steadfast passion and an equal constant duty....

I don't know what dreams Altiora may have had in her schoolroom days, I
always suspected her of suppressed and forgotten phases, but certainly
her general effect now was of an entirely passionless worldliness in
these matters. Indeed so far as I could get at her, she regarded sexual
passion as being hardly more legitimate in a civilised person than--let
us say--homicidal mania. She must have forgotten--and Bailey too. I
suspect she forgot before she married him. I don't suppose either of
them had the slightest intimation of the dimensions sexual love can take
in the thoughts of the great majority of people with whom they come in
contact. They loved in their way--an intellectual way it was and a fond
way--but it had no relation to beauty and physical sensation--except
that there seemed a decree of exile against these things. They got their
glow in high moments of altruistic ambition--and in moments of vivid
worldly success. They sat at opposite ends of their dinner table with so
and so "captured," and so and so, flushed with a mutual approval. They
saw people in love forgetful and distraught about them, and just put it
down to forgetfulness and distraction. At any rate Altiora manifestly
viewed my situation and Margaret's with an abnormal and entirely
misleading simplicity. There was the girl, rich, with an acceptable
claim to be beautiful, shiningly virtuous, quite capable of political
interests, and there was I, talented, ambitious and full of
political and social passion, in need of just the money, devotion and
regularisation Margaret could provide. We were both unmarried--white
sheets of uninscribed paper. Was there ever a simpler situation? What
more could we possibly want?

She was even a little offended at the inconclusiveness that did not
settle things at Pangbourne. I seemed to her, I suspect, to reflect upon
her judgment and good intentions.



7


I didn't see things with Altiora's simplicity.

I admired Margaret very much, I was fully aware of all that she and I
might give each other; indeed so far as Altiora went we were quite in
agreement. But what seemed solid ground to Altiora and the ultimate
footing of her emasculated world, was to me just the superficial
covering of a gulf--oh! abysses of vague and dim, and yet stupendously
significant things.

I couldn't dismiss the interests and the passion of sex as Altiora did.
Work, I agreed, was important; career and success; but deep unanalysable
instincts told me this preoccupation was a thing quite as important;
dangerous, interfering, destructive indeed, but none the less a
dominating interest in life. I have told how flittingly and uninvited it
came like a moth from the outer twilight into my life, how it grew in me
with my manhood, how it found its way to speech and grew daring, and led
me at last to experience. After that adventure at Locarno sex and the
interests and desires of sex never left me for long at peace. I went on
with my work and my career, and all the time it was like--like someone
talking ever and again in a room while one tries to write.

There were times when I could have wished the world a world all of men,
so greatly did this unassimilated series of motives and curiosities
hamper me; and times when I could have wished the world all of women.
I seemed always to be seeking something in women, in girls, and I
was never clear what it was I was seeking. But never--even at my
coarsest--was I moved by physical desire alone. Was I seeking help and
fellowship? Was I seeking some intimacy with beauty? It was a thing too
formless to state, that I seemed always desiring to attain and never
attaining. Waves of gross sensuousness arose out of this preoccupation,
carried me to a crisis of gratification or disappointment that was
clearly not the needed thing; they passed and left my mind free again
for a time to get on with the permanent pursuits of my life. And then
presently this solicitude would have me again, an irrelevance as it
seemed, and yet a constantly recurring demand.

I don't want particularly to dwell upon things that are disagreeable
for others to read, but I cannot leave them out of my story and get the
right proportions of the forces I am balancing. I was no abnormal man,
and that world of order we desire to make must be built of such stuff as
I was and am and can beget. You cannot have a world of Baileys; it would
end in one orderly generation. Humanity is begotten in Desire, lives by
Desire.


     "Love which is lust, is the Lamp in the Tomb;
      Love which is lust, is the Call from the Gloom."


I echo Henley.

I suppose the life of celibacy which the active, well-fed,
well-exercised and imaginatively stirred young man of the educated
classes is supposed to lead from the age of nineteen or twenty,
when Nature certainly meant him to marry, to thirty or more, when
civilisation permits him to do so, is the most impossible thing in the
world. We deal here with facts that are kept secret and obscure, but
I doubt for my own part if more than one man out of five in our class
satisfies that ideal demand. The rest are even as I was, and Hatherleigh
and Esmeer and all the men I knew. I draw no lessons and offer no
panacea; I have to tell the quality of life, and this is how it is. This
is how it will remain until men and women have the courage to face the
facts of life.

I was no systematic libertine, you must understand; things happened to
me and desire drove me. Any young man would have served for that Locarno
adventure, and after that what had been a mystic and wonderful thing
passed rapidly into a gross, manifestly misdirected and complicating
one. I can count a meagre tale of five illicit loves in the days of my
youth, to include that first experience, and of them all only two were
sustained relationships. Besides these five "affairs," on one or two
occasions I dipped so low as the inky dismal sensuality of the streets,
and made one of those pairs of correlated figures, the woman in her
squalid finery sailing homeward, the man modestly aloof and behind, that
every night in the London year flit by the score of thousands across the
sight of the observant....

How ugly it is to recall; ugly and shameful now without qualification!
Yet at the time there was surely something not altogether ugly in
it--something that has vanished, some fine thing mortally ailing.

One such occasion I recall as if it were a vision deep down in a pit,
as if it had happened in another state of existence to someone else. And
yet it is the sort of thing that has happened, once or twice at least,
to half the men in London who have been in a position to make it
possible. Let me try and give you its peculiar effect. Man or woman, you
ought to know of it.

Figure to yourself a dingy room, somewhere in that network of streets
that lies about Tottenham Court Road, a dingy bedroom lit by a solitary
candle and carpeted with scraps and patches, with curtains of cretonne
closing the window, and a tawdry ornament of paper in the grate. I sit
on a bed beside a weary-eyed, fair-haired, sturdy young woman, half
undressed, who is telling me in broken German something that my
knowledge of German is at first inadequate to understand....

I thought she was boasting about her family, and then slowly the meaning
came to me. She was a Lett from near Libau in Courland, and she was
telling me--just as one tells something too strange for comment or
emotion--how her father had been shot and her sister outraged and
murdered before her eyes.

It was as if one had dipped into something primordial and stupendous
beneath the smooth and trivial surfaces of life. There was I, you know,
the promising young don from Cambridge, who wrote quite brilliantly
about politics and might presently get into Parliament, with my collar
and tie in my hand, and a certain sense of shameful adventure fading out
of my mind.

"Ach Gott!" she sighed by way of comment, and mused deeply for a
moment before she turned her face to me, as to something forgotten and
remembered, and assumed the half-hearted meretricious smile.

"Bin ich eine hubsche?" she asked like one who repeats a lesson.

I was moved to crave her pardon and come away.

"Bin ich eine hubsche?" she asked a little anxiously, laying a detaining
hand upon me, and evidently not understanding a word of what I was
striving to say.



8


I find it extraordinarily difficult to recall the phases by which
I passed from my first admiration of Margaret's earnestness and
unconscious daintiness to an intimate acquaintance. The earlier
encounters stand out clear and hard, but then the impressions become
crowded and mingle not only with each other but with all the subsequent
developments of relationship, the enormous evolutions of interpretation
and comprehension between husband and wife. Dipping into my memories is
like dipping into a ragbag, one brings out this memory or that, with no
intimation of how they came in time or what led to them and joined them
together. And they are all mixed up with subsequent associations,
with sympathies and discords, habits of intercourse, surprises and
disappointments and discovered misunderstandings. I know only that
always my feelings for Margaret were complicated feelings, woven of many
and various strands.

It is one of the curious neglected aspects of life how at the same time
and in relation to the same reality we can have in our minds streams of
thought at quite different levels. We can be at the same time idealising
a person and seeing and criticising that person quite coldly and
clearly, and we slip unconsciously from level to level and produce
all sorts of inconsistent acts. In a sense I had no illusions about
Margaret; in a sense my conception of Margaret was entirely poetic
illusion. I don't think I was ever blind to certain defects of hers, and
quite as certainly they didn't seem to matter in the slightest degree.
Her mind had a curious want of vigour, "flatness" is the only word; she
never seemed to escape from her phrase; her way of thinking, her way of
doing was indecisive; she remained in her attitude, it did not flow out
to easy, confirmatory action.

I saw this quite clearly, and when we walked and talked together I
seemed always trying for animation in her and never finding it. I would
state my ideas. "I know," she would say, "I know."

I talked about myself and she listened wonderfully, but she made no
answering revelations. I talked politics, and she remarked with her blue
eyes wide and earnest: "Every WORD you say seems so just."

I admired her appearance tremendously but--I can only express it by
saying I didn't want to touch her. Her fair hair was always delectably
done. It flowed beautifully over her pretty small ears, and she would
tie its fair coilings with fillets of black or blue velvet that carried
pretty buckles of silver and paste. The light, the faint down on her
brow and cheek was delightful. And it was clear to me that I made her
happy.

My sense of her deficiencies didn't stand in the way of my falling at
last very deeply in love with her. Her very shortcomings seemed to offer
me something....

She stood in my mind for goodness--and for things from which it seemed
to me my hold was slipping.

She seemed to promise a way of escape from the deepening opposition in
me between physical passions and the constructive career, the career
of wide aims and human service, upon which I had embarked. All the time
that I was seeing her as a beautiful, fragile, rather ineffective girl,
I was also seeing her just as consciously as a shining slender figure,
a radiant reconciliation, coming into my darkling disorders of lust and
impulse. I could understand clearly that she was incapable of the most
necessary subtleties of political thought, and yet I could contemplate
praying to her and putting all the intricate troubles of my life at her
feet.

Before the reappearance of Margaret in my world at all an unwonted
disgust with the consequences and quality of my passions had arisen in
my mind. Among other things that moment with the Lettish girl haunted
me persistently. I would see myself again and again sitting amidst those
sluttish surroundings, collar and tie in hand, while her heavy German
words grouped themselves to a slowly apprehended meaning. I would
feel again with a fresh stab of remorse, that this was not a flash of
adventure, this was not seeing life in any permissible sense, but a dip
into tragedy, dishonour, hideous degradation, and the pitiless cruelty
of a world as yet uncontrolled by any ordered will.

"Good God!" I put it to myself, "that I should finish the work those
Cossacks had begun! I who want order and justice before everything!
There's no way out of it, no decent excuse! If I didn't think, I ought
to have thought!"...

"How did I get to it?"... I would ransack the phases of my development
from the first shy unveiling of a hidden wonder to the last extremity as
a man will go through muddled account books to find some disorganising
error....

I was also involved at that time--I find it hard to place these things
in the exact order of their dates because they were so disconnected
with the regular progress of my work and life--in an intrigue, a clumsy,
sensuous, pretentious, artificially stimulated intrigue, with a Mrs.
Larrimer, a woman living separated from her husband. I will not go
into particulars of that episode, nor how we quarrelled and chafed one
another. She was at once unfaithful and jealous and full of whims
about our meetings; she was careless of our secret, and vulgarised our
relationship by intolerable interpretations; except for some glowing
moments of gratification, except for the recurrent and essentially
vicious desire that drew us back to each other again, we both fretted at
a vexatious and unexpectedly binding intimacy. The interim was full
of the quality of work delayed, of time and energy wasted, of insecure
precautions against scandal and exposure. Disappointment is almost
inherent in illicit love. I had, and perhaps it was part of her
recurrent irritation also, a feeling as though one had followed
something fine and beautiful into a net--into bird lime! These furtive
scuffles, this sneaking into shabby houses of assignation, was what we
had made out of the suggestion of pagan beauty; this was the reality
of our vision of nymphs and satyrs dancing for the joy of life amidst
incessant sunshine. We had laid hands upon the wonder and glory of
bodily love and wasted them....

It was the sense of waste, of finely beautiful possibilities getting
entangled and marred for ever that oppressed me. I had missed, I had
lost. I did not turn from these things after the fashion of the Baileys,
as one turns from something low and embarrassing. I felt that these
great organic forces were still to be wrought into a harmony with my
constructive passion. I felt too that I was not doing it. I had not
understood the forces in this struggle nor its nature, and as I learnt
I failed. I had been started wrong, I had gone on wrong, in a world that
was muddled and confused, full of false counsel and erratic shames and
twisted temptations. I learnt to see it so by failures that were perhaps
destroying any chance of profit in my lessons. Moods of clear keen
industry alternated with moods of relapse and indulgence and moods of
dubiety and remorse. I was not going on as the Baileys thought I was
going on. There were times when the blindness of the Baileys irritated
me intensely. Beneath the ostensible success of those years, between
twenty-three and twenty-eight, this rottenness, known to scarcely
any one but myself, grew and spread. My sense of the probability of
a collapse intensified. I knew indeed now, even as Willersley had
prophesied five years before, that I was entangling myself in something
that might smother all my uses in the world. Down there among those
incommunicable difficulties, I was puzzled and blundering. I was losing
my hold upon things; the chaotic and adventurous element in life was
spreading upward and getting the better of me, over-mastering me and all
my will to rule and make.... And the strength, the drugging urgency of
the passion!

Margaret shone at times in my imagination like a radiant angel in a
world of mire and disorder, in a world of cravings, hot and dull red
like scars inflamed....

I suppose it was because I had so great a need of such help as her
whiteness proffered, that I could ascribe impossible perfections to
her, a power of intellect, a moral power and patience to which she, poor
fellow mortal, had indeed no claim. If only a few of us WERE angels and
freed from the tangle of effort, how easy life might be! I wanted her so
badly, so very badly, to be what I needed. I wanted a woman to save me.
I forced myself to see her as I wished to see her. Her tepidities became
infinite delicacies, her mental vagueness an atmospheric realism. The
harsh precisions of the Baileys and Altiora's blunt directness threw up
her fineness into relief and made a grace of every weakness.

Mixed up with the memory of times when I talked with Margaret as one
talks politely to those who are hopelessly inferior in mental quality,
explaining with a false lucidity, welcoming and encouraging the feeblest
response, when possible moulding and directing, are times when I did
indeed, as the old phrase goes, worship the ground she trod on. I was
equally honest and unconscious of inconsistency at each extreme. But in
neither phase could I find it easy to make love to Margaret. For in the
first I did not want to, though I talked abundantly to her of marriage
and so forth, and was a little puzzled at myself for not going on to
some personal application, and in the second she seemed inaccessible, I
felt I must make confessions and put things before her that would be the
grossest outrage upon the noble purity I attributed to her.



9


I went to Margaret at last to ask her to marry me, wrought up to the
mood of one who stakes his life on a cast. Separated from her, and with
the resonance of an evening of angry recriminations with Mrs. Larrimer
echoing in my mind, I discovered myself to be quite passionately in
love with Margaret. Last shreds of doubt vanished. It has always been a
feature of our relationship that Margaret absent means more to me than
Margaret present; her memory distils from its dross and purifies in
me. All my criticisms and qualifications of her vanished into some dark
corner of my mind. She was the lady of my salvation; I must win my way
to her or perish.

I went to her at last, for all that I knew she loved me, in passionate
self-abasement, white and a-tremble. She was staying with the Rockleys
at Woking, for Shena Rockley had been at Bennett Hall with her and they
had resumed a close intimacy; and I went down to her on an impulse,
unheralded. I was kept waiting for some minutes, I remember, in a little
room upon which a conservatory opened, a conservatory full of pots
of large mauve-edged, white cyclamens in flower. And there was a big
lacquer cabinet, a Chinese thing, I suppose, of black and gold against
the red-toned wall. To this day the thought of Margaret is inseparably
bound up with the sight of a cyclamen's back-turned petals.

She came in, looking pale and drooping rather more than usual. I
suddenly realised that Altiora's hint of a disappointment leading to
positive illness was something more than a vindictive comment. She
closed the door and came across to me and took and dropped my hand and
stood still. "What is it you want with me?" she asked.

The speech I had been turning over and over in my mind on the way
vanished at the sight of her.

"I want to talk to you," I answered lamely.

For some seconds neither of us said a word.

"I want to tell you things about my life," I began.

She answered with a scarcely audible "yes."

"I almost asked you to marry me at Pangbourne," I plunged. "I didn't. I
didn't because--because you had too much to give me."

"Too much!" she echoed, "to give you!" She had lifted her eyes to my
face and the colour was coming into her cheeks.

"Don't misunderstand me," I said hastily. "I want to tell you things,
things you don't know. Don't answer me. I want to tell you."

She stood before the fireplace with her ultimate answer shining through
the quiet of her face. "Go on," she said, very softly. It was so
pitilessly manifest she was resolved to idealise the situation whatever
I might say. I began walking up and down the room between those
cyclamens and the cabinet. There were little gold fishermen on the
cabinet fishing from little islands that each had a pagoda and a tree,
and there were also men in boats or something, I couldn't determine
what, and some obscure sub-office in my mind concerned itself with that
quite intently. Yet I seem to have been striving with all my being
to get words for the truth of things. "You see," I emerged, "you make
everything possible to me. You can give me help and sympathy, support,
understanding. You know my political ambitions. You know all that I
might do in the world. I do so intensely want to do constructive things,
big things perhaps, in this wild jumble.... Only you don't know a bit
what I am. I want to tell you what I am. I'm complex.... I'm streaked."

I glanced at her, and she was regarding me with an expression of
blissful disregard for any meaning I was seeking to convey.

"You see," I said, "I'm a bad man."

She sounded a note of valiant incredulity.

Everything seemed to be slipping away from me. I pushed on to the ugly
facts that remained over from the wreck of my interpretation. "What
has held me back," I said, "is the thought that you could not possibly
understand certain things in my life. Men are not pure as women are. I
have had love affairs. I mean I have had affairs. Passion--desire. You
see, I have had a mistress, I have been entangled--"

She seemed about to speak, but I interrupted. "I'm not telling you," I
said, "what I meant to tell you. I want you to know clearly that there
is another side to my life, a dirty side. Deliberately I say, dirty. It
didn't seem so at first--"

I stopped blankly. "Dirty," I thought, was the most idiotic choice of
words to have made.

I had never in any tolerable sense of the word been dirty.

"I drifted into this--as men do," I said after a little pause and
stopped again.

She was looking at me with her wide blue eyes.

"Did you imagine," she began, "that I thought you--that I expected--"

"But how can you know?"

"I know. I do know."

"But--" I began.

"I know," she persisted, dropping her eyelids. "Of course I know," and
nothing could have convinced me more completely that she did not know.

"All men--" she generalised. "A woman does not understand these
temptations."

I was astonished beyond measure at her way of taking my confession. ...

"Of course," she said, hesitating a little over a transparent
difficulty, "it is all over and past."

"It's all over and past," I answered.

There was a little pause.

"I don't want to know," she said. "None of that seems to matter now in
the slightest degree."

She looked up and smiled as though we had exchanged some acceptable
commonplaces. "Poor dear!" she said, dismissing everything, and put out
her arms, and it seemed to me that I could hear the Lettish girl in
the background--doomed safety valve of purity in this intolerable
world--telling something in indistinguishable German--I know not what
nor why....

I took Margaret in my arms and kissed her. Her eyes were wet with tears.
She clung to me and was near, I felt, to sobbing.

"I have loved you," she whispered presently, "Oh! ever since we met in
Misterton--six years and more ago."



CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ MARGARET IN VENICE



1


There comes into my mind a confused memory of conversations with
Margaret; we must have had dozens altogether, and they mix in now for
the most part inextricably not only with one another, but with later
talks and with things we discussed at Pangbourne. We had the immensest
anticipations of the years and opportunities that lay before us. I was
now very deeply in love with her indeed. I felt not that I had cleaned
up my life but that she had. We called each other "confederate" I
remember, and made during our brief engagement a series of visits to the
various legislative bodies in London, the County Council, the House of
Commons, where we dined with Villiers, and the St. Pancras Vestry, where
we heard Shaw speaking. I was full of plans and so was she of the way
in which we were to live and work. We were to pay back in public service
whatever excess of wealth beyond his merits old Seddon's economic
advantage had won for him from the toiling people in the potteries. The
end of the Boer War was so recent that that blessed word "efficiency"
echoed still in people's minds and thoughts. Lord Roseberry in a
memorable oration had put it into the heads of the big outer public, but
the Baileys with a certain show of justice claimed to have set it going
in the channels that took it to him--if as a matter of fact it was taken
to him. But then it was their habit to make claims of that sort. They
certainly did their share to keep "efficient" going. Altiora's
highest praise was "thoroughly efficient." We were to be a "thoroughly
efficient" political couple of the "new type." She explained us to
herself and Oscar, she explained us to ourselves, she explained us to
the people who came to her dinners and afternoons until the world was
highly charged with explanation and expectation, and the proposal that I
should be the Liberal candidate for the Kinghamstead Division seemed the
most natural development in the world.

I was full of the ideal of hard restrained living and relentless
activity, and throughout a beautiful November at Venice, where chiefly
we spent our honeymoon, we turned over and over again and discussed in
every aspect our conception of a life tremendously focussed upon the
ideal of social service.

Most clearly there stands out a picture of ourselves talking in a
gondola on our way to Torcella. Far away behind us the smoke of Murano
forms a black stain upon an immense shining prospect of smooth water,
water as unruffled and luminous as the sky above, a mirror on which rows
of posts and distant black high-stemmed, swan-necked boats with their
minutely clear swinging gondoliers, float aerially. Remote and low
before us rises the little tower of our destination. Our men swing
together and their oars swirl leisurely through the water, hump back in
the rowlocks, splash sharply and go swishing back again. Margaret lies
back on cushions, with her face shaded by a holland parasol, and I sit
up beside her.

"You see," I say, and in spite of Margaret's note of perfect
acquiescence I feel myself reasoning against an indefinable antagonism,
"it is so easy to fall into a slack way with life. There may seem to be
something priggish in a meticulous discipline, but otherwise it is
so easy to slip into indolent habits--and to be distracted from one's
purpose. The country, the world, wants men to serve its constructive
needs, to work out and carry out plans. For a man who has to make a
living the enemy is immediate necessity; for people like ourselves
it's--it's the constant small opportunity of agreeable things."

"Frittering away," she says, "time and strength."

"That is what I feel. It's so pleasant to pretend one is simply modest,
it looks so foolish at times to take one's self too seriously. We've GOT
to take ourselves seriously."

She endorses my words with her eyes.

"I feel I can do great things with life."

"I KNOW you can."

"But that's only to be done by concentrating one's life upon one main
end. We have to plan our days, to make everything subserve our scheme."

"I feel," she answers softly, "we ought to give--every hour."

Her face becomes dreamy. "I WANT to give every hour," she adds.



2


That holiday in Venice is set in my memory like a little artificial lake
in uneven confused country, as something very bright and skylike, and
discontinuous with all about it. The faded quality of the very sunshine
of that season, the mellow discoloured palaces and places, the huge,
time-ripened paintings of departed splendours, the whispering, nearly
noiseless passage of hearse-black gondolas, for the horrible steam
launch had not yet ruined Venice, the stilled magnificences of the
depopulated lagoons, the universal autumn, made me feel altogether in
recess from the teeming uproars of reality. There was not a dozen people
all told, no Americans and scarcely any English, to dine in the big
cavern of a dining-room, with its vistas of separate tables, its
distempered walls and its swathed chandeliers. We went about seeing
beautiful things, accepting beauty on every hand, and taking it for
granted that all was well with ourselves and the world. It was ten days
or a fortnight before I became fretful and anxious for action; a long
tranquillity for such a temperament as mine.

Our pleasures were curiously impersonal, a succession of shared
aesthetic appreciation threads all that time. Our honeymoon was no
exultant coming together, no mutual shout of "YOU!" We were almost shy
with one another, and felt the relief of even a picture to help us
out. It was entirely in my conception of things that I should be very
watchful not to shock or distress Margaret or press the sensuous note.
Our love-making had much of the tepid smoothness of the lagoons.
We talked in delicate innuendo of what should be glorious freedoms.
Margaret had missed Verona and Venice in her previous Italian
journey--fear of the mosquito had driven her mother across Italy to the
westward route--and now she could fill up her gaps and see the Titians
and Paul Veroneses she already knew in colourless photographs, the
Carpaccios, (the St. George series delighted her beyond measure,)
the Basaitis and that great statue of Bartolomeo Colleoni that Ruskin
praised.

But since I am not a man to look at pictures and architectural effects
day after day, I did watch Margaret very closely and store a thousand
memories of her. I can see her now, her long body drooping a little
forward, her sweet face upraised to some discovered familiar masterpiece
and shining with a delicate enthusiasm. I can hear again the soft
cadences of her voice murmuring commonplace comments, for she had no
gift of expressing the shapeless satisfaction these things gave her.

Margaret, I perceived, was a cultivated person, the first cultivated
person with whom I had ever come into close contact. She was cultivated
and moral, and I, I now realise, was never either of these things. She
was passive, and I am active. She did not simply and naturally look
for beauty but she had been incited to look for it at school, and took
perhaps a keener interest in books and lectures and all the organisation
of beautiful things than she did in beauty itself; she found much of her
delight in being guided to it. Now a thing ceases to be beautiful to me
when some finger points me out its merits. Beauty is the salt of life,
but I take my beauty as a wild beast gets its salt, as a constituent of
the meal....

And besides, there was that between us that should have seemed more
beautiful than any picture....

So we went about Venice tracking down pictures and spiral staircases and
such-like things, and my brains were busy all the time with such things
as a comparison of Venice and its nearest modern equivalent, New York,
with the elaboration of schemes of action when we returned to London,
with the development of a theory of Margaret.

Our marriage had done this much at least, that it had fused and
destroyed those two independent ways of thinking about her that had gone
on in my mind hitherto. Suddenly she had become very near to me, and a
very big thing, a sort of comprehensive generalisation behind a thousand
questions, like the sky or England. The judgments and understandings
that had worked when she was, so to speak, miles away from my life,
had now to be altogether revised. Trifling things began to matter
enormously, that she had a weak and easily fatigued back, for example,
or that when she knitted her brows and stammered a little in talking,
it didn't really mean that an exquisite significance struggled for
utterance.

We visited pictures in the mornings chiefly. In the afternoon, unless we
were making a day-long excursion in a gondola, Margaret would rest for
an hour while I prowled about in search of English newspapers, and then
we would go to tea in the Piazza San Marco and watch the drift of people
feeding the pigeons and going into the little doors beneath the sunlit
arches and domes of Saint Mark's. Then perhaps we would stroll on the
Piazzetta, or go out into the sunset in a gondola. Margaret became very
interested in the shops that abound under the colonnades and decided at
last to make an extensive purchase of table glass. "These things," she
said, "are quite beautiful, and far cheaper than anything but the most
ordinary looking English ware." I was interested in her idea, and a good
deal charmed by the delightful qualities of tinted shape, slender handle
and twisted stem. I suggested we should get not simply tumblers
and wineglasses but bedroom waterbottles, fruit- and sweet-dishes,
water-jugs, and in the end we made quite a business-like afternoon of
it.

I was beginning now to long quite definitely for events. Energy was
accumulating in me, and worrying me for an outlet. I found the TIMES and
the DAILY TELEGRAPH and the other papers I managed to get hold of, more
and more stimulating. I nearly wrote to the former paper one day in
answer to a letter by Lord Grimthorpe--I forget now upon what point.
I chafed secretly against this life of tranquil appreciations more and
more. I found my attitudes of restrained and delicate affection for
Margaret increasingly difficult to sustain. I surprised myself and her
by little gusts of irritability, gusts like the catspaws before a gale.
I was alarmed at these symptoms.

One night when Margaret had gone up to her room, I put on a light
overcoat, went out into the night and prowled for a long time through
the narrow streets, smoking and thinking. I returned and went and sat on
the edge of her bed to talk to her.

"Look here, Margaret," I said; "this is all very well, but I'm
restless."

"Restless!" she said with a faint surprise in her voice.

"Yes. I think I want exercise. I've got a sort of feeling--I've never
had it before--as though I was getting fat."

"My dear!" she cried.

"I want to do things;--ride horses, climb mountains, take the devil out
of myself."

She watched me thoughtfully.

"Couldn't we DO something?" she said.

Do what?

"I don't know. Couldn't we perhaps go away from here soon--and walk in
the mountains--on our way home."

I thought. "There seems to be no exercise at all in this place."

"Isn't there some walk?"

"I wonder," I answered. "We might walk to Chioggia perhaps, along
the Lido." And we tried that, but the long stretch of beach fatigued
Margaret's back, and gave her blisters, and we never got beyond
Malamocco....

A day or so after we went out to those pleasant black-robed, bearded
Armenians in their monastery at Saint Lazzaro, and returned towards
sundown. We fell into silence. "PIU LENTO," said Margaret to the
gondolier, and released my accumulated resolution.

"Let us go back to London," I said abruptly.

Margaret looked at me with surprised blue eyes.

"This is beautiful beyond measure, you know," I said, sticking to my
point, "but I have work to do."

She was silent for some seconds. "I had forgotten," she said.

"So had I," I sympathised, and took her hand. "Suddenly I have
remembered."

She remained quite still. "There is so much to be done," I said, almost
apologetically.

She looked long away from me across the lagoon and at last sighed, like
one who has drunk deeply, and turned to me.

"I suppose one ought not to be so happy," she said. "Everything has been
so beautiful and so simple and splendid. And clean. It has been just
With You--the time of my life. It's a pity such things must end. But
the world is calling you, dear.... I ought not to have forgotten it. I
thought you were resting--and thinking. But if you are rested.--Would
you like us to start to-morrow?"

She looked at once so fragile and so devoted that on the spur of the
moment I relented, and we stayed in Venice four more days.



CHAPTER THE FOURTH ~~ THE HOUSE IN WESTMINSTER



1


Margaret had already taken a little house in Radnor Square, Westminster,
before our marriage, a house that seemed particularly adaptable to our
needs as public-spirited efficients; it had been very pleasantly painted
and papered under Margaret's instructions, white paint and clean open
purples and green predominating, and now we set to work at once upon
the interesting business of arranging and--with our Venetian glass as a
beginning--furnishing it. We had been fairly fortunate with our wedding
presents, and for the most part it was open to us to choose just exactly
what we would have and just precisely where we would put it.

Margaret had a sense of form and colour altogether superior to mine, and
so quite apart from the fact that it was her money equipped us, I stood
aside from all these matters and obeyed her summons to a consultation
only to endorse her judgment very readily. Until everything was settled
I went every day to my old rooms in Vincent Square and worked at a
series of papers that were originally intended for the FORTNIGHTLY
REVIEW, the papers that afterwards became my fourth book, "New Aspects
of Liberalism."

I still remember as delightful most of the circumstances of getting
into 79, Radnor Square. The thin flavour of indecision about Margaret
disappeared altogether in a shop; she had the precisest ideas of what
she wanted, and the devices of the salesman did not sway her. It was
very pleasant to find her taking things out of my hands with a certain
masterfulness, and showing the distinctest determination to make a
house in which I should be able to work in that great project of "doing
something for the world."

"And I do want to make things pretty about us," she said. "You don't
think it wrong to have things pretty?"

"I want them so."

"Altiora has things hard."

"Altiora," I answered, "takes a pride in standing ugly and uncomfortable
things. But I don't see that they help her. Anyhow they won't help me."

So Margaret went to the best shops and got everything very simple and
very good. She bought some pictures very well indeed; there was a little
Sussex landscape, full of wind and sunshine, by Nicholson, for my study,
that hit my taste far better than if I had gone out to get some such
expression for myself.

"We will buy a picture just now and then," she said, "sometimes--when we
see one."

I would come back through the January mire or fog from Vincent Square to
the door of 79, and reach it at last with a quite childish appreciation
of the fact that its solid Georgian proportions and its fine brass
furnishings belonged to MY home; I would use my latchkey and discover
Margaret in the warm-lit, spacious hall with a partially opened
packing-case, fatigued but happy, or go up to have tea with her out
of the right tea things, "come at last," or be told to notice what was
fresh there. It wasn't simply that I had never had a house before, but
I had really never been, except in the most transitory way, in any house
that was nearly so delightful as mine promised to be. Everything was
fresh and bright, and softly and harmoniously toned. Downstairs we had
a green dining-room with gleaming silver, dark oak, and English
colour-prints; above was a large drawing-room that could be made still
larger by throwing open folding doors, and it was all carefully done in
greys and blues, for the most part with real Sheraton supplemented by
Sheraton so skilfully imitated by an expert Margaret had discovered as
to be indistinguishable except to a minute scrutiny. And for me, above
this and next to my bedroom, there was a roomy study, with specially
thick stair-carpet outside and thick carpets in the bedroom overhead and
a big old desk for me to sit at and work between fire and window, and
another desk specially made for me by that expert if I chose to
stand and write, and open bookshelves and bookcases and every sort of
convenient fitting. There were electric heaters beside the open fire,
and everything was put for me to make tea at any time--electric kettle,
infuser, biscuits and fresh butter, so that I could get up and work at
any hour of the day or night. I could do no work in this apartment for
a long time, I was so interested in the perfection of its arrangements.
And when I brought in my books and papers from Vincent Square, Margaret
seized upon all the really shabby volumes and had them re-bound in a
fine official-looking leather.

I can remember sitting down at that desk and looking round me and
feeling with a queer effect of surprise that after all even a place
in the Cabinet, though infinitely remote, was nevertheless in the same
large world with these fine and quietly expensive things.

On the same floor Margaret had a "den," a very neat and pretty den with
good colour-prints of Botticellis and Carpaccios, and there was a third
apartment for sectarial purposes should the necessity for them arise,
with a severe-looking desk equipped with patent files. And Margaret
would come flitting into the room to me, or appear noiselessly
standing, a tall gracefully drooping form, in the wide open doorway. "Is
everything right, dear?" she would ask.

"Come in," I would say, "I'm sorting out papers."

She would come to the hearthrug.

"I mustn't disturb you," she would remark.

"I'm not busy yet."

"Things are getting into order. Then we must make out a time-table as
the Baileys do, and BEGIN!"

Altiora came in to see us once or twice, and a number of serious
young wives known to Altiora called and were shown over the house, and
discussed its arrangements with Margaret. They were all tremendously
keen on efficient arrangements.

"A little pretty," said Altiora, with the faintest disapproval,
"still--"

It was clear she thought we should grow out of that. From the day of our
return we found other people's houses open to us and eager for us. We
went out of London for week-ends and dined out, and began discussing
our projects for reciprocating these hospitalities. As a single man
unattached, I had had a wide and miscellaneous social range, but now
I found myself falling into place in a set. For a time I acquiesced
in this. I went very little to my clubs, the Climax and the National
Liberal, and participated in no bachelor dinners at all. For a time,
too, I dropped out of the garrulous literary and journalistic circles I
had frequented. I put up for the Reform, not so much for the use of the
club as a sign of serious and substantial political standing. I didn't
go up to Cambridge, I remember, for nearly a year, so occupied was I
with my new adjustments.

The people we found ourselves among at this time were people, to put
it roughly, of the Parliamentary candidate class, or people already
actually placed in the political world. They ranged between very
considerable wealth and such a hard, bare independence as old Willersley
and the sister who kept house for him possessed. There were quite
a number of young couples like ourselves, a little younger and more
artless, or a little older and more established. Among the younger men
I had a sort of distinction because of my Cambridge reputation and my
writing, and because, unlike them, I was an adventurer and had won and
married my way into their circles instead of being naturally there. They
couldn't quite reckon upon what I should do; they felt I had reserves of
experience and incalculable traditions. Close to us were the Cramptons,
Willie Crampton, who has since been Postmaster-General, rich and
very important in Rockshire, and his younger brother Edward, who has
specialised in history and become one of those unimaginative men of
letters who are the glory of latter-day England. Then there was Lewis,
further towards Kensington, where his cousins the Solomons and the
Hartsteins lived, a brilliant representative of his race, able,
industrious and invariably uninspired, with a wife a little in revolt
against the racial tradition of feminine servitude and inclined to the
suffragette point of view, and Bunting Harblow, an old blue, and with an
erratic disposition well under the control of the able little cousin he
had married. I had known all these men, but now (with Altiora floating
angelically in benediction) they opened their hearts to me and took
me into their order. They were all like myself, prospective Liberal
candidates, with a feeling that the period of wandering in the
wilderness of opposition was drawing near its close. They were all
tremendously keen upon social and political service, and all greatly
under the sway of the ideal of a simple, strenuous life, a life finding
its satisfactions in political achievements and distinctions. The young
wives were as keen about it as the young husbands, Margaret most of
all, and I--whatever elements in me didn't march with the attitudes and
habits of this set were very much in the background during that time.

We would give little dinners and have evening gatherings at which
everything was very simple and very good, with a slight but perceptible
austerity, and there was more good fruit and flowers and less perhaps in
the way of savouries, patties and entrees than was customary. Sherry we
banished, and Marsala and liqueurs, and there was always good home-made
lemonade available. No men waited, but very expert parlourmaids. Our
meat was usually Welsh mutton--I don't know why, unless that mountains
have ever been the last refuge of the severer virtues. And we talked
politics and books and ideas and Bernard Shaw (who was a department by
himself and supposed in those days to be ethically sound at bottom),
and mingled with the intellectuals--I myself was, as it were, a promoted
intellectual.

The Cramptons had a tendency to read good things aloud on their less
frequented receptions, but I have never been able to participate
submissively in this hyper-digestion of written matter, and generally
managed to provoke a disruptive debate. We were all very earnest to make
the most of ourselves and to be and do, and I wonder still at times,
with an unassuaged perplexity, how it is that in that phase of utmost
earnestness I have always seemed to myself to be most remote from
reality.



2


I look back now across the detaching intervention of sixteen crowded
years, critically and I fancy almost impartially, to those beginnings
of my married life. I try to recall something near to their proper order
the developing phases of relationship. I am struck most of all by the
immense unpremeditated, generous-spirited insincerities upon which
Margaret and I were building.

It seems to me that here I have to tell perhaps the commonest experience
of all among married educated people, the deliberate, shy, complex
effort to fill the yawning gaps in temperament as they appear, the
sustained, failing attempt to bridge abysses, level barriers, evade
violent pressures. I have come these latter years of my life to believe
that it is possible for a man and woman to be absolutely real with one
another, to stand naked souled to each other, unashamed and unafraid,
because of the natural all-glorifying love between them. It is possible
to love and be loved untroubling, as a bird flies through the air. But
it is a rare and intricate chance that brings two people within sight of
that essential union, and for the majority marriage must adjust itself
on other terms. Most coupled people never really look at one another.
They look a little away to preconceived ideas. And each from the first
days of love-making HIDES from the other, is afraid of disappointing,
afraid of offending, afraid of discoveries in either sense. They build
not solidly upon the rock of truth, but upon arches and pillars and
queer provisional supports that are needed to make a common foundation,
and below in the imprisoned darknesses, below the fine fabric they
sustain together begins for each of them a cavernous hidden life. Down
there things may be prowling that scarce ever peep out to consciousness
except in the grey half-light of sleepless nights, passions that flash
out for an instant in an angry glance and are seen no more, starved
victims and beautiful dreams bricked up to die. For the most of us there
is no jail delivery of those inner depths, and the life above goes on to
its honourable end.

I have told how I loved Margaret and how I came to marry her. Perhaps
already unintentionally I have indicated the quality of the injustice
our marriage did us both. There was no kindred between us and no
understanding. We were drawn to one another by the unlikeness of our
quality, by the things we misunderstood in each other. I know a score of
couples who have married in that fashion.

Modern conditions and modern ideas, and in particular the intenser and
subtler perceptions of modern life, press more and more heavily upon a
marriage tie whose fashion comes from an earlier and less discriminating
time. When the wife was her husband's subordinate, meeting him simply
and uncritically for simple ends, when marriage was a purely domestic
relationship, leaving thought and the vivid things of life
almost entirely to the unencumbered man, mental and temperamental
incompatibilities mattered comparatively little. But now the wife,
and particularly the loving childless wife, unpremeditatedly makes a
relentless demand for a complete association, and the husband exacts
unthought of delicacies of understanding and co-operation. These are
stupendous demands. People not only think more fully and elaborately
about life than they ever did before, but marriage obliges us to make
that ever more accidented progress a three-legged race of carelessly
assorted couples....

Our very mental texture was different. I was rough-minded, to use the
phrase of William James, primary and intuitive and illogical; she was
tender-minded, logical, refined and secondary. She was loyal to
pledge and persons, sentimental and faithful; I am loyal to ideas
and instincts, emotional and scheming. My imagination moves in broad
gestures; her's was delicate with a real dread of extravagance. My
quality is sensuous and ruled by warm impulses; hers was discriminating
and essentially inhibitory. I like the facts of the case and to mention
everything; I like naked bodies and the jolly smells of things. She
abounded in reservations, in circumlocutions and evasions, in keenly
appreciated secondary points. Perhaps the reader knows that Tintoretto
in the National Gallery, the Origin of the Milky Way. It is an admirable
test of temperamental quality. In spite of my early training I have
come to regard that picture as altogether delightful; to Margaret it
has always been "needlessly offensive." In that you have our fundamental
breach. She had a habit, by no means rare, of damning what she did not
like or find sympathetic in me on the score that it was not my "true
self," and she did not so much accept the universe as select from it and
do her best to ignore the rest. And also I had far more initiative than
had she. This is no catalogue of rights and wrongs, or superiorities
and inferiorities; it is a catalogue of differences between two people
linked in a relationship that constantly becomes more intolerant of
differences.

This is how we stood to each other, and none of it was clear to either
of us at the outset. To begin with, I found myself reserving myself
from her, then slowly apprehending a jarring between our minds and
what seemed to me at first a queer little habit of misunderstanding in
her....

It did not hinder my being very fond of her....

Where our system of reservation became at once most usual and most
astounding was in our personal relations. It is not too much to say that
in that regard we never for a moment achieved sincerity with one another
during the first six years of our life together. It goes even deeper
than that, for in my effort to realise the ideal of my marriage I ceased
even to attempt to be sincere with myself. I would not admit my own
perceptions and interpretations. I tried to fit myself to her thinner
and finer determinations. There are people who will say with a note
of approval that I was learning to conquer myself. I record that much
without any note of approval....

For some years I never deceived Margaret about any concrete fact nor,
except for the silence about my earlier life that she had almost forced
upon me, did I hide any concrete fact that seemed to affect her, but
from the outset I was guilty of immense spiritual concealments, my very
marriage was based, I see now, on a spiritual subterfuge; I hid moods
from her, pretended feelings....



3


The interest and excitement of setting-up a house, of walking about
it from room to room and from floor to floor, or sitting at one's own
dinner table and watching one's wife control conversation with a pretty,
timid resolution, of taking a place among the secure and free people of
our world, passed almost insensibly into the interest and excitement
of my Parliamentary candidature for the Kinghamstead Division, that
shapeless chunk of agricultural midland between the Great Western and
the North Western railways. I was going to "take hold" at last, the
Kinghamstead Division was my appointed handle. I was to find my place in
the rather indistinctly sketched constructions that were implicit in the
minds of all our circle. The precise place I had to fill and the precise
functions I had to discharge were not as yet very clear, but all that,
we felt sure, would become plain as things developed.

A few brief months of vague activities of "nursing" gave place to
the excitements of the contest that followed the return of Mr.
Camphell-Bannerman to power in 1905. So far as the Kinghamstead Division
was concerned it was a depressed and tepid battle. I went about the
constituency making three speeches that were soon threadbare, and an
odd little collection of people worked for me; two solicitors, a cheap
photographer, a democratic parson, a number of dissenting ministers, the
Mayor of Kinghamstead, a Mrs. Bulger, the widow of an old Chartist who
had grown rich through electric traction patents, Sir Roderick Newton,
a Jew who had bought Calersham Castle, and old Sir Graham Rivers, that
sturdy old soldier, were among my chief supporters. We had headquarters
in each town and village, mostly there were empty shops we leased
temporarily, and there at least a sort of fuss and a coming and going
were maintained. The rest of the population stared in a state of
suspended judgment as we went about the business. The country was
supposed to be in a state of intellectual conflict and deliberate
decision, in history it will no doubt figure as a momentous conflict.
Yet except for an occasional flare of bill-sticking or a bill in a
window or a placard-plastered motor-car or an argumentative group
of people outside a public-house or a sluggish movement towards the
schoolroom or village hall, there was scarcely a sign that a great
empire was revising its destinies. Now and then one saw a canvasser on
a doorstep. For the most part people went about their business with an
entirely irresponsible confidence in the stability of the universe. At
times one felt a little absurd with one's flutter of colours and one's
air of saving the country.

My opponent was a quite undistinguished Major-General who relied upon
his advocacy of Protection, and was particularly anxious we should avoid
"personalities" and fight the constituency in a gentlemanly spirit. He
was always writing me notes, apologising for excesses on the part of his
supporters, or pointing out the undesirability of some course taken by
mine.

My speeches had been planned upon broad lines, but they lost touch with
these as the polling approached. To begin with I made a real attempt
to put what was in my mind before the people I was to supply with
a political voice. I spoke of the greatness of our empire and its
destinies, of the splendid projects and possibilities of life and order
that lay before the world, of all that a resolute and constructive
effort might do at the present time. "We are building a state," I said,
"secure and splendid, we are in the dawn of the great age of mankind."
Sometimes that would get a solitary "'Ear! 'ear!" Then having created,
as I imagined, a fine atmosphere, I turned upon the history of the last
Conservative administration and brought it into contrast with the wide
occasions of the age; discussed its failure to control the grasping
financiers in South Africa, its failure to release public education from
sectarian squabbles, its misconduct of the Boer War, its waste of the
world's resources....

It soon became manifest that my opening and my general spaciousness of
method bored my audiences a good deal. The richer and wider my phrases
the thinner sounded my voice in these non-resonating gatherings. Even
the platform supporters grew restive unconsciously, and stirred and
coughed. They did not recognise themselves as mankind. Building an
empire, preparing a fresh stage in the history of humanity, had no
appeal for them. They were mostly everyday, toiling people, full of
small personal solicitudes, and they came to my meetings, I think, very
largely as a relaxation. This stuff was not relaxing. They did not think
politics was a great constructive process, they thought it was a kind
of dog-fight. They wanted fun, they wanted spice, they wanted hits,
they wanted also a chance to say "'Ear', 'ear!" in an intelligent and
honourable manner and clap their hands and drum with their feet. The
great constructive process in history gives so little scope for clapping
and drumming and saying "'Ear, 'ear!" One might as well think of
hounding on the solar system.

So after one or two attempts to lift my audiences to the level of the
issues involved, I began to adapt myself to them. I cut down my review
of our imperial outlook and destinies more and more, and
developed a series of hits and anecdotes and--what shall I call
them?--"crudifications" of the issue. My helper's congratulated me on
the rapid improvement of my platform style. I ceased to speak of the
late Prime Minister with the respect I bore him, and began to fall in
with the popular caricature of him as an artful rabbit-witted person
intent only on keeping his leadership, in spite of the vigorous attempts
of Mr. Joseph Chamberlain to oust him therefrom. I ceased to qualify my
statement that Protection would make food dearer for the agricultural
labourer. I began to speak of Mr. Alfred Lyttelton as an influence at
once insane and diabolical, as a man inspired by a passionate desire
to substitute manacled but still criminal Chinese for honest British
labourers throughout the world. And when it came to the mention of our
own kindly leader, of Mr. John Burns or any one else of any prominence
at all on our side I fell more and more into the intonation of one who
mentions the high gods. And I had my reward in brighter meetings and
readier and readier applause.

One goes on from phase to phase in these things.

"After all," I told myself, "if one wants to get to Westminster one must
follow the road that leads there," but I found the road nevertheless
rather unexpectedly distasteful. "When one gets there," I said, "then it
is one begins."

But I would lie awake at nights with that sore throat and headache and
fatigue which come from speaking in ill-ventilated rooms, and wondering
how far it was possible to educate a whole people to great political
ideals. Why should political work always rot down to personalities and
personal appeals in this way? Life is, I suppose, to begin with and
end with a matter of personalities, from personalities all our broader
interests arise and to personalities they return. All our social and
political effort, all of it, is like trying to make a crowd of people
fall into formation. The broader lines appear, but then come a rush
and excitement and irrelevancy, and forthwith the incipient order has
vanished and the marshals must begin the work over again!

My memory of all that time is essentially confusion. There was a
frightful lot of tiresome locomotion in it; for the Kinghamstead
Division is extensive, abounding in ill-graded and badly metalled
cross-roads and vicious little hills, and singularly unpleasing to
the eye in a muddy winter. It is sufficiently near to London to
have undergone the same process of ill-regulated expansion that made
Bromstead the place it is. Several of its overgrown villages have
developed strings of factories and sidings along the railway lines, and
there is an abundance of petty villas. There seemed to be no place
at which one could take hold of more than this or that element of the
population. Now we met in a meeting-house, now in a Masonic Hall or
Drill Hall; I also did a certain amount of open-air speaking in the
dinner hour outside gas-works and groups of factories. Some special sort
of people was, as it were, secreted in response to each special appeal.
One said things carefully adjusted to the distinctive limitations of
each gathering. Jokes of an incredible silliness and shallowness drifted
about us. Our advisers made us declare that if we were elected we would
live in the district, and one hasty agent had bills printed, "If Mr.
Remington is elected he will live here." The enemy obtained a number
of these bills and stuck them on outhouses, pigstyes, dog-kennels; you
cannot imagine how irksome the repetition of that jest became. The vast
drifting indifference in between my meetings impressed me more and more.
I realised the vagueness of my own plans as I had never done before
I brought them to the test of this experience. I was perplexed by the
riddle of just how far I was, in any sense of the word, taking hold at
all, how far I wasn't myself flowing into an accepted groove.

Margaret was troubled by no such doubts. She was clear I had to go into
Parliament on the side of Liberalism and the light, as against the late
Government and darkness. Essential to the memory of my first contest, is
the memory of her clear bright face, very resolute and grave, helping me
consciously, steadfastly, with all her strength. Her quiet confidence,
while I was so dissatisfied, worked curiously towards the alienation
of my sympathies. I felt she had no business to be so sure of me. I had
moments of vivid resentment at being thus marched towards Parliament.

I seemed now always to be discovering alien forces of character in
her. Her way of taking life diverged from me more and more. She sounded
amazing, independent notes. She bought some particularly costly furs for
the campaign that roused enthusiasm whenever she appeared. She also made
me a birthday present in November of a heavily fur-trimmed coat and this
she would make me remove as I went on to the platform, and hold over her
arm until I was ready to resume it. It was fearfully heavy for her and
she liked it to be heavy for her. That act of servitude was in essence
a towering self-assertion. I would glance sideways while some chairman
floundered through his introduction and see the clear blue eye with
which she regarded the audience, which existed so far as she was
concerned merely to return me to Parliament. It was a friendly eye,
provided they were not silly or troublesome. But it kindled a little at
the hint of a hostile question. After we had come so far and taken so
much trouble!

She constituted herself the dragoman of our political travels. In hotels
she was serenely resolute for the quietest and the best, she rejected
all their proposals for meals and substituted a severely nourishing
dietary of her own, and even in private houses she astonished me by her
tranquil insistence upon special comforts and sustenance. I can see her
face now as it would confront a hostess, a little intent, but sweetly
resolute and assured.

Since our marriage she had read a number of political memoirs, and she
had been particularly impressed by the career of Mrs. Gladstone. I don't
think it occurred to her to compare and contrast my quality with that
of Mrs. Gladstone's husband. I suspect her of a deliberate intention
of achieving parallel results by parallel methods. I was to be
Gladstonised. Gladstone it appeared used to lubricate his speeches with
a mixture--if my memory serves me right--of egg beaten up in sherry,
and Margaret was very anxious I should take a leaf from that celebrated
book. She wanted, I know, to hold the glass in her hand while I was
speaking.

But here I was firm. "No," I said, very decisively, "simply I won't
stand that. It's a matter of conscience. I shouldn't feel--democratic.
I'll take my chance of the common water in the carafe on the chairman's
table."

"I DO wish you wouldn't," she said, distressed.

It was absurd to feel irritated; it was so admirable of her, a little
childish, infinitely womanly and devoted and fine--and I see now how
pathetic. But I could not afford to succumb to her. I wanted to follow
my own leading, to see things clearly, and this reassuring pose of a
high destiny, of an almost terribly efficient pursuit of a fixed end
when as a matter of fact I had a very doubtful end and an aim as yet by
no means fixed, was all too seductive for dalliance....



4


And into all these things with the manner of a trifling and casual
incident comes the figure of Isabel Rivers. My first impressions of
her were of a rather ugly and ungainly, extraordinarily interesting
schoolgirl with a beautiful quick flush under her warm brown skin, who
said and did amusing and surprising things. When first I saw her she
was riding a very old bicycle downhill with her feet on the fork of the
frame--it seemed to me to the public danger, but afterwards I came to
understand the quality of her nerve better--and on the third occasion
she was for her own private satisfaction climbing a tree. On the
intervening occasion we had what seems now to have been a long sustained
conversation about the political situation and the books and papers I
had written.

I wonder if it was.

What a delightful mixture of child and grave woman she was at that time,
and how little I reckoned on the part she would play in my life! And
since she has played that part, how impossible it is to tell now of
those early days! Since I wrote that opening paragraph to this section
my idle pen has been, as it were, playing by itself and sketching faces
on the blotting pad--one impish wizened visage is oddly like little
Bailey--and I have been thinking cheek on fist amidst a limitless wealth
of memories. She sits below me on the low wall under the olive trees
with our little child in her arms. She is now the central fact in my
life. It still seems a little incredible that that should be so. She has
destroyed me as a politician, brought me to this belated rebeginning of
life. When I sit down and try to make her a girl again, I feel like the
Arabian fisherman who tried to put the genius back into the pot from
which it had spread gigantic across the skies....

I have a very clear vision of her rush downhill past our
labouring ascendant car--my colours fluttered from handle-bar and
shoulder-knot--and her waving hand and the sharp note of her voice. She
cried out something, I don't know what, some greeting.

"What a pretty girl!" said Margaret.

Parvill, the cheap photographer, that industrious organiser for whom
by way of repayment I got those magic letters, that knighthood of the
underlings, "J. P." was in the car with us and explained her to us. "One
of the best workers you have," he said....

And then after a toilsome troubled morning we came, rather cross from
the strain of sustained amiability, to Sir Graham Rivers' house. It
seemed all softness and quiet--I recall dead white panelling and
oval mirrors horizontally set and a marble fireplace between white
marble-blind Homer and marble-blind Virgil, very grave and fine--and how
Isabel came in to lunch in a shapeless thing like a blue smock that
made her bright quick-changing face seem yellow under her cloud of black
hair. Her step-sister was there, Miss Gamer, to whom the house was
to descend, a well-dressed lady of thirty, amiably disavowing
responsibility for Isabel in every phrase and gesture. And there was a
very pleasant doctor, an Oxford man, who seemed on excellent terms with
every one. It was manifest that he was in the habit of sparring with the
girl, but on this occasion she wasn't sparring and refused to be teased
into a display in spite of the taunts of either him or her father. She
was, they discovered with rising eyebrows, shy. It seemed an opportunity
too rare for them to miss. They proclaimed her enthusiasm for me in a
way that brought a flush to her cheek and a look into her eye between
appeal and defiance. They declared she had read my books, which I
thought at the time was exaggeration, their dry political quality was so
distinctly not what one was accustomed to regard as schoolgirl reading.
Miss Gamer protested to protect her, "When once in a blue moon Isabel is
well-behaved....!"

Except for these attacks I do not remember much of the conversation
at table; it was, I know, discursive and concerned with the sort of
topographical and social and electioneering fact natural to such a
visit. Old Rivers struck me as a delightful person, modestly unconscious
of his doubly-earned V. C. and the plucky defence of Kardin-Bergat that
won his baronetcy. He was that excellent type, the soldier radical, and
we began that day a friendship that was only ended by his death in the
hunting-field three years later. He interested Margaret into a disregard
of my plate and the fact that I had secured the illegal indulgence of
Moselle. After lunch we went for coffee into another low room, this
time brown panelled and looking through French windows on a red-walled
garden, graceful even in its winter desolation. And there the
conversation suddenly picked up and became good. It had fallen to a
pause, and the doctor, with an air of definitely throwing off a mask
and wrecking an established tranquillity, remarked: "Very probably you
Liberals will come in, though I'm not sure you'll come in so mightily as
you think, but what you do when you do come in passes my comprehension."

"There's good work sometimes," said Sir Graham, "in undoing."

"You can't govern a great empire by amending and repealing the Acts of
your predecessors," said the doctor.

There came that kind of pause that happens when a subject is broached
too big and difficult for the gathering. Margaret's blue eyes regarded
the speaker with quiet disapproval for a moment, and then came to me in
the not too confident hope that I would snub him out of existence with
some prompt rhetorical stroke. A voice spoke out of the big armchair.

"We'll do things," said Isabel.

The doctor's eye lit with the joy of the fisherman who strikes his fish
at last. "What will you do?" he asked her.

"Every one knows we're a mixed lot," said Isabel.

"Poor old chaps like me!" interjected the general.

"But that's not a programme," said the doctor.

"But Mr. Remington has published a programme," said Isabel.

The doctor cocked half an eye at me.

"In some review," the girl went on. "After all, we're not going to
elect the whole Liberal party in the Kinghamstead Division. I'm a
Remington-ite!"

"But the programme," said the doctor, "the programme--"

"In front of Mr. Remington!"

"Scandal always comes home at last," said the doctor. "Let him hear the
worst."

"I'd like to hear," I said. "Electioneering shatters convictions and
enfeebles the mind."

"Not mine," said Isabel stoutly. "I mean--Well, anyhow I take it Mr.
Remington stands for constructing a civilised state out of this muddle."

"THIS muddle," protested the doctor with an appeal of the eye to the
beautiful long room and the ordered garden outside the bright clean
windows.

"Well, THAT muddle, if you like! There's a slum within a mile of us
already. The dust and blacks get worse and worse, Sissie?"

"They do," agreed Miss Gamer.

"Mr. Remington stands for construction, order, education, discipline."

"And you?" said the doctor.

"I'm a good Remington-ite."

"Discipline!" said the doctor.

"Oh!" said Isabel. "At times one has to be--Napoleonic. They want to
libel me, Mr. Remington. A political worker can't always be in time for
meals, can she? At times one has to make--splendid cuts."

Miss Gamer said something indistinctly.

"Order, education, discipline," said Sir Graham. "Excellent things!
But I've a sort of memory--in my young days--we talked about something
called liberty."

"Liberty under the law," I said, with an unexpected approving murmur
from Margaret, and took up the defence. "The old Liberal definition of
liberty was a trifle uncritical. Privilege and legal restrictions are
not the only enemies of liberty. An uneducated, underbred, and underfed
propertyless man is a man who has lost the possibility of liberty.
There's no liberty worth a rap for him. A man who is swimming hopelessly
for life wants nothing but the liberty to get out of the water; he'll
give every other liberty for it--until he gets out."

Sir Graham took me up and we fell into a discussion of the
changing qualities of Liberalism. It was a good give-and-take talk,
extraordinarily refreshing after the nonsense and crowding secondary
issues of the electioneering outside. We all contributed more or less
except Miss Gamer; Margaret followed with knitted brows and occasional
interjections. "People won't SEE that," for example, and "It all seems
so plain to me." The doctor showed himself clever but unsubstantial and
inconsistent. Isabel sat back with her black mop of hair buried deep in
the chair looking quickly from face to face. Her colour came and went
with her vivid intellectual excitement; occasionally she would dart
a word, usually a very apt word, like a lizard's tongue into the
discussion. I remember chiefly that a chance illustration betrayed that
she had read Bishop Burnet....

After that it was not surprising that Isabel should ask for a lift in
our car as far as the Lurky Committee Room, and that she should offer
me quite sound advice EN ROUTE upon the intellectual temperament of the
Lurky gasworkers.

On the third occasion that I saw Isabel she was, as I have said,
climbing a tree--and a very creditable tree--for her own private
satisfaction. It was a lapse from the high seriousness of politics, and
I perceived she felt that I might regard it as such and attach too much
importance to it. I had some difficulty in reassuring her. And it's odd
to note now--it has never occurred to me before--that from that day to
this I do not think I have ever reminded Isabel of that encounter.

And after that memory she seems to be flickering about always in the
election, an inextinguishable flame; now she flew by on her bicycle,
now she dashed into committee rooms, now she appeared on doorsteps in
animated conversation with dubious voters; I took every chance I could
to talk to her--I had never met anything like her before in the world,
and she interested me immensely--and before the polling day she and I
had become, in the frankest simplicity, fast friends....

That, I think, sets out very fairly the facts of our early relationship.
But it is hard to get it true, either in form or texture, because of
the bright, translucent, coloured, and refracting memories that come
between. One forgets not only the tint and quality of thoughts and
impressions through that intervening haze, one forgets them altogether.
I don't remember now that I ever thought in those days of passionate
love or the possibility of such love between us. I may have done so
again and again. But I doubt it very strongly. I don't think I ever
thought of such aspects. I had no more sense of any danger between us,
seeing the years and things that separated us, than I could have had if
she had been an intelligent bright-eyed bird. Isabel came into my
life as a new sort of thing; she didn't join on at all to my previous
experiences of womanhood. They were not, as I have laboured to explain,
either very wide or very penetrating experiences, on the whole,
"strangled dinginess" expresses them, but I do not believe they were
narrower or shallower than those of many other men of my class. I
thought of women as pretty things and beautiful things, pretty rather
than beautiful, attractive and at times disconcertingly attractive,
often bright and witty, but, because of the vast reservations that hid
them from me, wanting, subtly and inevitably wanting, in understanding.
My idealisation of Margaret had evaporated insensibly after our
marriage. The shrine I had made for her in my private thoughts stood
at last undisguisedly empty. But Isabel did not for a moment admit of
either idealisation or interested contempt. She opened a new sphere
of womanhood to me. With her steady amber-brown eyes, her unaffected
interest in impersonal things, her upstanding waistless blue body, her
energy, decision and courage, she seemed rather some new and infinitely
finer form of boyhood than a feminine creature, as I had come to measure
femininity. She was my perfect friend. Could I have foreseen, had my
world been more wisely planned, to this day we might have been such
friends.

She seemed at that time unconscious of sex, though she has told me since
how full she was of protesting curiosities and restrained emotions. She
spoke, as indeed she has always spoken, simply, clearly, and vividly;
schoolgirl slang mingled with words that marked ample voracious reading,
and she moved quickly with the free directness of some graceful young
animal. She took many of the easy freedoms a man or a sister might have
done with me. She would touch my arm, lay a hand on my shoulder as I
sat, adjust the lapel of a breast-pocket as she talked to me. She says
now she loved me always from the beginning. I doubt if there was a
suspicion of that in her mind those days. I used to find her regarding
me with the clearest, steadiest gaze in the world, exactly like the gaze
of some nice healthy innocent animal in a forest, interested, inquiring,
speculative, but singularly untroubled....



5


Polling day came after a last hoarse and dingy crescendo. The excitement
was not of the sort that makes one forget one is tired out. The waiting
for the end of the count has left a long blank mark on my memory, and
then everyone was shaking my hand and repeating: "Nine hundred and
seventy-six."

My success had been a foregone conclusion since the afternoon, but
we all behaved as though we had not been anticipating this result for
hours, as though any other figures but nine hundred and seventy-six
would have meant something entirely different. "Nine hundred and
seventy-six!" said Margaret. "They didn't expect three hundred."

"Nine hundred and seventy-six," said a little short man with a paper.
"It means a big turnover. Two dozen short of a thousand, you know."

A tremendous hullaboo began outside, and a lot of fresh people came into
the room.

Isabel, flushed but not out of breath, Heaven knows where she had sprung
from at that time of night! was running her hand down my sleeve almost
caressingly, with the innocent bold affection of a girl. "Got you in!"
she said. "It's been no end of a lark."

"And now," said I, "I must go and be constructive."

"Now you must go and be constructive," she said.

"You've got to live here," she added.

"By Jove! yes," I said. "We'll have to house hunt."

"I shall read all your speeches."

She hesitated.

"I wish I was you," she said, and said it as though it was not exactly
the thing she was meaning to say.

"They want you to speak," said Margaret, with something unsaid in her
face.

"You must come out with me," I answered, putting my arm through hers,
and felt someone urging me to the French windows that gave on the
balcony.

"If you think--" she said, yielding gladly

"Oh, RATHER!" said I.

The Mayor of Kinghamstead, a managing little man with no great belief in
my oratorical powers, was sticking his face up to mine.

"It's all over," he said, "and you've won. Say all the nice things you
can and say them plainly."

I turned and handed Margaret out through the window and stood looking
over the Market-place, which was more than half filled with swaying
people. The crowd set up a roar of approval at the sight of us, tempered
by a little booing. Down in one corner of the square a fight was going
on for a flag, a fight that even the prospect of a speech could not
instantly check. "Speech!" cried voices, "Speech!" and then a brief
"boo-oo-oo" that was drowned in a cascade of shouts and cheers. The
conflict round the flag culminated in the smashing of a pane of glass in
the chemist's window and instantly sank to peace.

"Gentlemen voters of the Kinghamstead Division," I began.

"Votes for Women!" yelled a voice, amidst laughter--the first time I
remember hearing that memorable war-cry.

"Three cheers for Mrs. Remington!"

"Mrs. Remington asks me to thank you," I said, amidst further uproar and
reiterated cries of "Speech!"

Then silence came with a startling swiftness.

Isabel was still in my mind, I suppose. "I shall go to Westminster," I
began. I sought for some compelling phrase and could not find one.
"To do my share," I went on, "in building up a great and splendid
civilisation."

I paused, and there was a weak gust of cheering, and then a renewal of
booing.

"This election," I said, "has been the end and the beginning of much.
New ideas are abroad--"

"Chinese labour," yelled a voice, and across the square swept a wildfire
of booting and bawling.

It is one of the few occasions when I quite lost my hold on a speech. I
glanced sideways and saw the Mayor of Kinghamstead speaking behind his
hand to Parvill. By a happy chance Parvill caught my eye.

"What do they want?" I asked.

"Eh?"

"What do they want?"

"Say something about general fairness--the other side," prompted
Parvill, flattered but a little surprised by my appeal. I pulled myself
hastily into a more popular strain with a gross eulogy of my opponent's
good taste.

"Chinese labour!" cried the voice again.

"You've given that notice to quit," I answered.

The Market-place roared delight, but whether that delight expressed
hostility to Chinamen or hostility to their practical enslavement no
student of the General Election of 1906 has ever been able to determine.
Certainly one of the most effective posters on our side displayed a
hideous yellow face, just that and nothing more. There was not even a
legend to it. How it impressed the electorate we did not know, but that
it impressed the electorate profoundly there can be no disputing.



6


Kinghamstead was one of the earliest constituencies fought, and we came
back--it must have been Saturday--triumphant but very tired, to our
house in Radnor Square. In the train we read the first intimations that
the victory of our party was likely to be a sweeping one.

Then came a period when one was going about receiving and giving
congratulations and watching the other men arrive, very like a boy who
has returned to school with the first batch after the holidays. The
London world reeked with the General Election; it had invaded the
nurseries. All the children of one's friends had got big maps of England
cut up into squares to represent constituencies and were busy sticking
gummed blue labels over the conquered red of Unionism that had hitherto
submerged the country. And there were also orange labels, if I remember
rightly, to represent the new Labour party, and green for the Irish. I
engaged myself to speak at one or two London meetings, and lunched
at the Reform, which was fairly tepid, and dined and spent one or two
tumultuous evenings at the National Liberal Club, which was in active
eruption. The National Liberal became feverishly congested towards
midnight as the results of the counting came dropping in. A big
green-baize screen had been fixed up at one end of the large
smoking-room with the names of the constituencies that were voting that
day, and directly the figures came to hand, up they went, amidst cheers
that at last lost their energy through sheer repetition, whenever there
was record of a Liberal gain. I don't remember what happened when there
was a Liberal loss; I don't think that any were announced while I was
there.

How packed and noisy the place was, and what a reek of tobacco and
whisky fumes we made! Everybody was excited and talking, making waves of
harsh confused sound that beat upon one's ears, and every now and then
hoarse voices would shout for someone to speak. Our little set was much
in evidence. Both the Cramptons were in, Lewis, Bunting Harblow. We gave
brief addresses attuned to this excitement and the late hour, amidst
much enthusiasm.

"Now we can DO things!" I said amidst a rapture of applause. Men I did
not know from Adam held up glasses and nodded to me in solemn fuddled
approval as I came down past them into the crowd again.

Men were betting whether the Unionists would lose more or less than two
hundred seats.

"I wonder just what we shall do with it all," I heard one sceptic
speculating....

After these orgies I would get home very tired and excited, and find it
difficult to get to sleep. I would lie and speculate about what it was
we WERE going to do. One hadn't anticipated quite such a tremendous
accession to power for one's party. Liberalism was swirling in like a
flood....

I found the next few weeks very unsatisfactory and distressing. I don't
clearly remember what it was I had expected; I suppose the fuss and
strain of the General Election had built up a feeling that my return
would in some way put power into my hands, and instead I found myself
a mere undistinguished unit in a vast but rather vague majority. There
were moments when I felt very distinctly that a majority could be
too big a crowd altogether. I had all my work still before me, I had
achieved nothing as yet but opportunity, and a very crowded opportunity
it was at that. Everyone about me was chatting Parliament and
appointments; one breathed distracting and irritating speculations as
to what would be done and who would be asked to do it. I was chiefly
impressed by what was unlikely to be done and by the absence of any
general plan of legislation to hold us all together. I found the talk
about Parliamentary procedure and etiquette particularly trying. We
dined with the elder Cramptons one evening, and old Sir Edward was
lengthily sage about what the House liked, what it didn't like, what
made a good impression and what a bad one. "A man shouldn't speak more
than twice in his first session, and not at first on too contentious a
topic," said Sir Edward. "No."

"Very much depends on manner. The House hates a lecturer. There's a sort
of airy earnestness--"

He waved his cigar to eke out his words.

"Little peculiarities of costume count for a great deal. I could name
one man who spent three years living down a pair of spatterdashers. On
the other hand--a thing like that--if it catches the eye of the PUNCH
man, for example, may be your making."

He went off into a lengthy speculation of why the House had come to like
an originally unpopular Irishman named Biggar....

The opening of Parliament gave me some peculiar moods. I began to feel
more and more like a branded sheep. We were sworn in in batches,
dozens and scores of fresh men, trying not to look too fresh under the
inspection of policemen and messengers, all of us carrying new silk hats
and wearing magisterial coats. It is one of my vivid memories from this
period, the sudden outbreak of silk hats in the smoking-room of the
National Liberal Club. At first I thought there must have been a
funeral. Familiar faces that one had grown to know under soft felt hats,
under bowlers, under liberal-minded wide brims, and above artistic ties
and tweed jackets, suddenly met one, staring with the stern gaze of
self-consciousness, from under silk hats of incredible glossiness. There
was a disposition to wear the hat much too forward, I thought, for a
good Parliamentary style.

There was much play with the hats all through; a tremendous competition
to get in first and put hats on coveted seats. A memory hangs about me
of the House in the early afternoon, an inhumane desolation inhabited
almost entirely by silk hats. The current use of cards to secure seats
came later. There were yards and yards of empty green benches with hats
and hats and hats distributed along them, resolute-looking top hats, lax
top hats with a kind of shadowy grin under them, sensible top bats brim
upward, and one scandalous incontinent that had rolled from the front
Opposition bench right to the middle of the floor. A headless hat is
surely the most soulless thing in the world, far worse even than a
skull....

At last, in a leisurely muddled manner we got to the Address; and
I found myself packed in a dense elbowing crowd to the right of the
Speaker's chair; while the attenuated Opposition, nearly leaderless
after the massacre, tilted its brim to its nose and sprawled at its ease
amidst its empty benches.

There was a tremendous hullaboo about something, and I craned to see
over the shoulder of the man in front. "Order, order, order!"

"What's it about?" I asked.

The man in front of me was clearly no better informed, and then I
gathered from a slightly contemptuous Scotchman beside me that it was
Chris Robinson had walked between the honourable member in possession
of the house and the Speaker. I caught a glimpse of him blushingly
whispering about his misadventure to a colleague. He was just that
same little figure I had once assisted to entertain at Cambridge, but
grey-haired now, and still it seemed with the same knitted muffler
he had discarded for a reckless half-hour while he talked to us in
Hatherleigh's rooms.

It dawned upon me that I wasn't particularly wanted in the House, and
that I should get all I needed of the opening speeches next day from the
TIMES.

I made my way out and was presently walking rather aimlessly through the
outer lobby.

I caught myself regarding the shadow that spread itself out before me,
multiplied itself in blue tints of various intensity, shuffled itself
like a pack of cards under the many lights, the square shoulders, the
silk hat, already worn with a parliamentary tilt backward; I found I was
surveying this statesmanlike outline with a weak approval. "A MEMBER!"
I felt the little cluster of people that were scattered about the lobby
must be saying.

"Good God!" I said in hot reaction, "what am I doing here?"

It was one of those moments infinitely trivial in themselves, that yet
are cardinal in a man's life. It came to me with extreme vividness that
it wasn't so much that I had got hold of something as that something
had got hold of me. I distinctly recall the rebound of my mind. Whatever
happened in this Parliament, I at least would attempt something. "By
God!" I said, "I won't be overwhelmed. I am here to do something, and do
something I will!"

But I felt that for the moment I could not remain in the House.

I went out by myself with my thoughts into the night. It was a chilling
night, and rare spots of rain were falling. I glanced over my shoulder
at the lit windows of the Lords. I walked, I remember, westward, and
presently came to the Grosvenar Embankment and followed it, watching the
glittering black rush of the river and the dark, dimly lit barges round
which the water swirled. Across the river was the hunched sky-line of
Doulton's potteries, and a kiln flared redly. Dimly luminous trams were
gliding amidst a dotted line of lamps, and two little trains crawled
into Waterloo station. Mysterious black figures came by me and were
suddenly changed to the commonplace at the touch of the nearer lamps. It
was a big confused world, I felt, for a man to lay his hands upon.

I remember I crossed Vauxhall Bridge and stood for a time watching the
huge black shapes in the darkness under the gas-works. A shoal of coal
barges lay indistinctly on the darkly shining mud and water below, and
a colossal crane was perpetually hauling up coal into mysterious
blacknesses above, and dropping the empty clutch back to the barges.
Just one or two minute black featureless figures of men toiled amidst
these monster shapes. They did not seem to be controlling them but only
moving about among them. These gas-works have a big chimney that belches
a lurid flame into the night, a livid shivering bluish flame, shot with
strange crimson streaks....

On the other side of Lambeth Bridge broad stairs go down to the lapping
water of the river; the lower steps are luminous under the lamps and
one treads unwarned into thick soft Thames mud. They seem to be purely
architectural steps, they lead nowhere, they have an air of absolute
indifference to mortal ends.

Those shapes and large inhuman places--for all of mankind that one
sees at night about Lambeth is minute and pitiful beside the industrial
monsters that snort and toil there--mix up inextricably with my memories
of my first days as a legislator. Black figures drift by me, heavy vans
clatter, a newspaper rough tears by on a motor bicycle, and presently,
on the Albert Embankment, every seat has its one or two outcasts huddled
together and slumbering.

"These things come, these things go," a whispering voice urged upon me,
"as once those vast unmeaning Saurians whose bones encumber museums came
and went rejoicing noisily in fruitless lives."...

Fruitless lives!--was that the truth of it all?...

Later I stood within sight of the Houses of Parliament in front of the
colonnades of St Thomas's Hospital. I leant on the parapet close by a
lamp-stand of twisted dolphins--and I prayed!

I remember the swirl of the tide upon the water, and how a string of
barges presently came swinging and bumping round as high-water turned
to ebb. That sudden change of position and my brief perplexity at it,
sticks like a paper pin through the substance of my thoughts. It was
then I was moved to prayer. I prayed that night that life might not
be in vain, that in particular I might not live in vain. I prayed for
strength and faith, that the monstrous blundering forces in life might
not overwhelm me, might not beat me back to futility and a meaningless
acquiescence in existent things. I knew myself for the weakling I was,
I knew that nevertheless it was set for me to make such order as I could
out of these disorders, and my task cowed me, gave me at the thought of
it a sense of yielding feebleness.

"Break me, O God," I prayed at last, "disgrace me, torment me, destroy
me as you will, but save me from self-complacency and little interests
and little successes and the life that passes like the shadow of a
dream."




BOOK THE THIRD: THE HEART OF POLITICS



CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ THE RIDDLE FOR THE STATESMAN



1


I have been planning and replanning, writing and rewriting, this next
portion of my book for many days. I perceive I must leave it raw edged
and ill joined. I have learnt something of the impossibility of History.
For all I have had to tell is the story of one man's convictions and
aims and how they reacted upon his life; and I find it too subtle and
involved and intricate for the doing. I find it taxes all my powers to
convey even the main forms and forces in that development. It is like
looking through moving media of changing hue and variable refraction
at something vitally unstable. Broad theories and generalisations are
mingled with personal influences, with prevalent prejudices; and
not only coloured but altered by phases of hopefulness and moods of
depression. The web is made up of the most diverse elements, beyond
treatment multitudinous.... For a week or so I desisted altogether,
and walked over the mountains and returned to sit through the warm soft
mornings among the shaded rocks above this little perched-up house of
ours, discussing my difficulties with Isabel and I think on the whole
complicating them further in the effort to simplify them to manageable
and stateable elements.

Let me, nevertheless, attempt a rough preliminary analysis of this
confused process. A main strand is quite easily traceable. This main
strand is the story of my obvious life, my life as it must have looked
to most of my acquaintances. It presents you with a young couple,
bright, hopeful, and energetic, starting out under Altiora's auspices to
make a career. You figure us well dressed and active, running about in
motor-cars, visiting in great people's houses, dining amidst brilliant
companies, going to the theatre, meeting in the lobby. Margaret wore
hundreds of beautiful dresses. We must have had an air of succeeding
meritoriously during that time.

We did very continually and faithfully serve our joint career. I thought
about it a great deal, and did and refrained from doing ten thousand
things for the sake of it. I kept up a solicitude for it, as it were by
inertia, long after things had happened and changes occurred in me
that rendered its completion impossible. Under certain very artless
pretences, we wanted steadfastly to make a handsome position in the
world, achieve respect, SUCCEED. Enormous unseen changes had been in
progress for years in my mind and the realities of my life, before
our general circle could have had any inkling of their existence, or
suspected the appearances of our life. Then suddenly our proceedings
began to be deflected, our outward unanimity visibly strained and marred
by the insurgence of these so long-hidden developments.

That career had its own hidden side, of course; but when I write
of these unseen factors I do not mean that but something altogether
broader. I do not mean the everyday pettinesses which gave the cynical
observer scope and told of a narrower, baser aspect of the fair but
limited ambitions of my ostensible self. This "sub-careerist" element
noted little things that affected the career, made me suspicious of the
rivalry of so-and-so, propitiatory to so-and-so, whom, as a matter of
fact, I didn't respect or feel in the least sympathetic towards; guarded
with that man, who for all his charm and interest wasn't helpful, and
a little touchy at the appearance of neglect from that. No, I mean
something greater and not something smaller when I write of a hidden
life.

In the ostensible self who glowed under the approbation of Altiora
Bailey, and was envied and discussed, praised and depreciated, in the
House and in smoking-room gossip, you really have as much of a man as
usually figures in a novel or an obituary notice. But I am tremendously
impressed now in the retrospect by the realisation of how little that
frontage represented me, and just how little such frontages do represent
the complexities of the intelligent contemporary. Behind it, yet
struggling to disorganise and alter it, altogether, was a far more
essential reality, a self less personal, less individualised, and
broader in its references. Its aims were never simply to get on; it
had an altogether different system of demands and satisfactions. It
was critical, curious, more than a little unfeeling--and relentlessly
illuminating.

It is just the existence and development of this more generalised
self-behind-the-frontage that is making modern life so much more subtle
and intricate to render, and so much more hopeful in its relations
to the perplexities of the universe. I see this mental and spiritual
hinterland vary enormously in the people about me, from a type which
seems to keep, as people say, all its goods in the window, to others
who, like myself, come to regard the ostensible existence more and more
as a mere experimental feeder and agent for that greater personality
behind. And this back-self has its history of phases, its crises and
happy accidents and irrevocable conclusions, more or less distinct from
the adventures and achievements of the ostensible self. It meets persons
and phrases, it assimilates the spirit of a book, it is startled into
new realisations by some accident that seems altogether irrelevant to
the general tenor of one's life. Its increasing independence of the
ostensible career makes it the organ of corrective criticism; it
accumulates disturbing energy. Then it breaks our overt promises and
repudiates our pledges, coming down at last like an overbearing mentor
upon the small engagements of the pupil.

In the life of the individual it takes the role that the growth of
philosophy, science, and creative literature may play in the development
of mankind.



2


It is curious to recall how Britten helped shatter that obvious,
lucidly explicable presentation of myself upon which I had embarked
with Margaret. He returned to revive a memory of adolescent dreams and a
habit of adolescent frankness; he reached through my shallow frontage
as no one else seemed capable of doing, and dragged that back-self into
relation with it.

I remember very distinctly a dinner and a subsequent walk with him
which presents itself now as altogether typical of the quality of his
influence.

I had come upon him one day while lunching with Somers and Sutton at
the Playwrights' Club, and had asked him to dinner on the spur of the
moment. He was oddly the same curly-headed, red-faced ventriloquist, and
oddly different, rather seedy as well as untidy, and at first a little
inclined to make comparisons with my sleek successfulness. But that
disposition presently evaporated, and his talk was good and fresh and
provocative. And something that had long been straining at its checks in
my mind flapped over, and he and I found ourselves of one accord.

Altiora wasn't at this dinner. When she came matters were apt to become
confusedly strenuous. There was always a slight and ineffectual struggle
at the end on the part of Margaret to anticipate Altiora's overpowering
tendency to a rally and the establishment of some entirely unjustifiable
conclusion by a COUP-DE-MAIN. When, however, Altiora was absent, the
quieter influence of the Cramptons prevailed; temperance and information
for its own sake prevailed excessively over dinner and the play of
thought.... Good Lord! what bores the Cramptons were! I wonder I
endured them as I did. They had all of them the trick of lying in wait
conversationally; they had no sense of the self-exposures, the gallant
experiments in statement that are necessary for good conversation. They
would watch one talking with an expression exactly like peeping through
bushes. Then they would, as it were, dash out, dissent succinctly,
contradict some secondary fact, and back to cover. They gave one
twilight nerves. Their wives were easier but still difficult at a
stretch; they talked a good deal about children and servants, but with
an air caught from Altiora of making observations upon sociological
types. Lewis gossiped about the House in an entirely finite manner. He
never raised a discussion; nobody ever raised a discussion. He would ask
what we thought of Evesham's question that afternoon, and Edward would
say it was good, and Mrs. Willie, who had been behind the grille, would
think it was very good, and then Willie, parting the branches, would say
rather conclusively that he didn't think it was very much good, and I
would deny hearing the question in order to evade a profitless statement
of views in that vacuum, and then we would cast about in our minds for
some other topic of equal interest....

On this occasion Altiora was absent, and to qualify our Young Liberal
bleakness we had Mrs. Millingham, with her white hair and her fresh mind
and complexion, and Esmeer. Willie Crampton was with us, but not his
wife, who was having her third baby on principle; his brother Edward was
present, and the Lewises, and of course the Bunting Harblows. There was
also some other lady. I remember her as pale blue, but for the life of
me I cannot remember her name.

Quite early there was a little breeze between Edward Crampton and
Esmeer, who had ventured an opinion about the partition of Poland.
Edward was at work then upon the seventh volume of his monumental Life
of Kosciusko, and a little impatient with views perhaps not altogether
false but betraying a lamentable ignorance of accessible literature. At
any rate, his correction of Esmeer was magisterial. After that there was
a distinct and not altogether delightful pause, and then some one, it
may have been the pale-blue lady, asked Mrs. Lewis whether her aunt Lady
Carmixter had returned from her rest-and-sun-cure in Italy. That led to
a rather anxiously sustained talk about regimen, and Willie told us how
he had profited by the no-breakfast system. It had increased his power
of work enormously. He could get through ten hours a day now without
inconvenience.

"What do you do?" said Esmeer abruptly.

"Oh! no end of work. There's all the estate and looking after things."

"But publicly?"

"I asked three questions yesterday. And for one of them I had to consult
nine books!"

We were drifting, I could see, towards Doctor Haig's system of dietary,
and whether the exclusion or inclusion of fish and chicken were most
conducive to high efficiency, when Britten, who had refused lemonade
and claret and demanded Burgundy, broke out, and was discovered to be
demanding in his throat just what we Young Liberals thought we were up
to?

"I want," said Britten, repeating his challenge a little louder, "to
hear just exactly what you think you are doing in Parliament?"

Lewis laughed nervously, and thought we were "Seeking the Good of the
Community."

"HOW?"

"Beneficient Legislation," said Lewis.

"Beneficient in what direction?" insisted Britten. "I want to know where
you think you are going."

"Amelioration of Social Conditions," said Lewis.

"That's only a phrase!"

"You wouldn't have me sketch bills at dinner?"

"I'd like you to indicate directions," said Britten, and waited.

"Upward and On," said Lewis with conscious neatness, and turned to ask
Mrs. Bunting Harblow about her little boy's French.

For a time talk frothed over Britten's head, but the natural mischief
in Mrs. Millingham had been stirred, and she was presently echoing his
demand in lisping, quasi-confidential undertones. "What ARE we Liberals
doing?" Then Esmeer fell in with the revolutionaries.

To begin with, I was a little shocked by this clamour for
fundamentals--and a little disconcerted. I had the experience that I
suppose comes to every one at times of discovering oneself together with
two different sets of people with whom one has maintained two different
sets of attitudes. It had always been, I perceived, an instinctive
suppression in our circle that we shouldn't be more than vague about our
political ideals. It had almost become part of my morality to respect
this convention. It was understood we were all working hard, and keeping
ourselves fit, tremendously fit, under Altiora's inspiration, Pro Bono
Publico. Bunting Harblow had his under-secretaryship, and Lewis was on
the verge of the Cabinet, and these things we considered to be in the
nature of confirmations.... It added to the discomfort of the situation
that these plunging enquiries were being made in the presence of our
wives.

The rebel section of our party forced the talk.

Edward Crampton was presently declaring--I forget in what relation: "The
country is with us."

My long-controlled hatred of the Cramptons' stereotyped phrases about
the Country and the House got the better of me. I showed my cloven hoof
to my friends for the first time.

"We don't respect the Country as we used to do," I said. "We haven't
the same belief we used to have in the will of the people. It's no
good, Crampton, trying to keep that up. We Liberals know as a matter of
fact--nowadays every one knows--that the monster that brought us into
power has, among other deficiencies, no head. We've got to give it
one--if possible with brains and a will. That lies in the future. For
the present if the country is with us, it means merely that we happen to
have hold of its tether."

Lewis was shocked. A "mandate" from the Country was sacred to his system
of pretences.

Britten wasn't subdued by his first rebuff; presently he was at
us again. There were several attempts to check his outbreak of
interrogation; I remember the Cramptons asked questions about the
welfare of various cousins of Lewis who were unknown to the rest of us,
and Margaret tried to engage Britten in a sympathetic discussion of the
Arts and Crafts exhibition. But Britten and Esmeer were persistent, Mrs.
Millingham was mischievous, and in the end our rising hopes of Young
Liberalism took to their thickets for good, while we talked all over
them of the prevalent vacuity of political intentions. Margaret was
perplexed by me. It is only now I perceive just how perplexing I must
have been. "Of course, she said with that faint stress of apprehension
in her eyes, one must have aims." And, "it isn't always easy to put
everything into phrases." "Don't be long," said Mrs. Edward Crampton
to her husband as the wives trooped out. And afterwards when we went
upstairs I had an indefinable persuasion that the ladies had been
criticising Britten's share in our talk in an altogether unfavourable
spirit. Mrs. Edward evidently thought him aggressive and impertinent,
and Margaret with a quiet firmness that brooked no resistance, took him
at once into a corner and showed him Italian photographs by Coburn. We
dispersed early.

I walked with Britten along the Chelsea back streets towards Battersea
Bridge--he lodged on the south side.

"Mrs. Millingham's a dear," he began.

"She's a dear."

"I liked her demand for a hansom because a four-wheeler was too safe."

"She was worked up," I said. "She's a woman of faultless character, but
her instincts, as Altiora would say, are anarchistic--when she gives
them a chance."

"So she takes it out in hansom cabs."

"Hansom cabs."

"She's wise," said Britten....

"I hope, Remington," he went on after a pause, "I didn't rag your other
guests too much. I've a sort of feeling at moments--Remington, those
chaps are so infernally not--not bloody. It's part of a man's duty
sometimes at least to eat red beef and get drunk. How is he to
understand government if he doesn't? It scares me to think of your
lot--by a sort of misapprehension--being in power. A kind of neuralgia
in the head, by way of government. I don't understand where YOU come in.
Those others--they've no lusts. Their ideal is anaemia. You and I,
we had at least a lust to take hold of life and make something of it.
They--they want to take hold of life and make nothing of it. They want
to cut out all the stimulants. Just as though life was anything else but
a reaction to stimulation!"...

He began to talk of his own life. He had had ill-fortune through most
of it. He was poor and unsuccessful, and a girl he had been very fond
of had been attacked and killed by a horse in a field in a very horrible
manner. These things had wounded and tortured him, but they hadn't
broken him. They had, it seemed to me, made a kind of crippled and ugly
demigod of him. He was, I began to perceive, so much better than I had
any right to expect. At first I had been rather struck by his unkempt
look, and it made my reaction all the stronger. There was about him
something, a kind of raw and bleeding faith in the deep things of
life, that stirred me profoundly as he showed it. My set of people had
irritated him and disappointed him. I discovered at his touch how they
irritated him. He reproached me boldly. He made me feel ashamed of my
easy acquiescences as I walked in my sleek tall neatness beside his
rather old coat, his rather battered hat, his sturdier shorter shape,
and listened to his denunciations of our self-satisfied New Liberalism
and Progressivism.

"It has the same relation to progress--the reality of progress--that the
things they paint on door panels in the suburbs have to art and beauty.
There's a sort of filiation.... Your Altiora's just the political
equivalent of the ladies who sell traced cloth for embroidery; she's
a dealer in Refined Social Reform for the Parlour. The real progress,
Remington, is a graver thing and a painfuller thing and a slower thing
altogether. Look! THAT"--and he pointed to where under a boarding in the
light of a gas lamp a dingy prostitute stood lurking--"was in Babylon
and Nineveh. Your little lot make believe there won't be anything of the
sort after this Parliament! They're going to vanish at a few top notes
from Altiora Bailey! Remington!--it's foolery. It's prigs at play.
It's make-believe, make-believe! Your people there haven't got hold of
things, aren't beginning to get hold of things, don't know anything of
life at all, shirk life, avoid life, get in little bright clean rooms
and talk big over your bumpers of lemonade while the Night goes by
outside--untouched. Those Crampton fools slink by all this,"--he
waved at the woman again--"pretend it doesn't exist, or is going to be
banished root and branch by an Act to keep children in the wet outside
public-houses. Do you think they really care, Remington? I don't. It's
make-believe. What they want to do, what Lewis wants to do, what Mrs.
Bunting Harblow wants her husband to do, is to sit and feel very grave
and necessary and respected on the Government benches. They think of
putting their feet out like statesmen, and tilting shiny hats with
becoming brims down over their successful noses. Presentation portrait
to a club at fifty. That's their Reality. That's their scope. They
don't, it's manifest, WANT to think beyond that. The things there ARE,
Remington, they'll never face! the wonder and the depth of life,--lust,
and the night-sky,--pain."

"But the good intention," I pleaded, "the Good Will!"

"Sentimentality," said Britten. "No Good Will is anything but dishonesty
unless it frets and burns and hurts and destroys a man. That lot of
yours have nothing but a good will to think they have good will. Do you
think they lie awake of nights searching their hearts as we do? Lewis?
Crampton? Or those neat, admiring, satisfied little wives? See how they
shrank from the probe!"

"We all," I said, "shrink from the probe."

"God help us!" said Britten....

"We are but vermin at the best, Remington," he broke out, "and the
greatest saint only a worm that has lifted its head for a moment from
the dust. We are damned, we are meant to be damned, coral animalculae
building upward, upward in a sea of damnation. But of all the damned
things that ever were damned, your damned shirking, temperate,
sham-efficient, self-satisfied, respectable, make-believe,
Fabian-spirited Young Liberal is the utterly damnedest." He paused for
a moment, and resumed in an entirely different note: "Which is why I was
so surprised, Remington, to find YOU in this set!"

"You're just the old plunger you used to be, Britten," I said. "You're
going too far with all your might for the sake of the damns. Like a
donkey that drags its cart up a bank to get thistles. There's depths in
Liberalism--"

"We were talking about Liberals."

"Liberty!"

"Liberty! What do YOOR little lot know of liberty?"

"What does any little lot know of liberty?"

"It waits outside, too big for our understanding. Like the night and the
stars. And lust, Remington! lust and bitterness! Don't I know them? with
all the sweetness and hope of life bitten and trampled, the dear eyes
and the brain that loved and understood--and my poor mumble of a life
going on! I'm within sight of being a drunkard, Remington! I'm a failure
by most standards! Life has cut me to the bone. But I'm not afraid of it
any more. I've paid something of the price, I've seen something of the
meaning."

He flew off at a tangent. "I'd rather die in Delirium Tremens," he
cried, "than be a Crampton or a Lewis...."

"Make-believe. Make-believe." The phrase and Britten's squat gestures
haunted me as I walked homeward alone. I went to my room and stood
before my desk and surveyed papers and files and Margaret's admirable
equipment of me.

I perceived in the lurid light of Britten's suggestions that so it was
Mr. George Alexander would have mounted a statesman's private room....



3


I was never at any stage a loyal party man. I doubt if party will
ever again be the force it was during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. Men are becoming increasingly constructive and selective,
less patient under tradition and the bondage of initial circumstances.
As education becomes more universal and liberating, men will sort
themselves more and more by their intellectual temperaments and less and
less by their accidental associations. The past will rule them less; the
future more. It is not simply party but school and college and county
and country that lose their glamour. One does not hear nearly as much
as our forefathers did of the "old Harrovian," "old Arvonian," "old
Etonian" claim to this or that unfair advantage or unearnt sympathy.
Even the Scotch and the Devonians weaken a little in their clannishness.
A widening sense of fair play destroys such things. They follow
freemasonry down--freemasonry of which one is chiefly reminded nowadays
in England by propitiatory symbols outside shady public-houses....

There is, of course, a type of man which clings very obstinately to
party ties. These are the men with strong reproductive imaginations
and no imaginative initiative, such men as Cladingbowl, for example, or
Dayton. They are the scholars-at-large in life. For them the fact that
the party system has been essential in the history of England for two
hundred years gives it an overwhelming glamour. They have read histories
and memoirs, they see the great grey pile of Westminster not so much
for what it is as for what it was, rich with dramatic memories, populous
with glorious ghosts, phrasing itself inevitably in anecdotes and
quotations. It seems almost scandalous that new things should continue
to happen, swamping with strange qualities the savour of these old
associations.

That Mr. Ramsay Macdonald should walk through Westminster Hall, thrust
himself, it may be, through the very piece of space that once held
Charles the Martyr pleading for his life, seems horrible profanation to
Dayton, a last posthumous outrage; and he would, I think, like to have
the front benches left empty now for ever, or at most adorned with
laureated ivory tablets: "Here Dizzy sat," and "On this Spot William
Ewart Gladstone made his First Budget Speech." Failing this, he demands,
if only as signs of modesty and respect on the part of the survivors,
meticulous imitation. "Mr. G.," he murmurs, "would not have done that,"
and laments a vanished subtlety even while Mr. Evesham is speaking. He
is always gloomily disposed to lapse into wonderings about what
things are coming to, wonderings that have no grain of curiosity. His
conception of perfect conduct is industrious persistence along the
worn-down, well-marked grooves of the great recorded days. So infinitely
more important to him is the documented, respected thing than the
elusive present.

Cladingbowl and Dayton do not shine in the House, though Cladingbowl is
a sound man on a committee, and Dayton keeps the OLD COUNTRY GAZETTE,
the most gentlemanly paper in London. They prevail, however, in their
clubs at lunch time. There, with the pleasant consciousness of a
morning's work free from either zeal or shirking, they mingle with
permanent officials, prominent lawyers, even a few of the soberer type
of business men, and relax their minds in the discussion of the morning
paper, of the architecture of the West End, and of the latest public
appointments, of golf, of holiday resorts, of the last judicial
witticisms and forensic "crushers." The New Year and Birthday honours
lists are always very sagely and exhaustively considered, and anecdotes
are popular and keenly judged. They do not talk of the things that are
really active in their minds, but in the formal and habitual manner they
suppose to be proper to intelligent but still honourable men. Socialism,
individual money matters, and religion are forbidden topics, and sex and
women only in so far as they appear in the law courts. It is to me
the strangest of conventions, this assumption of unreal loyalties and
traditional respects, this repudiation and concealment of passionate
interests. It is like wearing gloves in summer fields, or bathing in a
gown, or falling in love with the heroine of a novel, or writing under a
pseudonym, or becoming a masked Tuareg....

It is not, I think, that men of my species are insensitive to the great
past that is embodied in Westminster and its traditions; we are not so
much wanting in the historical sense as alive to the greatness of our
present opportunities and the still vaster future that is possible to
us. London is the most interesting, beautiful, and wonderful city in the
world to me, delicate in her incidental and multitudinous littleness,
and stupendous in her pregnant totality; I cannot bring myself to use
her as a museum or an old bookshop. When I think of Whitehall that
little affair on the scaffold outside the Banqueting Hall seems trivial
and remote in comparison with the possibilities that offer themselves to
my imagination within the great grey Government buildings close at hand.

It gives me a qualm of nostalgia even to name those places now. I think
of St. Stephen's tower streaming upwards into the misty London night and
the great wet quadrangle of New Palace Yard, from which the hansom cabs
of my first experiences were ousted more and more by taxicabs as the
second Parliament of King Edward the Seventh aged; I think of the
Admiralty and War office with their tall Marconi masts sending out
invisible threads of direction to the armies in the camps, to great
fleets about the world. The crowded, darkly shining river goes flooding
through my memory once again, on to those narrow seas that part us
from our rival nations; I see quadrangles and corridors of spacious
grey-toned offices in which undistinguished little men and little files
of papers link us to islands in the tropics, to frozen wildernesses
gashed for gold, to vast temple-studded plains, to forest worlds
and mountain worlds, to ports and fortresses and lighthouses and
watch-towers and grazing lands and corn lands all about the globe. Once
more I traverse Victoria Street, grimy and dark, where the Agents of the
Empire jostle one another, pass the big embassies in the West End
with their flags and scutcheons, follow the broad avenue that leads to
Buckingham Palace, witness the coming and going of troops and officials
and guests along it from every land on earth.... Interwoven in the
texture of it all, mocking, perplexing, stimulating beyond measure, is
the gleaming consciousness, the challenging knowledge: "You and your
kind might still, if you could but grasp it here, mould all the destiny
of Man!"



4


My first three years in Parliament were years of active discontent. The
little group of younger Liberals to which I belonged was very ignorant
of the traditions and qualities of our older leaders, and quite out of
touch with the mass of the party. For a time Parliament was enormously
taken up with moribund issues and old quarrels. The early Educational
legislation was sectarian and unenterprising, and the Licensing Bill
went little further than the attempted rectification of a Conservative
mistake. I was altogether for the nationalisation of the public-houses,
and of this end the Bill gave no intimations. It was just beer-baiting.
I was recalcitrant almost from the beginning, and spoke against the
Government so early as the second reading of the first Education Bill,
the one the Lords rejected in 1906. I went a little beyond my intention
in the heat of speaking,--it is a way with inexperienced man. I called
the Bill timid, narrow, a mere sop to the jealousies of sects and
little-minded people. I contrasted its aim and methods with the manifest
needs of the time.

I am not a particularly good speaker; after the manner of a writer I
worry to find my meaning too much; but this was one of my successes. I
spoke after dinner and to a fairly full House, for people were already
a little curious about me because of my writings. Several of the
Conservative leaders were present and stayed, and Mr. Evesham,
I remember, came ostentatiously to hear me, with that engaging
friendliness of his, and gave me at the first chance an approving "Hear,
Hear!" I can still recall quite distinctly my two futile attempts to
catch the Speaker's eye before I was able to begin, the nervous quiver
of my rather too prepared opening, the effect of hearing my own voice
and my subconscious wonder as to what I could possibly be talking
about, the realisation that I was getting on fairly well, the immense
satisfaction afterwards of having on the whole brought it off, and the
absurd gratitude I felt for that encouraging cheer.

Addressing the House of Commons is like no other public speaking in the
world. Its semi-colloquial methods give it an air of being easy, but
its shifting audience, the comings and goings and hesitations of members
behind the chair--not mere audience units, but men who matter--the
desolating emptiness that spreads itself round the man who fails to
interest, the little compact, disciplined crowd in the strangers'
gallery, the light, elusive, flickering movements high up behind the
grill, the wigged, attentive, weary Speaker, the table and the mace
and the chapel-like Gothic background with its sombre shadows, conspire
together, produce a confused, uncertain feeling in me, as though I was
walking upon a pavement full of trap-doors and patches of uncovered
morass. A misplaced, well-meant "Hear, Hear!" is apt to be
extraordinarily disconcerting, and under no other circumstances have I
had to speak with quite the same sideways twist that the arrangement of
the House imposes. One does not recognise one's own voice threading out
into the stirring brown. Unless I was excited or speaking to the mind of
some particular person in the house, I was apt to lose my feeling of an
auditor. I had no sense of whither my sentences were going, such as one
has with a public meeting well under one's eye. And to lose one's sense
of an auditor is for a man of my temperament to lose one's sense of the
immediate, and to become prolix and vague with qualifications.



5


My discontents with the Liberal party and my mental exploration of
the quality of party generally is curiously mixed up with certain
impressions of things and people in the National Liberal Club. The
National Liberal Club is Liberalism made visible in the flesh--and
Doultonware. It is an extraordinary big club done in a bold, wholesale,
shiny, marbled style, richly furnished with numerous paintings, steel
engravings, busts, and full-length statues of the late Mr. Gladstone;
and its spacious dining-rooms, its long, hazy, crowded smoking-room with
innumerable little tables and groups of men in armchairs, its
magazine room and library upstairs, have just that undistinguished and
unconcentrated diversity which is for me the Liberal note. The pensive
member sits and hears perplexing dialects and even fragments of foreign
speech, and among the clustering masses of less insistent whites his
roving eye catches profiles and complexions that send his mind afield to
Calcutta or Rangoon or the West Indies or Sierra Leone or the Cape....

I was not infrequently that pensive member. I used to go to the Club to
doubt about Liberalism.

About two o'clock in the day the great smoking-room is crowded with
countless little groups. They sit about small round tables, or in
circles of chairs, and the haze of tobacco seems to prolong the great
narrow place, with its pillars and bays, to infinity. Some of the groups
are big, as many as a dozen men talk in loud tones; some are duologues,
and there is always a sprinkling of lonely, dissociated men. At first
one gets an impression of men going from group to group and as it were
linking them, but as one watches closely one finds that these men just
visit three or four groups at the outside, and know nothing of the
others. One begins to perceive more and more distinctly that one is
dealing with a sort of human mosaic; that each patch in that great place
is of a different quality and colour from the next and never to be mixed
with it. Most clubs have a common link, a lowest common denominator in
the Club Bore, who spares no one, but even the National Liberal bores
are specialised and sectional. As one looks round one sees here a clump
of men from the North Country or the Potteries, here an island of
South London politicians, here a couple of young Jews ascendant from
Whitechapel, here a circle of journalists and writers, here a group of
Irish politicians, here two East Indians, here a priest or so, here
a clump of old-fashioned Protestants, here a little knot of eminent
Rationalists indulging in a blasphemous story SOTTO VOCE. Next them are
a group of anglicised Germans and highly specialised chess-players,
and then two of the oddest-looking persons--bulging with documents and
intent upon extraordinary business transactions over long cigars....

I would listen to a stormy sea of babblement, and try to extract some
constructive intimations. Every now and then I got a whiff of politics.
It was clear they were against the Lords--against plutocrats--against
Cossington's newspapers--against the brewers.... It was tremendously
clear what they were against. The trouble was to find out what on earth
they were for!...

As I sat and thought, the streaked and mottled pillars and wall, the
various views, aspects, and portraits of Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone, the
partitions of polished mahogany, the yellow-vested waiters, would
dissolve and vanish, and I would have a vision of this sample of
miscellaneous men of limited, diverse interests and a universal
littleness of imagination enlarged, unlimited, no longer a sample but a
community, spreading, stretching out to infinity--all in little groups
and duologues and circles, all with their special and narrow concerns,
all with their backs to most of the others.

What but a common antagonism would ever keep these multitudes together?
I understood why modern electioneering is more than half of it
denunciation. Let us condemn, if possible, let us obstruct and deprive,
but not let us do. There is no real appeal to the commonplace mind in
"Let us do." That calls for the creative imagination, and few have been
accustomed to respond to that call. The other merely needs jealousy and
bate, of which there are great and easily accessible reservoirs in every
human heart....

I remember that vision of endless, narrow, jealous individuality very
vividly. A seething limitlessness it became at last, like a waste place
covered by crawling locusts that men sweep up by the sackload and drown
by the million in ditches....

Grotesquely against it came the lean features, the sidelong shy
movements of Edward Crampton, seated in a circle of talkers close at
hand. I had a whiff of his strained, unmusical voice, and behold! he was
saying something about the "Will of the People...."

The immense and wonderful disconnectednesses of human life! I forgot the
smoke and jabber of the club altogether; I became a lonely spirit flung
aloft by some queer accident, a stone upon a ledge in some high and
rocky wilderness, and below as far as the eye could reach stretched the
swarming infinitesimals of humanity, like grass upon the field, like
pebbles upon unbounded beaches. Was there ever to be in human life
more than that endless struggling individualism? Was there indeed some
giantry, some immense valiant synthesis, still to come--or present it
might be and still unseen by me, or was this the beginning and withal
the last phase of mankind?...

I glimpsed for a while the stupendous impudence of our ambitions,
the tremendous enterprise to which the modern statesman is implicitly
addressed. I was as it were one of a little swarm of would-be reef
builders looking back at the teeming slime upon the ocean floor. All the
history of mankind, all the history of life, has been and will be
the story of something struggling out of the indiscriminated abyss,
struggling to exist and prevail over and comprehend individual lives--an
effort of insidious attraction, an idea of invincible appeal. That
something greater than ourselves, which does not so much exist as seek
existence, palpitating between being and not-being, how marvellous it
is! It has worn the form and visage of ten thousand different gods,
sought a shape for itself in stone and ivory and music and wonderful
words, spoken more and more clearly of a mystery of love, a mystery
of unity, dabbling meanwhile in blood and cruelty beyond the common
impulses of men. It is something that comes and goes, like a light that
shines and is withdrawn, withdrawn so completely that one doubts if it
has ever been....



6


I would mark with a curious interest the stray country member of
the club up in town for a night or so. My mind would be busy with
speculations about him, about his home, his family, his reading, his
horizons, his innumerable fellows who didn't belong and never came up.
I would fill in the outline of him with memories of my uncle and his
Staffordshire neighbours. He was perhaps Alderman This or Councillor
That down there, a great man in his ward, J. P. within seven miles of
the boundary of the borough, and a God in his home. Here he was nobody,
and very shy, and either a little too arrogant or a little too meek
towards our very democratic mannered but still livened waiters. Was
he perhaps the backbone of England? He over-ate himself lest he should
appear mean, went through our Special Dinner conscientiously, drank,
unless he was teetotal, of unfamiliar wines, and did his best, in spite
of the rules, to tip. Afterwards, in a state of flushed repletion, he
would have old brandy, black coffee, and a banded cigar, or in the
name of temperance omit the brandy and have rather more coffee, in
the smoking-room. I would sit and watch that stiff dignity of
self-indulgence, and wonder, wonder....

An infernal clairvoyance would come to me. I would have visions of him
in relation to his wife, checking always, sometimes bullying, sometimes
being ostentatiously "kind"; I would see him glance furtively at his
domestic servants upon his staircase, or stiffen his upper lip against
the reluctant, protesting business employee. We imaginative people
are base enough, heaven knows, but it is only in rare moods of bitter
penetration that we pierce down to the baser lusts, the viler shames,
the everlasting lying and muddle-headed self-justification of the dull.

I would turn my eyes down the crowded room and see others of him and
others. What did he think he was up to? Did he for a moment realise that
his presence under that ceramic glory of a ceiling with me meant, if it
had any rational meaning at all, that we were jointly doing something
with the nation and the empire and mankind?... How on earth could any
one get hold of him, make any noble use of him? He didn't read beyond
his newspaper. He never thought, but only followed imaginings in his
heart. He never discussed. At the first hint of discussion his temper
gave way. He was, I knew, a deep, thinly-covered tank of resentments
and quite irrational moral rages. Yet withal I would have to resist an
impulse to go over to him and nudge him and say to him, "Look here!
What indeed do you think we are doing with the nation and the empire and
mankind? You know--MANKIND!"

I wonder what reply I should have got.

So far as any average could be struck and so far as any backbone could
be located, it seemed to me that this silent, shy, replete, sub-angry,
middle-class sentimentalist was in his endless species and varieties and
dialects the backbone of our party. So far as I could be considered as
representing anything in the House, I pretended to sit for the elements
of HIM....



7


For a time I turned towards the Socialists. They at least had an air of
coherent intentions. At that time Socialism had come into politics again
after a period of depression and obscurity, with a tremendous ECLAT.
There was visibly a following of Socialist members to Chris Robinson;
mysteriously uncommunicative gentlemen in soft felt hats and short
coats and square-toed boots who replied to casual advances a little
surprisingly in rich North Country dialects. Members became aware of a
"seagreen incorruptible," as Colonel Marlow put it to me, speaking on
the Address, a slender twisted figure supporting itself on a stick and
speaking with a fire that was altogether revolutionary. This was Philip
Snowden, the member for Blackburn. They had come in nearly forty
strong altogether, and with an air of presently meaning to come in much
stronger. They were only one aspect of what seemed at that time a big
national movement. Socialist societies, we gathered, were springing up
all over the country, and every one was inquiring about Socialism and
discussing Socialism. It had taken the Universities with particular
force, and any youngster with the slightest intellectual pretension was
either actively for or brilliantly against. For a time our Young Liberal
group was ostentatiously sympathetic....

When I think of the Socialists there comes a vivid memory of certain
evening gatherings at our house....

These gatherings had been organised by Margaret as the outcome of
a discussion at the Baileys'. Altiora had been very emphatic and
uncharitable upon the futility of the Socialist movement. It seemed that
even the leaders fought shy of dinner-parties.

"They never meet each other," said Altiora, "much less people on the
other side. How can they begin to understand politics until they do
that?"

"Most of them have totally unpresentable wives," said Altiora,
"totally!" and quoted instances, "and they WILL bring them. Or they
won't come! Some of the poor creatures have scarcely learnt their table
manners. They just make holes in the talk...."

I thought there was a great deal of truth beneath Altiora's outburst.
The presentation of the Socialist case seemed very greatly crippled
by the want of a common intimacy in its leaders; the want of intimacy
didn't at first appear to be more than an accident, and our talk led to
Margaret's attempt to get acquaintance and easy intercourse afoot among
them and between them and the Young Liberals of our group. She gave a
series of weekly dinners, planned, I think, a little too accurately upon
Altiora's model, and after each we had as catholic a reception as we
could contrive.

Our receptions were indeed, I should think, about as catholic as
receptions could be. Margaret found herself with a weekly houseful of
insoluble problems in intercourse. One did one's best, but one got a
nightmare feeling as the evening wore on.

It was one of the few unanimities of these parties that every one should
be a little odd in appearance, funny about the hair or the tie or the
shoes or more generally, and that bursts of violent aggression should
alternate with an attitude entirely defensive. A number of our guests
had an air of waiting for a clue that never came, and stood and sat
about silently, mildly amused but not a bit surprised that we did not
discover their distinctive Open-Sesames. There was a sprinkling of
manifest seers and prophetesses in shapeless garments, far too many, I
thought, for really easy social intercourse, and any conversation at any
moment was liable to become oracular. One was in a state of tension
from first to last; the most innocent remark seemed capable of exploding
resentment, and replies came out at the most unexpected angles. We Young
Liberals went about puzzled but polite to the gathering we had evoked.
The Young Liberals' tradition is on the whole wonderfully discreet,
superfluous steam is let out far away from home in the Balkans or
Africa, and the neat, stiff figures of the Cramptons, Bunting Harblow,
and Lewis, either in extremely well-cut morning coats indicative of the
House, or in what is sometimes written of as "faultless evening dress,"
stood about on those evenings, they and their very quietly and simply
and expensively dressed little wives, like a datum line amidst lakes and
mountains.

I didn't at first see the connection between systematic social
reorganisation and arbitrary novelties in dietary and costume, just as
I didn't realise why the most comprehensive constructive projects should
appear to be supported solely by odd and exceptional personalities.
On one of these evenings a little group of rather jolly-looking pretty
young people seated themselves for no particular reason in a large
circle on the floor of my study, and engaged, so far as I could judge,
in the game of Hunt the Meaning, the intellectual equivalent of Hunt the
Slipper. It must have been that same evening I came upon an unbleached
young gentleman before the oval mirror on the landing engaged in
removing the remains of an anchovy sandwich from his protruded
tongue--visible ends of cress having misled him into the belief that he
was dealing with doctrinally permissible food. It was not unusual to be
given hand-bills and printed matter by our guests, but there I had
the advantage over Lewis, who was too tactful to refuse the stuff, too
neatly dressed to pocket it, and had no writing-desk available upon
which he could relieve himself in a manner flattering to the giver. So
that his hands got fuller and fuller. A relentless, compact little woman
in what Margaret declared to be an extremely expensive black dress
has also printed herself on my memory; she had set her heart upon my
contributing to a weekly periodical in the lentil interest with which
she was associated, and I spent much time and care in evading her.

Mingling with the more hygienic types were a number of Anti-Puritan
Socialists, bulging with bias against temperance, and breaking out
against austere methods of living all over their faces. Their manner
was packed with heartiness. They were apt to choke the approaches to
the little buffet Margaret had set up downstairs, and there engage in
discussions of Determinism--it always seemed to be Determinism--which
became heartier and noisier, but never acrimonious even in the small
hours. It seemed impossible to settle about this Determinism of
theirs--ever. And there were worldly Socialists also. I particularly
recall a large, active, buoyant, lady-killing individual with an
eyeglass borne upon a broad black ribbon, who swam about us one evening.
He might have been a slightly frayed actor, in his large frock-coat,
his white waistcoat, and the sort of black and white check trousers that
twinkle. He had a high-pitched voice with aristocratic intonations, and
he seemed to be in a perpetual state of interrogation. "What are we
all he-a for?" he would ask only too audibly. "What are we doing he-a?
What's the connection?"

What WAS the connection?

We made a special effort with our last assembly in June, 1907. We tried
to get something like a representative collection of the parliamentary
leaders of Socialism, the various exponents of Socialist thought and a
number of Young Liberal thinkers into one room. Dorvil came, and Horatio
Bulch; Featherstonehaugh appeared for ten minutes and talked charmingly
to Margaret and then vanished again; there was Wilkins the novelist and
Toomer and Dr. Tumpany. Chris Robinson stood about for a time in a new
comforter, and Magdeberg and Will Pipes and five or six Labour members.
And on our side we had our particular little group, Bunting Harblow,
Crampton, Lewis, all looking as broad-minded and open to conviction as
they possibly could, and even occasionally talking out from their bushes
almost boldly. But the gathering as a whole refused either to mingle or
dispute, and as an experiment in intercourse the evening was a failure.
Unexpected dissociations appeared between Socialists one had supposed
friendly. I could not have imagined it was possible for half so many
people to turn their backs on everybody else in such small rooms as
ours. But the unsaid things those backs expressed broke out, I remarked,
with refreshed virulence in the various organs of the various sections
of the party next week.

I talked, I remember, with Dr. Tumpany, a large young man in a still
larger professional frock-coat, and with a great shock of very fair
hair, who was candidate for some North Country constituency. We
discussed the political outlook, and, like so many Socialists at that
time, he was full of vague threatenings against the Liberal party. I
was struck by a thing in him that I had already observed less vividly in
many others of these Socialist leaders, and which gave me at last a clue
to the whole business. He behaved exactly like a man in possession of
valuable patent rights, who wants to be dealt with. He had an air of
having a corner in ideas. Then it flashed into my head that the whole
Socialist movement was an attempted corner in ideas....



8


Late that night I found myself alone with Margaret amid the debris of
the gathering.

I sat before the fire, hands in pockets, and Margaret, looking white and
weary, came and leant upon the mantel.

"Oh, Lord!" said Margaret.

I agreed. Then I resumed my meditation.

"Ideas," I said, "count for more than I thought in the world."

Margaret regarded me with that neutral expression behind which she was
accustomed to wait for clues.

"When you think of the height and depth and importance and wisdom of the
Socialist ideas, and see the men who are running them," I explained....
"A big system of ideas like Socialism grows up out of the obvious common
sense of our present conditions. It's as impersonal as science. All
these men--They've given nothing to it. They're just people who have
pegged out claims upon a big intellectual No-Man's-Land--and don't feel
quite sure of the law. There's a sort of quarrelsome uneasiness....
If we professed Socialism do you think they'd welcome us? Not a man of
them! They'd feel it was burglary...."

"Yes," said Margaret, looking into the fire. "That is just what I felt
about them all the evening.... Particularly Dr. Tumpany."

"We mustn't confuse Socialism with the Socialists," I said; "that's
the moral of it. I suppose if God were to find He had made a mistake in
dates or something, and went back and annihilated everybody from Owen
onwards who was in any way known as a Socialist leader or teacher,
Socialism would be exactly where it is and what it is to-day--a growing
realisation of constructive needs in every man's mind, and a little
corner in party politics. So, I suppose, it will always be.... But they
WERE a damned lot, Margaret!"

I looked up at the little noise she made. "TWICE!" she said, smiling
indulgently, "to-day!" (Even the smile was Altiora's.)

I returned to my thoughts. They WERE a damned human lot. It was an
excellent word in that connection....

But the ideas marched on, the ideas marched on, just as though men's
brains were no more than stepping-stones, just as though some great
brain in which we are all little cells and corpuscles was thinking
them!...

"I don't think there is a man among them who makes me feel he is
trustworthy," said Margaret; "unless it is Featherstonehaugh."

I sat taking in this proposition.

"They'll never help us, I feel," said Margaret.

"Us?"

"The Liberals."

"Oh, damn the Liberals!" I said. "They'll never even help themselves."

"I don't think I could possibly get on with any of those people," said
Margaret, after a pause.

She remained for a time looking down at me and, I could feel, perplexed
by me, but I wanted to go on with my thinking, and so I did not look up,
and presently she stooped to my forehead and kissed me and went rustling
softly to her room.

I remained in my study for a long time with my thoughts crystallising
out....

It was then, I think, that I first apprehended clearly how that
opposition to which I have already alluded of the immediate life and the
mental hinterland of a man, can be applied to public and social affairs.
The ideas go on--and no person or party succeeds in embodying them. The
reality of human progress never comes to the surface, it is a power
in the deeps, an undertow. It goes on in silence while men think, in
studies where they write self-forgetfully, in laboratories under the
urgency of an impersonal curiosity, in the rare illumination of honest
talk, in moments of emotional insight, in thoughtful reading, but not
in everyday affairs. Everyday affairs and whatever is made an everyday
affair, are transactions of the ostensible self, the being of habits,
interests, usage. Temper, vanity, hasty reaction to imitation, personal
feeling, are their substance. No man can abolish his immediate self and
specialise in the depths; if he attempt that, he simply turns himself
into something a little less than the common man. He may have an immense
hinterland, but that does not absolve him from a frontage. That is the
essential error of the specialist philosopher, the specialist teacher,
the specialist publicist. They repudiate frontage; claim to be pure
hinterland. That is what bothered me about Codger, about those various
schoolmasters who had prepared me for life, about the Baileys and their
dream of an official ruling class. A human being who is a philosopher
in the first place, a teacher in the first place, or a statesman in the
first place, is thereby and inevitably, though he bring God-like gifts
to the pretence--a quack. These are attempts to live deep-side
shallow, inside out. They produce merely a new pettiness. To understand
Socialism, again, is to gain a new breadth of outlook; to join a
Socialist organisation is to join a narrow cult which is not even
tolerably serviceable in presenting or spreading the ideas for which it
stands....

I perceived I had got something quite fundamental here. It had taken me
some years to realise the true relation of the great constructive ideas
that swayed me not only to political parties, but to myself. I had
been disposed to identify the formulae of some one party with social
construction, and to regard the other as necessarily anti-constructive,
just as I had been inclined to follow the Baileys in the
self-righteousness of supposing myself to be wholly constructive. But I
saw now that every man of intellectual freedom and vigour is necessarily
constructive-minded nowadays, and that no man is disinterestedly so.
Each one of us repeats in himself the conflict of the race between the
splendour of its possibilities and its immediate associations. We may be
shaping immortal things, but we must sleep and answer the dinner gong,
and have our salt of flattery and self-approval. In politics a man
counts not for what he is in moments of imaginative expansion, but
for his common workaday, selfish self; and political parties are held
together not by a community of ultimate aims, but by the stabler bond
of an accustomed life. Everybody almost is for progress in general, and
nearly everybody is opposed to any change, except in so far as gross
increments are change, in his particular method of living and behaviour.
Every party stands essentially for the interests and mental usages of
some definite class or group of classes in the exciting community, and
every party has its scientific-minded and constructive leading section,
with well-defined hinterlands formulating its social functions in a
public-spirited form, and its superficial-minded following confessing
its meannesses and vanities and prejudices. No class will abolish
itself, materially alter its way of life, or drastically reconstruct
itself, albeit no class is indisposed to co-operate in the unlimited
socialisation of any other class. In that capacity for aggression upon
other classes lies the essential driving force of modern affairs. The
instincts, the persons, the parties, and vanities sway and struggle.
The ideas and understandings march on and achieve themselves for all--in
spite of every one....

The methods and traditions of British politics maintain the form of two
great parties, with rider groups seeking to gain specific ends in the
event of a small Government majority. These two main parties are more or
less heterogeneous in composition. Each, however, has certain necessary
characteristics. The Conservative Party has always stood quite
definitely for the established propertied interests. The land-owner,
the big lawyer, the Established Church, and latterly the huge private
monopoly of the liquor trade which has been created by temperance
legislation, are the essential Conservatives. Interwoven now with the
native wealthy are the families of the great international usurers, and
a vast miscellaneous mass of financial enterprise. Outside the range of
resistance implied by these interests, the Conservative Party has always
shown itself just as constructive and collectivist as any other party.
The great landowners have been as well-disposed towards the endowment
of higher education, and as willing to co-operate with the Church in
protective and mildly educational legislation for children and the
working class, as any political section. The financiers, too, are
adventurous-spirited and eager for mechanical progress and technical
efficiency. They are prepared to spend public money upon research,
upon ports and harbours and public communications, upon sanitation and
hygienic organisation. A certain rude benevolence of public intention is
equally characteristic of the liquor trade. Provided his comfort leads
to no excesses of temperance, the liquor trade is quite eager to see
the common man prosperous, happy, and with money to spend in a bar. All
sections of the party are aggressively patriotic and favourably inclined
to the idea of an upstanding, well-fed, and well-exercised population
in uniform. Of course there are reactionary landowners and old-fashioned
country clergy, full of localised self-importance, jealous even of the
cottager who can read, but they have neither the power nor the ability
to retard the constructive forces in the party as a whole. On the other
hand, when matters point to any definitely confiscatory proposal, to the
public ownership and collective control of land, for example, or
state mining and manufactures, or the nationalisation of the so-called
public-house or extended municipal enterprise, or even to an increase of
the taxation of property, then the Conservative Party presents a nearly
adamantine bar. It does not stand for, it IS, the existing arrangement
in these affairs.

Even more definitely a class party is the Labour Party, whose immediate
interest is to raise wages, shorten hours of labor, increase employment,
and make better terms for the working-man tenant and working-man
purchaser. Its leaders are no doubt constructive minded, but the mass
of the following is naturally suspicious of education and discipline,
hostile to the higher education, and--except for an obvious antagonism
to employers and property owners--almost destitute of ideas. What
else can it be? It stands for the expropriated multitude, whose whole
situation and difficulty arise from its individual lack of initiative
and organising power. It favours the nationalisation of land and capital
with no sense of the difficulties involved in the process; but, on the
other hand, the equally reasonable socialisation of individuals which
is implied by military service is steadily and quite naturally and quite
illogically opposed by it. It is only in recent years that Labour has
emerged as a separate party from the huge hospitable caravanserai of
Liberalism, and there is still a very marked tendency to step back again
into that multitudinous assemblage.

For multitudinousness has always been the Liberal characteristic.
Liberalism never has been nor ever can be anything but a diversified
crowd. Liberalism has to voice everything that is left out by these
other parties. It is the party against the predominating interests. It
is at once the party of the failing and of the untried; it is the party
of decadence and hope. From its nature it must be a vague and planless
association in comparison with its antagonist, neither so constructive
on the one hand, nor on the other so competent to hinder the inevitable
constructions of the civilised state. Essentially it is the party
of criticism, the "Anti" party. It is a system of hostilities and
objections that somehow achieves at times an elusive common soul. It is
a gathering together of all the smaller interests which find themselves
at a disadvantage against the big established classes, the leasehold
tenant as against the landowner, the retail tradesman as against
the merchant and the moneylender, the Nonconformist as against the
Churchman, the small employer as against the demoralising hospitable
publican, the man without introductions and broad connections against
the man who has these things. It is the party of the many small men
against the fewer prevailing men. It has no more essential reason for
loving the Collectivist state than the Conservatives; the small dealer
is doomed to absorption in that just as much as the large owner; but
it resorts to the state against its antagonists as in the middle ages
common men pitted themselves against the barons by siding with the king.
The Liberal Party is the party against "class privilege" because it
represents no class advantages, but it is also the party that is on
the whole most set against Collective control because it represents
no established responsibility. It is constructive only so far as its
antagonism to the great owner is more powerful than its jealousy of the
state. It organises only because organisation is forced upon it by the
organisation of its adversaries. It lapses in and out of alliance with
Labour as it sways between hostility to wealth and hostility to public
expenditure....

Every modern European state will have in some form or other these three
parties: the resistent, militant, authoritative, dull, and unsympathetic
party of establishment and success, the rich party; the confused,
sentimental, spasmodic, numerous party of the small, struggling,
various, undisciplined men, the poor man's party; and a third party
sometimes detaching itself from the second and sometimes reuniting with
it, the party of the altogether expropriated masses, the proletarians,
Labour. Change Conservative and Liberal to Republican and Democrat, for
example, and you have the conditions in the United States. The Crown or
a dethroned dynasty, the Established Church or a dispossessed church,
nationalist secessions, the personalities of party leaders, may break
up, complicate, and confuse the self-expression of these three necessary
divisions in the modern social drama, the analyst will make them out
none the less for that....

And then I came back as if I came back to a refrain;--the ideas go
on--as though we are all no more than little cells and corpuscles in
some great brain beyond our understanding....

So it was I sat and thought my problem out.... I still remember my
satisfaction at seeing things plainly at last. It was like clouds
dispersing to show the sky. Constructive ideas, of course, couldn't hold
a party together alone, "interests and habits, not ideas," I had that
now, and so the great constructive scheme of Socialism, invading and
inspiring all parties, was necessarily claimed only by this collection
of odds and ends, this residuum of disconnected and exceptional people.
This was true not only of the Socialist idea, but of the scientific
idea, the idea of veracity--of human confidence in humanity--of all that
mattered in human life outside the life of individuals.... The only real
party that would ever profess Socialism was the Labour Party, and that
in the entirely one-sided form of an irresponsible and non-constructive
attack on property. Socialism in that mutilated form, the teeth and
claws without the eyes and brain, I wanted as little as I wanted
anything in the world.

Perfectly clear it was, perfectly clear, and why hadn't I seen it
before?... I looked at my watch, and it was half-past two.

I yawned, stretched, got up and went to bed.



9


My ideas about statecraft have passed through three main phases to the
final convictions that remain. There was the first immediacy of my dream
of ports and harbours and cities, railways, roads, and administered
territories--the vision I had seen in the haze from that little church
above Locarno. Slowly that had passed into a more elaborate legislative
constructiveness, which had led to my uneasy association with the
Baileys and the professedly constructive Young Liberals. To get that
ordered life I had realised the need of organisation, knowledge,
expertness, a wide movement of co-ordinated methods. On the individual
side I thought that a life of urgent industry, temperance, and close
attention was indicated by my perception of these ends. I married
Margaret and set to work. But something in my mind refused from the
outset to accept these determinations as final. There was always a doubt
lurking below, always a faint resentment, a protesting criticism, a
feeling of vitally important omissions.

I arrived at last at the clear realisation that my political associates,
and I in my association with them, were oddly narrow, priggish, and
unreal, that the Socialists with whom we were attempting co-operation
were preposterously irrelevant to their own theories, that my political
life didn't in some way comprehend more than itself, that rather
perplexingly I was missing the thing I was seeking. Britten's footnotes
to Altiora's self-assertions, her fits of energetic planning, her
quarrels and rallies and vanities, his illuminating attacks on
Cramptonism and the heavy-spirited triviality of such Liberalism as the
Children's Charter, served to point my way to my present conclusions.
I had been trying to deal all along with human progress as something
immediate in life, something to be immediately attacked by political
parties and groups pointing primarily to that end. I now began to
see that just as in my own being there was the rather shallow, rather
vulgar, self-seeking careerist, who wore an admirable silk hat and
bustled self-consciously through the lobby, and a much greater and
indefinitely growing unpublished personality behind him--my hinterland,
I have called it--so in human affairs generally the permanent reality
is also a hinterland, which is never really immediate, which draws
continually upon human experience and influences human action more and
more, but which is itself never the actual player upon the stage. It is
the unseen dramatist who never takes a call. Now it was just through the
fact that our group about the Baileys didn't understand this, that with
a sort of frantic energy they were trying to develop that sham expert
officialdom of theirs to plan, regulate, and direct the affairs of
humanity, that the perplexing note of silliness and shallowness that I
had always felt and felt now most acutely under Britten's gibes, came
in. They were neglecting human life altogether in social organisation.

In the development of intellectual modesty lies the growth of
statesmanship. It has been the chronic mistake of statecraft and all
organising spirits to attempt immediately to scheme and arrange and
achieve. Priests, schools of thought, political schemers, leaders of
men, have always slipped into the error of assuming that they can think
out the whole--or at any rate completely think out definite parts--of
the purpose and future of man, clearly and finally; they have set
themselves to legislate and construct on that assumption, and,
experiencing the perplexing obduracy and evasions of reality, they have
taken to dogma, persecution, training, pruning, secretive education; and
all the stupidities of self-sufficient energy. In the passion of their
good intentions they have not hesitated to conceal fact, suppress
thought, crush disturbing initiatives and apparently detrimental
desires. And so it is blunderingly and wastefully, destroying with
the making, that any extension of social organisation is at present
achieved.

Directly, however, this idea of an emancipation from immediacy is
grasped, directly the dominating importance of this critical, less
personal, mental hinterland in the individual and of the collective mind
in the race is understood, the whole problem of the statesman and
his attitude towards politics gain a new significance, and becomes
accessible to a new series of solutions. He wants no longer to "fix
up," as people say, human affairs, but to devote his forces to the
development of that needed intellectual life without which all his
shallow attempts at fixing up are futile. He ceases to build on the
sands, and sets himself to gather foundations.

You see, I began in my teens by wanting to plan and build cities and
harbours for mankind; I ended in the middle thirties by desiring only
to serve and increase a general process of thought, a process fearless,
critical, real-spirited, that would in its own time give cities,
harbours, air, happiness, everything at a scale and quality and in
a light altogether beyond the match-striking imaginations of a
contemporary mind. I wanted freedom of speech and suggestion, vigour of
thought, and the cultivation of that impulse of veracity that lurks
more or less discouraged in every man. With that I felt there must go an
emotion. I hit upon a phrase that became at last something of a refrain
in my speech and writings, to convey the spirit that I felt was at the
very heart of real human progress--love and fine thinking.

(I suppose that nowadays no newspaper in England gets through a week
without the repetition of that phrase.)

My convictions crystallised more and more definitely upon this. The
more of love and fine thinking the better for men, I said; the less,
the worse. And upon this fresh basis I set myself to examine what I as
a politician might do. I perceived I was at last finding an adequate
expression for all that was in me, for those forces that had rebelled at
the crude presentations of Bromstead, at the secrecies and suppressions
of my youth, at the dull unrealities of City Merchants, at the
conventions and timidities of the Pinky Dinkys, at the philosophical
recluse of Trinity and the phrases and tradition-worship of my political
associates. None of these things were half alive, and I wanted life to
be intensely alive and awake. I wanted thought like an edge of steel and
desire like a flame. The real work before mankind now, I realised once
and for all, is the enlargement of human expression, the release and
intensification of human thought, the vivider utilisation of experience
and the invigoration of research--and whatever one does in human affairs
has or lacks value as it helps or hinders that.

With that I had got my problem clear, and the solution, so far as I
was concerned, lay in finding out the point in the ostensible life of
politics at which I could most subserve these ends. I was still against
the muddles of Bromstead, but I had hunted them down now to their
essential form. The jerry-built slums, the roads that went nowhere,
the tarred fences, litigious notice-boards and barbed wire fencing, the
litter and the heaps of dump, were only the outward appearances whose
ultimate realities were jerry-built conclusions, hasty purposes, aimless
habits of thought, and imbecile bars and prohibitions in the thoughts
and souls of men. How are we through politics to get at that confusion?

We want to invigorate and reinvigorate education. We want to create a
sustained counter effort to the perpetual tendency of all educational
organisations towards classicalism, secondary issues, and the evasion of
life.

We want to stimulate the expression of life through art and literature,
and its exploration through research.

We want to make the best and finest thought accessible to every one,
and more particularly to create and sustain an enormous free criticism,
without which art, literature, and research alike degenerate into
tradition or imposture.

Then all the other problems which are now so insoluble, destitution,
disease, the difficulty of maintaining international peace, the scarcely
faced possibility of making life generally and continually beautiful,
become--EASY....

It was clear to me that the most vital activities in which I could
engage would be those which most directly affected the Church, public
habits of thought, education, organised research, literature, and the
channels of general discussion. I had to ask myself how my position
as Liberal member for Kinghamstead squared with and conduced to this
essential work.



CHAPTER THE SECOND ~~ SEEKING ASSOCIATES



1


I have told of my gradual abandonment of the pretensions and habits of
party Liberalism. In a sense I was moving towards aristocracy. Regarding
the development of the social and individual mental hinterland as the
essential thing in human progress, I passed on very naturally to the
practical assumption that we wanted what I may call "hinterlanders." Of
course I do not mean by aristocracy the changing unorganised medley of
rich people and privileged people who dominate the civilised world of
to-day, but as opposed to this, a possibility of co-ordinating the will
of the finer individuals, by habit and literature, into a broad common
aim. We must have an aristocracy--not of privilege, but of understanding
and purpose--or mankind will fail. I find this dawning more and more
clearly when I look through my various writings of the years between
1903 and 1910. I was already emerging to plain statements in 1908.

I reasoned after this fashion. The line of human improvement and the
expansion of human life lies in the direction of education and finer
initiatives. If humanity cannot develop an education far beyond anything
that is now provided, if it cannot collectively invent devices and solve
problems on a much richer, broader scale than it does at the present
time, it cannot hope to achieve any very much finer order or any more
general happiness than it now enjoys. We must believe, therefore, that
it CAN develop such a training and education, or we must abandon secular
constructive hope. And here my peculiar difficulty as against crude
democracy comes in. If humanity at large is capable of that high
education and those creative freedoms our hope demands, much more must
its better and more vigorous types be so capable. And if those who have
power and leisure now, and freedom to respond to imaginative appeals,
cannot be won to the idea of collective self-development, then the whole
of humanity cannot be won to that. From that one passes to what
has become my general conception in politics, the conception of the
constructive imagination working upon the vast complex of powerful
people, clever people, enterprising people, influential people, amidst
whom power is diffused to-day, to produce that self-conscious, highly
selective, open-minded, devoted aristocratic culture, which seems to me
to be the necessary next phase in the development of human affairs.
I see human progress, not as the spontaneous product of crowds of raw
minds swayed by elementary needs, but as a natural but elaborate result
of intricate human interdependencies, of human energy and curiosity
liberated and acting at leisure, of human passions and motives, modified
and redirected by literature and art....

But now the reader will understand how it came about that, disappointed
by the essential littleness of Liberalism, and disillusioned about the
representative quality of the professed Socialists, I turned my
mind more and more to a scrutiny of the big people, the wealthy and
influential people, against whom Liberalism pits its forces. I was
asking myself definitely whether, after all, it was not my particular
job to work through them and not against them. Was I not altogether out
of my element as an Anti-? Weren't there big bold qualities about these
people that common men lack, and the possibility of far more splendid
dreams? Were they really the obstacles, might they not be rather the
vehicles of the possible new braveries of life?



2


The faults of the Imperialist movement were obvious enough. The
conception of the Boer War had been clumsy and puerile, the costly
errors of that struggle appalling, and the subsequent campaign of Mr.
Chamberlain for Tariff Reform seemed calculated to combine the financial
adventurers of the Empire in one vast conspiracy against the consumer.
The cant of Imperialism was easy to learn and use; it was speedily
adopted by all sorts of base enterprises and turned to all sorts of base
ends. But a big child is permitted big mischief, and my mind was
now continually returning to the persuasion that after all in some
development of the idea of Imperial patriotism might be found that wide,
rough, politically acceptable expression of a constructive dream capable
of sustaining a great educational and philosophical movement such as
no formula of Liberalism supplied. The fact that it readily took vulgar
forms only witnessed to its strong popular appeal. Mixed in with the
noisiness and humbug of the movement there appeared a real regard for
social efficiency, a real spirit of animation and enterprise. There
suddenly appeared in my world--I saw them first, I think, in 1908--a
new sort of little boy, a most agreeable development of the slouching,
cunning, cigarette-smoking, town-bred youngster, a small boy in a khaki
hat, and with bare knees and athletic bearing, earnestly engaged in
wholesome and invigorating games up to and occasionally a little beyond
his strength--the Boy Scout. I liked the Boy Scout, and I find it
difficult to express how much it mattered to me, with my growing bias in
favour of deliberate national training, that Liberalism hadn't been able
to produce, and had indeed never attempted to produce, anything of this
kind.



3


In those days there existed a dining club called--there was some lost
allusion to the exorcism of party feeling in its title--the Pentagram
Circle. It included Bailey and Dayton and myself, Sir Herbert Thorns,
Lord Charles Kindling, Minns the poet, Gerbault the big railway man,
Lord Gane, fresh from the settlement of Framboya, and Rumbold, who later
became Home Secretary and left us. We were men of all parties and very
various experiences, and our object was to discuss the welfare of the
Empire in a disinterested spirit. We dined monthly at the Mermaid in
Westminster, and for a couple of years we kept up an average attendance
of ten out of fourteen. The dinner-time was given up to desultory
conversation, and it is odd how warm and good the social atmosphere of
that little gathering became as time went on; then over the dessert, so
soon as the waiters had swept away the crumbs and ceased to fret us, one
of us would open with perhaps fifteen or twenty minutes' exposition
of some specially prepared question, and after him we would deliver
ourselves in turn, each for three or four minutes. When every one
present had spoken once talk became general again, and it was rare we
emerged upon Hendon Street before midnight. Sometimes, as my house
was conveniently near, a knot of men would come home with me and go on
talking and smoking in my dining-room until two or three. We had Fred
Neal, that wild Irish journalist, among us towards the end, and his
stupendous flow of words materially prolonged our closing discussions
and made our continuance impossible.

I learned very much and very many things at those dinners, but more
particularly did I become familiarised with the habits of mind of such
men as Neal, Crupp, Gane, and the one or two other New Imperialists
who belonged to us. They were nearly all like Bailey Oxford men, though
mostly of a younger generation, and they were all mysteriously and
inexplicably advocates of Tariff Reform, as if it were the principal
instead of at best a secondary aspect of constructive policy. They
seemed obsessed by the idea that streams of trade could be diverted
violently so as to link the parts of the Empire by common interests, and
they were persuaded, I still think mistakenly, that Tariff Reform would
have an immense popular appeal. They were also very keen on military
organisation, and with a curious little martinet twist in their minds
that boded ill for that side of public liberty. So much against them.
But they were disposed to spend money much more generously on education
and research of all sorts than our formless host of Liberals seemed
likely to do; and they were altogether more accessible than the Young
Liberals to bold, constructive ideas affecting the universities and
upper classes. The Liberals are abjectly afraid of the universities.
I found myself constantly falling into line with these men in our
discussions, and more and more hostile to Dayton's sentimentalising
evasions of definite schemes and Minns' trust in such things as the
"Spirit of our People" and the "General Trend of Progress." It wasn't
that I thought them very much righter than their opponents; I believe
all definite party "sides" at any time are bound to be about equally
right and equally lop-sided; but that I thought I could get more out
of them and what was more important to me, more out of myself if I
co-operated with them. By 1908 I had already arrived at a point where I
could be definitely considering a transfer of my political allegiance.

These abstract questions are inseparably interwoven with my memory of a
shining long white table, and our hock bottles and burgundy bottles, and
bottles of Perrier and St. Galmier and the disturbed central trophy of
dessert, and scattered glasses and nut-shells and cigarette-ends and
menu-cards used for memoranda. I see old Dayton sitting back and cocking
his eye to the ceiling in a way he had while he threw warmth into the
ancient platitudes of Liberalism, and Minns leaning forward, and a
little like a cockatoo with a taste for confidences, telling us in a
hushed voice of his faith in the Destiny of Mankind. Thorns lounges,
rolling his round face and round eyes from speaker to speaker and
sounding the visible depths of misery whenever Neal begins. Gerbault
and Gane were given to conversation in undertones, and Bailey pursued
mysterious purposes in lisping whispers. It was Crupp attracted me most.
He had, as people say, his eye on me from the beginning. He used to
speak at me, and drifted into a custom of coming home with me very
regularly for an after-talk.

He opened his heart to me.

"Neither of us," he said, "are dukes, and neither of us are horny-handed
sons of toil. We want to get hold of the handles, and to do that, one
must go where the power is, and give it just as constructive a twist as
we can. That's MY Toryism."

"Is it Kindling's--or Gerbault's?"

"No. But theirs is soft, and mine's hard. Mine will wear theirs out. You
and I and Bailey are all after the same thing, and why aren't we working
together?"

"Are you a Confederate?" I asked suddenly.

"That's a secret nobody tells," he said.

"What are the Confederates after?"

"Making aristocracy work, I suppose. Just as, I gather, you want to
do."...

The Confederates were being heard of at that time. They were at once
attractive and repellent to me, an odd secret society whose membership
nobody knew, pledged, it was said, to impose Tariff Reform and an ample
constructive policy upon the Conservatives. In the press, at any rate,
they had an air of deliberately organised power. I have no doubt the
rumour of them greatly influenced my ideas....

In the end I made some very rapid decisions, but for nearly two years I
was hesitating. Hesitations were inevitable in such a matter. I was
not dealing with any simple question of principle, but with elusive and
fluctuating estimates of the trend of diverse forces and of the nature
of my own powers. All through that period I was asking over and over
again: how far are these Confederates mere dreamers? How far--and this
was more vital--are they rendering lip-service to social organisations?
Is it true they desire war because it confirms the ascendency of their
class? How far can Conservatism be induced to plan and construct before
it resists the thrust towards change. Is it really in bulk anything more
than a mass of prejudice and conceit, cynical indulgence, and a hard
suspicion of and hostility to the expropriated classes in the community?

That is a research which yields no statistics, an enquiry like asking
what is the ruling colour of a chameleon. The shadowy answer varied
with my health, varied with my mood and the conduct of the people I was
watching. How fine can people be? How generous?--not incidentally, but
all round? How far can you educate sons beyond the outlook of their
fathers, and how far lift a rich, proud, self-indulgent class above the
protests of its business agents and solicitors and its own habits and
vanity? Is chivalry in a class possible?--was it ever, indeed, or will
it ever indeed be possible? Is the progress that seems attainable in
certain directions worth the retrogression that may be its price?



4


It was to the Pentagram Circle that I first broached the new conceptions
that were developing in my mind. I count the evening of my paper the
beginning of the movement that created the BLUE WEEKLY and our wing of
the present New Tory party. I do that without any excessive egotism,
because my essay was no solitary man's production; it was my reaction
to forces that had come to me very large through my fellow-members; its
quick reception by them showed that I was, so to speak, merely the first
of the chestnuts to pop. The atmospheric quality of the evening stands
out very vividly in my memory. The night, I remember, was warmly foggy
when after midnight we went to finish our talk at my house.

We had recently changed the rules of the club to admit visitors, and
so it happened that I had brought Britten, and Crupp introduced Arnold
Shoesmith, my former schoolfellow at City Merchants, and now the
wealthy successor of his father and elder brother. I remember his heavy,
inexpressively handsome face lighting to his rare smile at the sight of
me, and how little I dreamt of the tragic entanglement that was destined
to involve us both. Gane was present, and Esmeer, a newly-added
member, but I think Bailey was absent. Either he was absent, or he said
something so entirely characteristic and undistinguished that it has
left no impression on my mind.

I had broken a little from the traditions of the club even in my title,
which was deliberately a challenge to the liberal idea: it was, "The
World Exists for Exceptional People." It is not the title I should
choose now--for since that time I have got my phrase of "mental
hinterlander" into journalistic use. I should say now, "The World Exists
for Mental Hinterland."

The notes I made of that opening have long since vanished with a
thousand other papers, but some odd chance has preserved and brought
with me to Italy the menu for the evening; its back black with the
scrawled notes I made of the discussion for my reply. I found it the
other day among some letters from Margaret and a copy of the 1909 Report
of the Poor Law Commission, also rich with pencilled marginalia.

My opening was a criticism of the democratic idea and method, upon lines
such as I have already sufficiently indicated in the preceding sections.
I remember how old Dayton fretted in his chair, and tushed and pished
at that, even as I gave it, and afterwards we were treated to one of his
platitudinous harangues, he sitting back in his chair with that small
obstinate eye of his fixed on the ceiling, and a sort of cadaverous glow
upon his face, repeating--quite regardless of all my reasoning and all
that had been said by others in the debate--the sacred empty phrases
that were his soul's refuge from reality. "You may think it very
clever," he said with a nod of his head to mark his sense of his point,
"not to Trust in the People. I do." And so on. Nothing in his life or
work had ever shown that he did trust in the people, but that was
beside the mark. He was the party Liberal, and these were the party
incantations.

After my preliminary attack on vague democracy I went on to show that
all human life was virtually aristocratic; people must either recognise
aristocracy in general or else follow leaders, which is aristocracy in
particular, and so I came to my point that the reality of human progress
lay necessarily through the establishment of freedoms for the human best
and a collective receptivity and understanding. There was a disgusted
grunt from Dayton, "Superman rubbish--Nietzsche. Shaw! Ugh!" I sailed on
over him to my next propositions. The prime essential in a progressive
civilisation was the establishment of a more effective selective process
for the privilege of higher education, and the very highest educational
opportunity for the educable. We were too apt to patronise scholarship
winners, as though a scholarship was toffee given as a reward for
virtue. It wasn't any reward at all; it was an invitation to capacity.
We had no more right to drag in virtue, or any merit but quality, than
we had to involve it in a search for the tallest man. We didn't want a
mere process for the selection of good as distinguished from gifted and
able boys--"No, you DON'T," from Dayton--we wanted all the brilliant
stuff in the world concentrated upon the development of the world.
Just to exasperate Dayton further I put in a plea for gifts as against
character in educational, artistic, and legislative work. "Good
teaching," I said, "is better than good conduct. We are becoming idiotic
about character."

Dayton was too moved to speak. He slewed round upon me an eye of
agonised aversion.

I expatiated on the small proportion of the available ability that is
really serving humanity to-day. "I suppose to-day all the thought, all
the art, all the increments of knowledge that matter, are supplied so
far as the English-speaking community is concerned by--how many?--by
three or four thousand individuals. ('Less,' said Thorns.) To be
more precise, by the mental hinterlands of three or four thousand
individuals. We who know some of the band entertain no illusions as to
their innate rarity. We know that they are just the few out of many, the
few who got in our world of chance and confusion, the timely stimulus,
the apt suggestion at the fortunate moment, the needed training, the
leisure. The rest are lost in the crowd, fail through the defects of
their qualities, become commonplace workmen and second-rate professional
men, marry commonplace wives, are as much waste as the driftage of
superfluous pollen in a pine forest is waste."

"Decent honest lives!" said Dayton to his bread-crumbs, with his chin in
his necktie. "WASTE!"

"And the people who do get what we call opportunity get it usually
in extremely limited and cramping forms. No man lives a life of
intellectual productivity alone; he needs not only material and
opportunity, but helpers, resonators. Round and about what I might
call the REAL men, you want the sympathetic cooperators, who help by
understanding. It isn't that our--SALT of three or four thousand is
needlessly rare; it is sustained by far too small and undifferentiated a
public. Most of the good men we know are not really doing the very
best work of their gifts; nearly all are a little adapted, most are
shockingly adapted to some second-best use. Now, I take it, this is the
very centre and origin of the muddle, futility, and unhappiness that
distresses us; it's the cardinal problem of the state--to discover,
develop, and use the exceptional gifts of men. And I see that best
done--I drift more and more away from the common stuff of legislative
and administrative activity--by a quite revolutionary development of the
educational machinery, but by a still more unprecedented attempt to
keep science going, to keep literature going, and to keep what is
the necessary spur of all science and literature, an intelligent and
appreciative criticism going. You know none of these things have ever
been kept going hitherto; they've come unexpectedly and inexplicably."

"Hear, hear!" from Dayton, cough, nodding of the head, and an expression
of mystical profundity.

"They've lit up a civilisation and vanished, to give place to darkness
again. Now the modern state doesn't mean to go back to darkness
again--and so it's got to keep its light burning." I went on to attack
the present organisation of our schools and universities, which
seemed elaborately designed to turn the well-behaved, uncritical, and
uncreative men of each generation into the authoritative leaders of the
next, and I suggested remedies upon lines that I have already indicated
in the earlier chapters of this story....

So far I had the substance of the club with me, but I opened new
ground and set Crupp agog by confessing my doubt from which party or
combination of groups these developments of science and literature and
educational organisation could most reasonably be expected. I looked up
to find Crupp's dark little eye intent upon me.

There I left it to them.

We had an astonishingly good discussion; Neal burst once, but we emerged
from his flood after a time, and Dayton had his interlude. The rest was
all close, keen examination of my problem.

I see Crupp now with his arm bent before him on the table in a way we
had, as though it was jointed throughout its length like a lobster's
antenna, his plump, short-fingered hand crushing up a walnut shell into
smaller and smaller fragments. "Remington," he said, "has given us the
data for a movement, a really possible movement. It's not only possible,
but necessary--urgently necessary, I think, if the Empire is to go on."

"We're working altogether too much at the social basement in education
and training," said Gane. "Remington is right about our neglect of the
higher levels."

Britten made a good contribution with an analysis of what he called the
spirit of a country and what made it. "The modern community needs its
serious men to be artistic and its artists to be taken seriously," I
remember his saying. "The day has gone by for either dull responsibility
or merely witty art."

I remember very vividly how Shoesmith harped on an idea I had thrown out
of using some sort of review or weekly to express and elaborate these
conceptions of a new, severer, aristocratic culture.

"It would have to be done amazingly well," said Britten, and my mind
went back to my school days and that ancient enterprise of ours, and how
Cossington had rushed it. Well, Cossington had too many papers nowadays
to interfere with us, and we perhaps had learnt some defensive devices.

"But this thing has to be linked to some political party," said Crupp,
with his eye on me. "You can't get away from that. The Liberals," he
added, "have never done anything for research or literature."

"They had a Royal Commission on the Dramatic Censorship," said Thorns,
with a note of minute fairness. "It shows what they were made of," he
added.

"It's what I've told Remington again and again," said Crupp, "we've
got to pick up the tradition of aristocracy, reorganise it, and make it
work. But he's certainly suggested a method."

"There won't be much aristocracy to pick up," said Dayton, darkly to the
ceiling, "if the House of Lords throws out the Budget."

"All the more reason for picking it up," said Neal. "For we can't do
without it."

"Will they go to the bad, or will they rise from the ashes, aristocrats
indeed--if the Liberals come in overwhelmingly?" said Britten.

"It's we who might decide that," said Crupp, insidiously.

"I agree," said Gane.

"No one can tell," said Thorns. "I doubt if they will get beaten."

It was an odd, fragmentary discussion that night. We were all with ideas
in our minds at once fine and imperfect. We threw out suggestions that
showed themselves at once far inadequate, and we tried to qualify them
by minor self-contradictions. Britten, I think, got more said than any
one. "You all seem to think you want to organise people, particular
groups and classes of individuals," he insisted. "It isn't that. That's
the standing error of politicians. You want to organise a culture.
Civilisation isn't a matter of concrete groupings; it's a matter of
prevailing ideas. The problem is how to make bold, clear ideas prevail.
The question for Remington and us is just what groups of people will
most help this culture forward."

"Yes, but how are the Lords going to behave?" said Crupp. "You yourself
were asking that a little while ago."

"If they win or if they lose," Gane maintained, "there will be a
movement to reorganise aristocracy--Reform of the House of Lords,
they'll call the political form of it."

"Bailey thinks that," said some one.

"The labour people want abolition," said some one. "Let 'em," said
Thorns.

He became audible, sketching a possibility of action.

"Suppose all of us were able to work together. It's just one of those
indeterminate, confused, eventful times ahead when a steady jet of ideas
might produce enormous results."

"Leave me out of it," said Dayton, "IF you please."

"We should," said Thorns under his breath.

I took up Crupp's initiative, I remember, and expanded it.

"I believe we could do--extensive things," I insisted.

"Revivals and revisions of Toryism have been tried so often," said
Thorns, "from the Young England movement onward."

"Not one but has produced its enduring effects," I said. "It's the
peculiarity of English conservatism that it's persistently progressive
and rejuvenescent."

I think it must have been about that point that Dayton fled our
presence, after some clumsy sentence that I decided upon reflection was
intended to remind me of my duty to my party.

Then I remember Thorns firing doubts at me obliquely across the table.
"You can't run a country through its spoilt children," he said. "What
you call aristocrats are really spoilt children. They've had too much of
everything, except bracing experience."

"Children can always be educated," said Crupp.

"I said SPOILT children," said Thorns.

"Look here, Thorns!" said I. "If this Budget row leads to a storm, and
these big people get their power clipped, what's going to happen? Have
you thought of that? When they go out lock, stock, and barrel, who comes
in?"

"Nature abhors a Vacuum," said Crupp, supporting me.

"Bailey's trained officials," suggested Gane.

"Quacks with a certificate of approval from Altiora," said Thorns. "I
admit the horrors of the alternative. There'd be a massacre in three
years."

"One may go on trying possibilities for ever," I said. "One thing
emerges. Whatever accidents happen, our civilisation needs, and almost
consciously needs, a culture of fine creative minds, and all the
necessary tolerances, opennesses, considerations, that march with that.
For my own part, I think that is the Most Vital Thing. Build your ship
of state as you will; get your men as you will; I concentrate on what is
clearly the affair of my sort of man,--I want to ensure the quality of
the quarter deck."

"Hear, hear!" said Shoesmith, suddenly--his first remark for a long
time. "A first-rate figure," said Shoesmith, gripping it.

"Our danger is in missing that," I went on. "Muddle isn't ended by
transferring power from the muddle-headed few to the muddle-headed
many, and then cheating the many out of it again in the interests of
a bureaucracy of sham experts. But that seems the limit of the liberal
imagination. There is no real progress in a country, except a rise
in the level of its free intellectual activity. All other progress is
secondary and dependant. If you take on Bailey's dreams of efficient
machinery and a sort of fanatical discipline with no free-moving brains
behind it, confused ugliness becomes rigid ugliness,--that's all.
No doubt things are moving from looseness to discipline, and from
irresponsible controls to organised controls--and also and rather
contrariwise everything is becoming as people say, democratised; but
all the more need in that, for an ark in which the living element may be
saved."

"Hear, hear!" said Shoesmith, faint but pursuing.

It must have been in my house afterwards that Shoesmith became
noticeable. He seemed trying to say something vague and difficult that
he didn't get said at all on that occasion. "We could do immense things
with a weekly," he repeated, echoing Neal, I think. And there he left
off and became a mute expressiveness, and it was only afterwards, when I
was in bed, that I saw we had our capitalist in our hands....

We parted that night on my doorstep in a tremendous glow--but in that
sort of glow one doesn't act upon without much reconsideration, and it
was some months before I made my decision to follow up the indications
of that opening talk.



5


I find my thoughts lingering about the Pentagram Circle. In my
developments it played a large part, not so much by starting new trains
of thought as by confirming the practicability of things I had already
hesitatingly entertained. Discussion with these other men so prominently
involved in current affairs endorsed views that otherwise would have
seemed only a little less remote from actuality than the guardians of
Plato or the labour laws of More. Among other questions that were never
very distant from our discussions, that came apt to every topic, was
the true significance of democracy, Tariff Reform as a method of
international hostility, and the imminence of war. On the first issue
I can still recall little Bailey, glib and winking, explaining that
democracy was really just a dodge for getting assent to the ordinances
of the expert official by means of the polling booth. "If they don't
like things," said he, "they can vote for the opposition candidate
and see what happens then--and that, you see, is why we don't want
proportional representation to let in the wild men." I opened my
eyes--the lids had dropped for a moment under the caress of those smooth
sounds--to see if Bailey's artful forefinger wasn't at the side of his
predominant nose.

The international situation exercised us greatly. Our meetings were
pervaded by the feeling that all things moved towards a day of
reckoning with Germany, and I was largely instrumental in keeping up
the suggestion that India was in a state of unstable equilibrium, that
sooner or later something must happen there--something very serious to
our Empire. Dayton frankly detested these topics. He was full of
that old Middle Victorian persuasion that whatever is inconvenient or
disagreeable to the English mind could be annihilated by not thinking
about it. He used to sit low in his chair and look mulish. "Militarism,"
he would declare in a tone of the utmost moral fervour, "is a curse.
It's an unmitigated curse." Then he would cough shortly and twitch his
head back and frown, and seem astonished beyond measure that after this
conclusive statement we could still go on talking of war.

All our Imperialists were obsessed by the thought of international
conflict, and their influence revived for a time those uneasinesses that
had been aroused in me for the first time by my continental journey
with Willersley and by Meredith's "One of Our Conquerors." That
quite justifiable dread of a punishment for all the slackness, mental
dishonesty, presumption, mercenary respectability and sentimentalised
commercialism of the Victorian period, at the hands of the better
organised, more vigorous, and now far more highly civilised peoples
of Central Europe, seemed to me to have both a good and bad series of
consequences. It seemed the only thing capable of bracing English minds
to education, sustained constructive effort and research; but on the
other hand it produced the quality of a panic, hasty preparation,
impatience of thought, a wasteful and sometimes quite futile immediacy.
In 1909, for example, there was a vast clamour for eight additional
Dreadnoughts--

     "We want eight
      And we won't wait,"

but no clamour at all about our national waste of inventive talent, our
mean standard of intellectual attainment, our disingenuous criticism,
and the consequent failure to distinguish men of the quality needed to
carry on the modern type of war. Almost universally we have the wrong
men in our places of responsibility and the right men in no place
at all, almost universally we have poorly qualified, hesitating, and
resentful subordinates, because our criticism is worthless and, so
habitually as to be now almost unconsciously, dishonest. Germany is
beating England in every matter upon which competition is possible,
because she attended sedulously to her collective mind for sixty
pregnant years, because in spite of tremendous defects she is still far
more anxious for quality in achievement than we are. I remember saying
that in my paper. From that, I remember, I went on to an image that had
flashed into my mind. "The British Empire," I said, "is like some of
those early vertebrated monsters, the Brontosaurus and the Atlantosaurus
and such-like; it sacrifices intellect to character; its backbone,
that is to say,--especially in the visceral region--is bigger than its
cranium. It's no accident that things are so. We've worked for backbone.
We brag about backbone, and if the joints are anchylosed so much the
better. We're still but only half awake to our error. You can't change
that suddenly."

"Turn it round and make it go backwards," interjected Thorns.

"It's trying to do that," I said, "in places."

And afterwards Crupp declared I had begotten a nightmare which haunted
him of nights; he was trying desperately and belatedly to blow a brain
as one blows soap-bubbles on such a mezoroic saurian as I had conjured
up, while the clumsy monster's fate, all teeth and brains, crept nearer
and nearer....

I've grown, I think, since those days out of the urgency of that
apprehension. I still think a European war, and conceivably a very
humiliating war for England, may occur at no very distant date, but I
do not think there is any such heroic quality in our governing class
as will make that war catastrophic. The prevailing spirit in English
life--it is one of the essential secrets of our imperial endurance--is
one of underbred aggression in prosperity and diplomatic compromise in
moments of danger; we bully haughtily where we can and assimilate where
we must. It is not for nothing that our upper and middle-class youth is
educated by teachers of the highest character, scholars and gentlemen,
men who can pretend quite honestly that Darwinism hasn't upset the
historical fall of man, that cricket is moral training, and that
Socialism is an outrage upon the teachings of Christ. A sort of
dignified dexterity of evasion is the national reward. Germany, with a
larger population, a vigorous and irreconcilable proletariat, a bolder
intellectual training, a harsher spirit, can scarcely fail to drive us
at last to a realisation of intolerable strain. So we may never fight at
all. The war of preparations that has been going on for thirty years may
end like a sham-fight at last in an umpire's decision. We shall proudly
but very firmly take the second place. For my own part, since I love
England as much as I detest her present lethargy of soul, I pray for a
chastening war--I wouldn't mind her flag in the dirt if only her spirit
would come out of it. So I was able to shake off that earlier fear of
some final and irrevocable destruction truncating all my schemes. At the
most, a European war would be a dramatic episode in the reconstruction I
had in view.

In India, too, I no longer foresee, as once I was inclined to
see, disaster. The English rule in India is surely one of the most
extraordinary accidents that has ever happened in history. We are there
like a man who has fallen off a ladder on to the neck of an elephant,
and doesn't know what to do or how to get down. Until something happens
he remains. Our functions in India are absurd. We English do not own
that country, do not even rule it. We make nothing happen; at the most
we prevent things happening. We suppress our own literature there. Most
English people cannot even go to this land they possess; the authorities
would prevent it. If Messrs. Perowne or Cook organised a cheap tour
of Manchester operatives, it would be stopped. No one dare bring the
average English voter face to face with the reality of India, or let
the Indian native have a glimpse of the English voter. In my time I
have talked to English statesmen, Indian officials and ex-officials,
viceroys, soldiers, every one who might be supposed to know what India
signifies, and I have prayed them to tell me what they thought we were
up to there. I am not writing without my book in these matters. And
beyond a phrase or so about "even-handed justice"--and look at our
sedition trials!--they told me nothing. Time after time I have heard
of that apocryphal native ruler in the north-west, who, when asked what
would happen if we left India, replied that in a week his men would be
in the saddle, and in six months not a rupee nor a virgin would be left
in Lower Bengal. That is always given as our conclusive justification.
But is it our business to preserve the rupees and virgins of Lower
Bengal in a sort of magic inconclusiveness? Better plunder than
paralysis, better fire and sword than futility. Our flag is spread over
the peninsula, without plans, without intentions--a vast preventive.
The sum total of our policy is to arrest any discussion, any conferences
that would enable the Indians to work out a tolerable scheme of the
future for themselves. But that does not arrest the resentment of men
held back from life. Consider what it must be for the educated Indian
sitting at the feast of contemporary possibilities with his mouth gagged
and his hands bound behind him! The spirit of insurrection breaks out
in spite of espionage and seizures. Our conflict for inaction develops
stupendous absurdities. The other day the British Empire was taking off
and examining printed cotton stomach wraps for seditious emblems and
inscriptions....

In some manner we shall have to come out of India. We have had our
chance, and we have demonstrated nothing but the appalling dulness of
our national imagination. We are not good enough to do anything with
India. Codger and Flack, and Gates and Dayton, Cladingbowl in the club,
and the HOME CHURCHMAN in the home, cant about "character," worship
of strenuous force and contempt of truth; for the sake of such men and
things as these, we must abandon in fact, if not in appearance, that
empty domination. Had we great schools and a powerful teaching, could we
boast great men, had we the spirit of truth and creation in our lives,
then indeed it might be different. But a race that bears a sceptre must
carry gifts to justify it.

It does not follow that we shall be driven catastrophically from India.
That was my earlier mistake. We are not proud enough in our bones to be
ruined by India as Spain was by her empire. We may be able to abandon
India with an air of still remaining there. It is our new method. We
train our future rulers in the public schools to have a very wholesome
respect for strength, and as soon as a power arises in India in spite of
us, be it a man or a culture, or a native state, we shall be willing to
deal with it. We may or may not have a war, but our governing class will
be quick to learn when we are beaten. Then they will repeat our South
African diplomacy, and arrange for some settlement that will abandon
the reality, such as it is, and preserve the semblance of power. The
conqueror DE FACTO will become the new "loyal Briton," and the democracy
at home will be invited to celebrate our recession--triumphantly. I am
no believer in the imminent dissolution of our Empire; I am less and
less inclined to see in either India or Germany the probability of an
abrupt truncation of those slow intellectual and moral constructions
which are the essentials of statecraft.



6


I sit writing in this little loggia to the sound of dripping water--this
morning we had rain, and the roof of our little casa is still not dry,
there are pools in the rocks under the sweet chestnuts, and the torrent
that crosses the salita is full and boastful,--and I try to recall the
order of my impressions during that watching, dubious time, before I
went over to the Conservative Party. I was trying--chaotic task--to
gauge the possibilities inherent in the quality of the British
aristocracy. There comes a broad spectacular effect of wide parks,
diversified by woods and bracken valleys, and dappled with deer; of
great smooth lawns shaded by ancient trees; of big facades of sunlit
buildings dominating the country side; of large fine rooms full of
handsome, easy-mannered people. As a sort of representative picture to
set off against those other pictures of Liberals and of Socialists I
have given, I recall one of those huge assemblies the Duchess of Clynes
inaugurated at Stamford House. The place itself is one of the vastest
private houses in London, a huge clustering mass of white and gold
saloons with polished floors and wonderful pictures, and staircases and
galleries on a Gargantuan scale. And there she sought to gather all
that was most representative of English activities, and did, in fact, in
those brilliant nocturnal crowds, get samples of nearly every section
of our social and intellectual life, with a marked predominance upon the
political and social side.

I remember sitting in one of the recesses at the end of the big saloon
with Mrs. Redmondson, one of those sharp-minded, beautiful rich women
one meets so often in London, who seem to have done nothing and to be
capable of everything, and we watched the crowd--uniforms and splendours
were streaming in from a State ball--and exchanged information. I told
her about the politicians and intellectuals, and she told me about the
aristocrats, and we sharpened our wit on them and counted the percentage
of beautiful people among the latter, and wondered if the general effect
of tallness was or was not an illusion.

They were, we agreed, for the most part bigger than the average of
people in London, and a handsome lot, even when they were not subtly
individualised. "They look so well nurtured," I said, "well cared for.
I like their quiet, well-trained movements, their pleasant consideration
for each other."

"Kindly, good tempered, and at bottom utterly selfish," she said, "like
big, rather carefully trained, rather pampered children. What else can
you expect from them?"

"They are good tempered, anyhow," I witnessed, "and that's an
achievement. I don't think I could ever be content under a bad-tempered,
sentimentalism, strenuous Government. That's why I couldn't stand the
Roosevelt REGIME in America. One's chief surprise when one comes across
these big people for the first time is their admirable easiness and
a real personal modesty. I confess I admire them. Oh! I like them.
I wouldn't at all mind, I believe, giving over the country to this
aristocracy--given SOMETHING--"

"Which they haven't got."

"Which they haven't got--or they'd be the finest sort of people in the
world."

"That something?" she inquired.

"I don't know. I've been puzzling my wits to know. They've done all
sorts of things--"

"That's Lord Wrassleton," she interrupted, "whose leg was broken--you
remember?--at Spion Kop."

"It's healed very well. I like the gold lace and the white glove
resting, with quite a nice awkwardness, on the sword. When I was a
little boy I wanted to wear clothes like that. And the stars! He's got
the V. C. Most of these people here have at any rate shown pluck, you
know--brought something off."

"Not quite enough," she suggested.

"I think that's it," I said. "Not quite enough--not quite hard enough,"
I added.

She laughed and looked at me. "You'd like to make us," she said.

"What?"

"Hard."

"I don't think you'll go on if you don't get hard."

"We shan't be so pleasant if we do."

"Well, there my puzzled wits come in again. I don't see why an
aristocracy shouldn't be rather hard trained, and yet kindly. I'm not
convinced that the resources of education are exhausted. I want to
better this, because it already looks so good."

"How are we to do it?" asked Mrs. Redmondson.

"Oh, there you have me! I've been spending my time lately in trying to
answer that! It makes me quarrel with"--I held up my fingers and ticked
the items off--"the public schools, the private tutors, the army exams,
the Universities, the Church, the general attitude of the country
towards science and literature--"

"We all do," said Mrs. Redmondson. "We can't begin again at the
beginning," she added.

"Couldn't one," I nodded at the assembly in general, start a movement?

"There's the Confederates," she said, with a faint smile that masked a
gleam of curiosity.... "You want," she said, "to say to the aristocracy,
'Be aristocrats. NOBLESSE OBLIGE.' Do you remember what happened to the
monarch who was told to 'Be a King'?"

"Well," I said, "I want an aristocracy."

"This," she said, smiling, "is the pick of them. The backwoodsmen are
off the stage. These are the brilliant ones--the smart and the blues....
They cost a lot of money, you know."

So far Mrs. Redmondson, but the picture remained full of things not
stated in our speech. They were on the whole handsome people, charitable
minded, happy, and easy. They led spacious lives, and there was
something free and fearless about their bearing that I liked extremely.
The women particularly were wide-reading, fine-thinking. Mrs. Redmondson
talked as fully and widely and boldly as a man, and with those flashes
of intuition, those startling, sudden delicacies of perception few men
display. I liked, too, the relations that held between women and men,
their general tolerance, their antagonism to the harsh jealousies that
are the essence of the middle-class order....

After all, if one's aim resolved itself into the development of a type
and culture of men, why shouldn't one begin at this end?

It is very easy indeed to generalise about a class or human beings, but
much harder to produce a sample. Was old Lady Forthundred, for instance,
fairly a sample? I remember her as a smiling, magnificent presence, a
towering accumulation of figure and wonderful shimmering blue silk and
black lace and black hair, and small fine features and chins and chins
and chins, disposed in a big cane chair with wraps and cushions upon the
great terrace of Champneys. Her eye was blue and hard, and her accent
and intonation were exactly what you would expect from a rather
commonplace dressmaker pretending to be aristocratic. I was, I am
afraid, posing a little as the intelligent but respectful inquirer from
below investigating the great world, and she was certainly posing as my
informant. She affected a cynical coarseness. She developed a theory on
the governance of England, beautifully frank and simple. "Give 'um all
a peerage when they get twenty thousand a year," she maintained. "That's
my remedy."

In my new role of theoretical aristocrat I felt a little abashed.

"Twenty thousand," she repeated with conviction.

It occurred to me that I was in the presence of the aristocratic
theory currently working as distinguished from my as yet unformulated
intentions.

"You'll get a lot of loafers and scamps among 'um," said Lady
Forthundred. "You get loafers and scamps everywhere, but you'll get a
lot of men who'll work hard to keep things together, and that's what
we're all after, isn't ut?

"It's not an ideal arrangement."

"Tell me anything better," said Lady Forthundred.

On the whole, and because she refused emphatically to believe in
education, Lady Forthundred scored.

We had been discussing Cossington's recent peerage, for Cossington, my
old schoolfellow at City Merchants', and my victor in the affair of
the magazine, had clambered to an amazing wealth up a piled heap of
energetically pushed penny and halfpenny magazines, and a group of
daily newspapers. I had expected to find the great lady hostile to the
new-comer, but she accepted him, she gloried in him.

"We're a peerage," she said, "but none of us have ever had any nonsense
about nobility."

She turned and smiled down on me. "We English," she said, "are a
practical people. We assimilate 'um."

"Then, I suppose, they don't give trouble?"

"Then they don't give trouble."

"They learn to shoot?"

"And all that," said Lady Forthundred. "Yes. And things go on. Sometimes
better than others, but they go on--somehow. It depends very much on the
sort of butler who pokes 'um about."

I suggested that it might be possible to get a secure twenty thousand a
year by at least detrimental methods--socially speaking.

"We must take the bad and the good of 'um," said Lady Forthundred,
courageously....

Now, was she a sample? It happened she talked. What was there in the
brains of the multitude of her first, second, third, fourth, and fifth
cousins, who didn't talk, who shone tall, and bearing themselves finely,
against a background of deft, attentive maids and valets, on every
spacious social scene? How did things look to them?



7


Side by side with Lady Forthundred, it is curious to put Evesham with
his tall, bent body, his little-featured almost elvish face, his unequal
mild brown eyes, his gentle manner, his sweet, amazing oratory. He led
all these people wonderfully. He was always curious and interested about
life, wary beneath a pleasing frankness--and I tormented my brain to get
to the bottom of him. For a long time he was the most powerful man in
England under the throne; he had the Lords in his hand, and a great
majority in the Commons, and the discontents and intrigues that are the
concomitants of an overwhelming party advantage broke against him as
waves break against a cliff. He foresaw so far in these matters that it
seemed he scarcely troubled to foresee. He brought political art to
the last triumph of naturalness. Always for me he has been the typical
aristocrat, so typical and above the mere forms of aristocracy, that he
remained a commoner to the end of his days.

I had met him at the beginning of my career; he read some early papers
of mine, and asked to see me, and I conceived a flattered liking for him
that strengthened to a very strong feeling indeed. He seemed to me to
stand alone without an equal, the greatest man in British political
life. Some men one sees through and understands, some one cannot see
into or round because they are of opaque clay, but about Evesham I had a
sense of things hidden as it were by depth and mists, because he was so
big and atmospheric a personality. No other contemporary has had that
effect upon me. I've sat beside him at dinners, stayed in houses with
him--he was in the big house party at Champneys--talked to him,
sounded him, watching him as I sat beside him. I could talk to him with
extraordinary freedom and a rare sense of being understood. Other men
have to be treated in a special manner; approached through their own
mental dialect, flattered by a minute regard for what they have said and
done. Evesham was as widely and charitably receptive as any man I have
ever met. The common politicians beside him seemed like rows of stuffy
little rooms looking out upon the sea.

And what was he up to? What did HE think we were doing with Mankind?
That I thought worth knowing.

I remember his talking on one occasion at the Hartsteins', at a dinner
so tremendously floriferous and equipped that we were almost forced into
duologues, about the possible common constructive purpose in politics.

"I feel so much," he said, "that the best people in every party
converge. We don't differ at Westminster as they do in the country
towns. There's a sort of extending common policy that goes on under
every government, because on the whole it's the right thing to do, and
people know it. Things that used to be matters of opinion become matters
of science--and cease to be party questions."

He instanced education.

"Apart," said I, "from the religious question."

"Apart from the religious question."

He dropped that aspect with an easy grace, and went on with his general
theme that political conflict was the outcome of uncertainty. "Directly
you get a thing established, so that people can say, 'Now this is
Right,' with the same conviction that people can say water is a
combination of oxygen and hydrogen, there's no more to be said. The
thing has to be done...."

And to put against this effect of Evesham, broad and humanely tolerant,
posing as the minister of a steadily developing constructive conviction,
there are other memories.

Have I not seen him in the House, persistent, persuasive, indefatigable,
and by all my standards wickedly perverse, leaning over the table with
those insistent movements of his hand upon it, or swaying forward with
a grip upon his coat lapel, fighting with a diabolical skill to preserve
what are in effect religious tests, tests he must have known would
outrage and humiliate and injure the consciences of a quarter--and that
perhaps the best quarter--of the youngsters who come to the work of
elementary education?

In playing for points in the game of party advantage Evesham displayed
at times a quite wicked unscrupulousness in the use of his subtle mind.
I would sit on the Liberal benches and watch him, and listen to his
urbane voice, fascinated by him. Did he really care? Did anything matter
to him? And if it really mattered nothing, why did he trouble to serve
the narrowness and passion of his side? Or did he see far beyond my
scope, so that this petty iniquity was justified by greater, remoter
ends of which I had no intimation?

They accused him of nepotism. His friends and family were certainly well
cared for. In private life he was full of an affectionate intimacy; he
pleased by being charmed and pleased. One might think at times there was
no more of him than a clever man happily circumstanced, and finding an
interest and occupation in politics. And then came a glimpse of thought,
of imagination, like the sight of a soaring eagle through a staircase
skylight. Oh, beyond question he was great! No other contemporary
politician had his quality. In no man have I perceived so
sympathetically the great contrast between warm, personal things and the
white dream of statecraft. Except that he had it seemed no hot passions,
but only interests and fine affections and indolences, he paralleled the
conflict of my life. He saw and thought widely and deeply; but at times
it seemed to me his greatness stood over and behind the reality of his
life, like some splendid servant, thinking his own thoughts, who waits
behind a lesser master's chair....



8


Of course, when Evesham talked of this ideal of the organised state
becoming so finely true to practicability and so clearly stated as to
have the compelling conviction of physical science, he spoke quite after
my heart. Had he really embodied the attempt to realise that, I could
have done no more than follow him blindly. But neither he nor I embodied
that, and there lies the gist of my story. And when it came to a study
of others among the leading Tories and Imperialists the doubt increased,
until with some at last it was possible to question whether they had any
imaginative conception of constructive statecraft at all; whether they
didn't opaquely accept the world for what it was, and set themselves
single-mindedly to make a place for themselves and cut a figure in it.

There were some very fine personalities among them: there were the great
peers who had administered Egypt, India, South Africa, Framboya--Cromer,
Kitchener, Curzon, Milner, Gane, for example. So far as that easier
task of holding sword and scales had gone, they had shown the finest
qualities, but they had returned to the perplexing and exacting problem
of the home country, a little glorious, a little too simply bold. They
wanted to arm and they wanted to educate, but the habit of immediate
necessity made them far more eager to arm than to educate, and their
experience of heterogeneous controls made them overrate the need for
obedience in a homogeneous country. They didn't understand raw men,
ill-trained men, uncertain minds, and intelligent women; and these are
the things that matter in England.... There were also the great business
adventurers, from Cranber to Cossington (who was now Lord Paddockhurst).
My mind remained unsettled, and went up and down the scale between
a belief in their far-sighted purpose and the perception of crude
vanities, coarse ambitions, vulgar competitiveness, and a mere habitual
persistence in the pursuit of gain. For a time I saw a good deal of
Cossington--I wish I had kept a diary of his talk and gestures, to mark
how he could vary from day to day between a POSEUR, a smart tradesman,
and a very bold and wide-thinking political schemer. He had a vanity
of sweeping actions, motor car pounces, Napoleonic rushes, that led to
violent ineffectual changes in the policy of his papers, and a haunting
pursuit by parallel columns in the liberal press that never abashed him
in the slightest degree. By an accident I plumbed the folly in him--but
I feel I never plumbed his wisdom. I remember him one day after a lunch
at the Barhams' saying suddenly, out of profound meditation over the end
of a cigar, one of those sentences that seem to light the whole interior
being of a man. "Some day," he said softly, rather to himself than to
me, and A PROPOS of nothing--"some day I will raise the country."

"Why not?" I said, after a pause, and leant across him for the little
silver spirit-lamp, to light my cigarette....

Then the Tories had for another section the ancient creations, and again
there were the financial peers, men accustomed to reserve, and their big
lawyers, accustomed to--well, qualified statement. And below the giant
personalities of the party were the young bloods, young, adventurous men
of the type of Lord Tarvrille, who had seen service in South Africa,
who had travelled and hunted; explorers, keen motorists, interested
in aviation, active in army organisation. Good, brown-faced stuff they
were, but impervious to ideas outside the range of their activities,
more ignorant of science than their chauffeurs, and of the quality
of English people than welt-politicians; contemptuous of school and
university by reason of the Gateses and Flacks and Codgers who had come
their way, witty, light-hearted, patriotic at the Kipling level, with
a certain aptitude for bullying. They varied in insensible gradations
between the noble sportsmen on the one hand, and men like Gane and the
Tories of our Pentagram club on the other. You perceive how a man
might exercise his mind in the attempt to strike an average of public
serviceability in this miscellany! And mixed up with these, mixed up
sometimes in the same man, was the pure reactionary, whose predominant
idea was that the village schools should confine themselves to teaching
the catechism, hat-touching and courtesying, and be given a holiday
whenever beaters were in request....

I find now in my mind as a sort of counterpoise to Evesham the figure
of old Lord Wardingham, asleep in the largest armchair in the library
of Stamford Court after lunch. One foot rested on one of those things--I
think they are called gout stools. He had been playing golf all the
morning and wearied a weak instep; at lunch he had sat at my table and
talked in the overbearing manner permitted to irascible important men
whose insteps are painful. Among other things he had flouted the idea
that women would ever understand statecraft or be more than a nuisance
in politics, denied flatly that Hindoos were capable of anything
whatever except excesses in population, regretted he could not
censor picture galleries and circulating libraries, and declared that
dissenters were people who pretended to take theology seriously with the
express purpose of upsetting the entirely satisfactory compromise of the
Established Church. "No sensible people, with anything to gain or lose,
argue about religion," he said. "They mean mischief." Having delivered
his soul upon these points, and silenced the little conversation to the
left of him from which they had arisen, he became, after an appreciative
encounter with a sanguinary woodcock, more amiable, responded to some
respectful initiatives of Crupp's, and related a number of classical
anecdotes of those blighting snubs, vindictive retorts and scandalous
miscarriages of justice that are so dear to the forensic mind. Now he
reposed. He was breathing heavily with his mouth a little open and his
head on one side. One whisker was turned back against the comfortable
padding. His plump strong hands gripped the arms of his chair, and his
frown was a little assuaged. How tremendously fed up he looked! Honours,
wealth, influence, respect, he had them all. How scornful and hard it
had made his unguarded expression!

I note without comment that it didn't even occur to me then to wake him
up and ask him what HE was up to with mankind.



9


One countervailing influence to my drift to Toryism in those days was
Margaret's quite religious faith in the Liberals. I realised that slowly
and with a mild astonishment. It set me, indeed, even then questioning
my own change of opinion. We came at last incidentally, as our way was,
to an exchange of views. It was as nearly a quarrel as we had before
I came over to the Conservative side. It was at Champneys, and I think
during the same visit that witnessed my exploration of Lady Forthundred.
It arose indirectly, I think, out of some comments of mine upon our
fellow-guests, but it is one of those memories of which the scene and
quality remain more vivid than the things said, a memory without any
very definite beginning or end. It was afternoon, in the pause between
tea and the dressing bell, and we were in Margaret's big silver-adorned,
chintz-bright room, looking out on the trim Italian garden.... Yes, the
beginning of it has escaped me altogether, but I remember it as an odd
exceptional little wrangle.

At first we seem to have split upon the moral quality of the
aristocracy, and I had an odd sense that in some way too feminine for
me to understand our hostess had aggrieved her. She said, I know, that
Champneys distressed her; made her "eager for work and reality again."

"But aren't these people real?"

"They're so superficial, so extravagant!"

I said I was not shocked by their unreality. They seemed the least
affected people I had ever met. "And are they really so extravagant?"
I asked, and put it to her that her dresses cost quite as much as any
other woman's in the house.

"It's not only their dresses," Margaret parried. "It's the scale and
spirit of things."

I questioned that. "They're cynical," said Margaret, staring before her
out of the window.

I challenged her, and she quoted the Brabants, about whom there had
been an ancient scandal. She'd heard of it from Altiora, and it was also
Altiora who'd given her a horror of Lord Carnaby, who was also with us.
"You know his reputation," said Margaret. "That Normandy girl. Every
one knows about it. I shiver when I look at him. He seems--oh! like
something not of OUR civilisation. He WILL come and say little things to
me."

"Offensive things?"

"No, politenesses and things. Of course his manners are--quite right.
That only makes it worse, I think. It shows he might have helped--all
that happened. I do all I can to make him see I don't like him. But none
of the others make the slightest objection to him."

"Perhaps these people imagine something might be said for him."

"That's just it," said Margaret.

"Charity," I suggested.

"I don't like that sort of toleration."

I was oddly annoyed. "Like eating with publicans and sinners," I said.
"No!..."

But scandals, and the contempt for rigid standards their condonation
displayed, weren't more than the sharp edge of the trouble. "It's their
whole position, their selfish predominance, their class conspiracy
against the mass of people," said Margaret. "When I sit at dinner
in that splendid room, with its glitter and white reflections and
candlelight, and its flowers and its wonderful service and its
candelabra of solid gold, I seem to feel the slums and the mines and the
over-crowded cottages stuffed away under the table."

I reminded Margaret that she was not altogether innocent of unearned
increment.

"But aren't we doing our best to give it back?" she said.

I was moved to question her. "Do you really think," I asked, "that the
Tories and peers and rich people are to blame for social injustice as we
have it to-day? Do you really see politics as a struggle of light on the
Liberal side against darkness on the Tory?"

"They MUST know," said Margaret.

I found myself questioning that. I see now that to Margaret it must have
seemed the perversest carping against manifest things, but at the time
I was concentrated simply upon the elucidation of her view and my own; I
wanted to get at her conception in the sharpest, hardest lines that were
possible. It was perfectly clear that she saw Toryism as the diabolical
element in affairs. The thing showed in its hopeless untruth all the
clearer for the fine, clean emotion with which she gave it out to me.
My sleeping peer in the library at Stamford Court and Evesham talking
luminously behind the Hartstein flowers embodied the devil, and my
replete citizen sucking at his cigar in the National Liberal Club,
Willie Crampton discussing the care and management of the stomach over
a specially hygienic lemonade, and Dr. Tumpany in his aggressive
frock-coat pegging out a sort of copyright in Socialism, were the centre
and wings of the angelic side. It was nonsense. But how was I to put the
truth to her?

"I don't see things at all as you do," I said. "I don't see things in
the same way."

"Think of the poor," said Margaret, going off at a tangent.

"Think of every one," I said. "We Liberals have done more mischief
through well-intentioned benevolence than all the selfishness in the
world could have done. We built up the liquor interest."

"WE!" cried Margaret. "How can you say that? It's against us."

"Naturally. But we made it a monopoly in our clumsy efforts to prevent
people drinking what they liked, because it interfered with industrial
regularity--"

"Oh!" cried Margaret, stung; and I could see she thought I was talking
mere wickedness.

"That's it," I said.

"But would you have people drink whatever they pleased?"

"Certainly. What right have I to dictate to other men and women?"

"But think of the children!"

"Ah! there you have the folly of modern Liberalism, its half-cunning,
half-silly way of getting at everything in a roundabout fashion. If
neglecting children is an offence, and it IS an offence, then deal
with it as such, but don't go badgering and restricting people who sell
something that may possibly in some cases lead to a neglect of children.
If drunkenness is an offence, punish it, but don't punish a man for
selling honest drink that perhaps after all won't make any one drunk at
all. Don't intensify the viciousness of the public-house by assuming the
place isn't fit for women and children. That's either spite or folly.
Make the public-house FIT for women and children. Make it a real
public-house. If we Liberals go on as we are going, we shall presently
want to stop the sale of ink and paper because those things tempt men
to forgery. We do already threaten the privacy of the post because of
betting tout's letters. The drift of all that kind of thing is narrow,
unimaginative, mischievous, stupid...."

I stopped short and walked to the window and surveyed a pretty fountain,
facsimile of one in Verona, amidst trim-cut borderings of yew. Beyond,
and seen between the stems of ilex trees, was a great blaze of yellow
flowers....

"But prevention," I heard Margaret behind me, "is the essence of our
work."

I turned. "There's no prevention but education. There's no antiseptics
in life but love and fine thinking. Make people fine, make fine people.
Don't be afraid. These Tory leaders are better people individually
than the average; why cast them for the villains of the piece? The
real villain in the piece--in the whole human drama--is the
muddle-headedness, and it matters very little if it's virtuous-minded or
wicked. I want to get at muddle-headedness. If I could do that I could
let all that you call wickedness in the world run about and do what
it jolly well pleased. It would matter about as much as a slightly
neglected dog--in an otherwise well-managed home."

My thoughts had run away with me.

"I can't understand you," said Margaret, in the profoundest distress. "I
can't understand how it is you are coming to see things like this."



10


The moods of a thinking man in politics are curiously evasive and
difficult to describe. Neither the public nor the historian will permit
the statesman moods. He has from the first to assume he has an Aim, a
definite Aim, and to pretend to an absolute consistency with that. Those
subtle questionings about the very fundamentals of life which plague us
all so relentlessly nowadays are supposed to be silenced. He lifts his
chin and pursues his Aim explicitly in the sight of all men. Those
who have no real political experience can scarcely imagine the immense
mental and moral strain there is between one's everyday acts and
utterances on the one hand and the "thinking-out" process on the other.
It is perplexingly difficult to keep in your mind, fixed and firm, a
scheme essentially complex, to keep balancing a swaying possibility
while at the same time under jealous, hostile, and stupid observation
you tread your part in the platitudinous, quarrelsome, ill-presented
march of affairs....

The most impossible of all autobiographies is an intellectual
autobiography. I have thrown together in the crudest way the elements
of the problem I struggled with, but I can give no record of the subtle
details; I can tell nothing of the long vacillations between Protean
values, the talks and re-talks, the meditations, the bleak lucidities of
sleepless nights....

And yet these things I have struggled with must be thought out, and, to
begin with, they must be thought out in this muddled, experimenting way.
To go into a study to think about statecraft is to turn your back on the
realities you are constantly needing to feel and test and sound if your
thinking is to remain vital; to choose an aim and pursue it in despite
of all subsequent questionings is to bury the talent of your mind. It
is no use dealing with the intricate as though it were simple, to leap
haphazard at the first course of action that presents itself; the whole
world of politicians is far too like a man who snatches a poker to a
failing watch. It is easy to say he wants to "get something done," but
the only sane thing to do for the moment is to put aside that poker and
take thought and get a better implement....

One of the results of these fundamental preoccupations of mine was a
curious irritability towards Margaret that I found difficult to conceal.
It was one of the incidental cruelties of our position that this should
happen. I was in such doubt myself, that I had no power to phrase
things for her in a form she could use. Hitherto I had stage-managed our
"serious" conversations. Now I was too much in earnest and too uncertain
to go on doing this. I avoided talk with her. Her serene, sustained
confidence in vague formulae and sentimental aspirations exasperated me;
her want of sympathetic apprehension made my few efforts to indicate my
changing attitudes distressing and futile. It wasn't that I was always
thinking right, and that she was always saying wrong. It was that I was
struggling to get hold of a difficult thing that was, at any rate, half
true, I could not gauge how true, and that Margaret's habitual phrasing
ignored these elusive elements of truth, and without premeditation
fitted into the weaknesses of my new intimations, as though they had
nothing but weaknesses. It was, for example, obvious that these big
people, who were the backbone of Imperialism and Conservatism, were
temperamentally lax, much more indolent, much more sensuous, than our
deliberately virtuous Young Liberals. I didn't want to be reminded of
that, just when I was in full effort to realise the finer elements in
their composition. Margaret classed them and disposed of them. It was
our incurable differences in habits and gestures of thought coming
between us again.

The desert of misunderstanding widened. I was forced back upon myself
and my own secret councils. For a time I went my way alone; an unmixed
evil for both of us. Except for that Pentagram evening, a series of
talks with Isabel Rivers, who was now becoming more and more important
in my intellectual life, and the arguments I maintained with Crupp, I
never really opened my mind at all during that period of indecisions,
slow abandonments, and slow acquisitions.



CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ SECESSION



1


At last, out of a vast accumulation of impressions, decision distilled
quite suddenly. I succumbed to Evesham and that dream of the right
thing triumphant through expression. I determined I would go over to
the Conservatives, and use my every gift and power on the side of such
forces on that side as made for educational reorganisation, scientific
research, literature, criticism, and intellectual development. That was
in 1909. I judged the Tories were driving straight at a conflict with
the country, and I thought them bound to incur an electoral defeat. I
under-estimated their strength in the counties. There would follow, I
calculated, a period of profound reconstruction in method and policy
alike. I was entirely at one with Crupp in perceiving in this an immense
opportunity for the things we desired. An aristocracy quickened by
conflict and on the defensive, and full of the idea of justification
by reconstruction, might prove altogether more apt for thought and
high professions than Mrs. Redmondson's spoilt children. Behind the now
inevitable struggle for a reform of the House of Lords, there would
be great heart searchings and educational endeavour. On that we
reckoned....

At last we talked it out to the practical pitch, and Crupp and
Shoesmith, and I and Gane, made our definite agreement together....

I emerged from enormous silences upon Margaret one evening.

She was just back from the display of some new musicians at the
Hartsteins. I remember she wore a dress of golden satin, very
rich-looking and splendid. About her slender neck there was a rope of
gold-set amber beads. Her hair caught up and echoed and returned these
golden notes. I, too, was in evening dress, but where I had been escapes
me,--some forgotten dinner, I suppose. I went into her room. I remember
I didn't speak for some moments. I went across to the window and pulled
the blind aside, and looked out upon the railed garden of the square,
with its shrubs and shadowed turf gleaming pallidly and irregularly in
the light of the big electric standard in the corner.

"Margaret," I said, "I think I shall break with the party."

She made no answer. I turned presently, a movement of enquiry.

"I was afraid you meant to do that," she said.

"I'm out of touch," I explained. "Altogether."

"Oh! I know."

"It places me in a difficult position," I said.

Margaret stood at her dressing-table, looking steadfastly at herself
in the glass, and with her fingers playing with a litter of stoppered
bottles of tinted glass. "I was afraid it was coming to this," she said.

"In a way," I said, "we've been allies. I owe my seat to you. I couldn't
have gone into Parliament...."

"I don't want considerations like that to affect us," she interrupted.

There was a pause. She sat down in a chair by her dressing-table, lifted
an ivory hand-glass, and put it down again.

"I wish," she said, with something like a sob in her voice, "it were
possible that you shouldn't do this." She stopped abruptly, and I did
not look at her, because I could feel the effort she was making to
control herself.

"I thought," she began again, "when you came into Parliament--"

There came another silence. "It's all gone so differently," she said.
"Everything has gone so differently."

I had a sudden memory of her, shining triumphant after the Kinghampstead
election, and for the first time I realised just how perplexing and
disappointing my subsequent career must have been to her.

"I'm not doing this without consideration," I said.

"I know," she said, in a voice of despair, "I've seen it coming. But--I
still don't understand it. I don't understand how you can go over."

"My ideas have changed and developed," I said.

I walked across to her bearskin hearthrug, and stood by the mantel.

"To think that you," she said; "you who might have been leader--" She
could not finish it. "All the forces of reaction," she threw out.

"I don't think they are the forces of reaction," I said. "I think I can
find work to do--better work on that side."

"Against us!" she said. "As if progress wasn't hard enough! As if it
didn't call upon every able man!"

"I don't think Liberalism has a monopoly of progress."

She did not answer that. She sat quite still looking in front of her.
"WHY have you gone over?" she asked abruptly as though I had said
nothing.

There came a silence that I was impelled to end. I began a stiff
dissertation from the hearthrug. "I am going over, because I think I
may join in an intellectual renascence on the Conservative side. I
think that in the coming struggle there will be a partial and altogether
confused and demoralising victory for democracy, that will stir the
classes which now dominate the Conservative party into an energetic
revival. They will set out to win back, and win back. Even if my
estimate of contemporary forces is wrong and they win, they will still
be forced to reconstruct their outlook. A war abroad will supply the
chastening if home politics fail. The effort at renascence is bound to
come by either alternative. I believe I can do more in relation to
that effort than in any other connexion in the world of politics at the
present time. That's my case, Margaret."

She certainly did not grasp what I said. "And so you will throw aside
all the beginnings, all the beliefs and pledges--" Again her sentence
remained incomplete. "I doubt if even, once you have gone over, they
will welcome you."

"That hardly matters."

I made an effort to resume my speech.

"I came into Parliament, Margaret," I said, "a little prematurely.
Still--I suppose it was only by coming into Parliament that I could see
things as I do now in terms of personality and imaginative range...."
I stopped. Her stiff, unhappy, unlistening silence broke up my
disquisition.

"After all," I remarked, "most of this has been implicit in my
writings."

She made no sign of admission.

"What are you going to do?" she asked.

"Keep my seat for a time and make the reasons of my breach clear. Then
either I must resign or--probably this new Budget will lead to a
General Election. It's evidently meant to strain the Lords and provoke a
quarrel."

"You might, I think, have stayed to fight for the Budget."

"I'm not," I said, "so keen against the Lords."

On that we halted.

"But what are you going to do?" she asked.

"I shall make my quarrel over some points in the Budget. I can't quite
tell you yet where my chance will come. Then I shall either resign my
seat--or if things drift to dissolution I shall stand again."

"It's political suicide."

"Not altogether."

"I can't imagine you out of Parliament again. It's just like--like
undoing all we have done. What will you do?"

"Write. Make a new, more definite place for myself. You know, of course,
there's already a sort of group about Crupp and Gane."

Margaret seemed lost for a time in painful thought.

"For me," she said at last, "our political work has been a religion--it
has been more than a religion."

I heard in silence. I had no form of protest available against the
implications of that.

"And then I find you turning against all we aimed to do--talking of
going over, almost lightly--to those others."...

She was white-lipped as she spoke. In the most curious way she had
captured the moral values of the situation. I found myself protesting
ineffectually against her fixed conviction. "It's because I think my
duty lies in this change that I make it," I said.

"I don't see how you can say that," she replied quietly.

There was another pause between us.

"Oh!" she said and clenched her hand upon the table. "That it should
have come to this!"

She was extraordinarily dignified and extraordinarily absurd. She was
hurt and thwarted beyond measure. She had no place in her ideas, I
thought, for me. I could see how it appeared to her, but I could not
make her see anything of the intricate process that had brought me to
this divergence. The opposition of our intellectual temperaments
was like a gag in my mouth. What was there for me to say? A flash
of intuition told me that behind her white dignity was a passionate
disappointment, a shattering of dreams that needed before everything
else the relief of weeping.

"I've told you," I said awkwardly, "as soon as I could."

There was another long silence. "So that is how we stand," I said with
an air of having things defined. I walked slowly to the door.

She had risen and stood now staring in front of her.

"Good-night," I said, making no movement towards our habitual kiss.

"Good-night," she answered in a tragic note....

I closed the door softly. I remained for a moment or so on the big
landing, hesitating between my bedroom and my study. As I did so I heard
the soft rustle of her movement and the click of the key in her bedroom
door. Then everything was still....

She hid her tears from me. Something gripped my heart at the thought.

"Damnation!" I said wincing. "Why the devil can't people at least THINK
in the same manner?"



2


And that insufficient colloquy was the beginning of a prolonged
estrangement between us. It was characteristic of our relations that we
never reopened the discussion. The thing had been in the air for some
time; we had recognised it now; the widening breach between us was
confessed. My own feelings were curiously divided. It is remarkable that
my very real affection for Margaret only became evident to me with this
quarrel. The changes of the heart are very subtle changes. I am quite
unaware how or when my early romantic love for her purity and beauty
and high-principled devotion evaporated from my life; but I do know that
quite early in my parliamentary days there had come a vague, unconfessed
resentment at the tie that seemed to hold me in servitude to her
standards of private living and public act. I felt I was caught, and
none the less so because it had been my own act to rivet on my shackles.
So long as I still held myself bound to her that resentment grew. Now,
since I had broken my bonds and taken my line it withered again, and I
could think of Margaret with a returning kindliness.

But I still felt embarrassment with her. I felt myself dependent upon
her for house room and food and social support, as it were under false
pretences. I would have liked to have separated our financial affairs
altogether. But I knew that to raise the issue would have seemed a
last brutal indelicacy. So I tried almost furtively to keep my personal
expenditure within the scope of the private income I made by writing,
and we went out together in her motor brougham, dined and made
appearances, met politely at breakfast--parted at night with a kiss upon
her cheek. The locking of her door upon me, which at that time I quite
understood, which I understand now, became for a time in my mind,
through some obscure process of the soul, an offence. I never crossed
the landing to her room again.

In all this matter, and, indeed, in all my relations with Margaret, I
perceive now I behaved badly and foolishly. My manifest blunder is that
I, who was several years older than she, much subtler and in many ways
wiser, never in any measure sought to guide and control her. After our
marriage I treated her always as an equal, and let her go her way; held
her responsible for all the weak and ineffective and unfortunate things
she said and did to me. She wasn't clever enough to justify that. It
wasn't fair to expect her to sympathise, anticipate, and understand.
I ought to have taken care of her, roped her to me when it came to
crossing the difficult places. If I had loved her more, and wiselier and
more tenderly, if there had not been the consciousness of my financial
dependence on her always stiffening my pride, I think she would have
moved with me from the outset, and left the Liberals with me. But she
did not get any inkling of the ends I sought in my change of sides. It
must have seemed to her inexplicable perversity. She had, I knew--for
surely I knew it then--an immense capacity for loyalty and devotion.
There she was with these treasures untouched, neglected and perplexed.
A woman who loves wants to give. It is the duty and business of the man
she has married for love to help her to help and give. But I was stupid.
My eyes had never been opened. I was stiff with her and difficult to
her, because even on my wedding morning there had been, deep down in
my soul, voiceless though present, something weakly protesting, a faint
perception of wrong-doing, the infinitesimally small, slow-multiplying
germs of shame.



3


I made my breach with the party on the Budget.

In many ways I was disposed to regard the 1909 Budget as a fine piece
of statecraft. Its production was certainly a very unexpected display
of vigour on the Liberal side. But, on the whole, this movement
towards collectivist organisation on the part of the Liberals rather
strengthened than weakened my resolve to cross the floor of the house.
It made it more necessary, I thought, to leaven the purely obstructive
and reactionary elements that were at once manifest in the opposition. I
assailed the land taxation proposals in one main speech, and a series
of minor speeches in committee. The line of attack I chose was that the
land was a great public service that needed to be controlled on broad
and far-sighted lines. I had no objection to its nationalisation, but I
did object most strenuously to the idea of leaving it in private hands,
and attempting to produce beneficial social results through the pressure
of taxation upon the land-owning class. That might break it up in an
utterly disastrous way. The drift of the government proposals was all in
the direction of sweating the landowner to get immediate values from his
property, and such a course of action was bound to give us an irritated
and vindictive land-owning class, the class upon which we had hitherto
relied--not unjustifiably--for certain broad, patriotic services and
an influence upon our collective judgments that no other class seemed
prepared to exercise. Abolish landlordism if you will, I said, buy
it out, but do not drive it to a defensive fight, and leave it still
sufficiently strong and wealthy to become a malcontent element in your
state. You have taxed and controlled the brewer and the publican until
the outraged Liquor Interest has become a national danger. You now
propose to do the same thing on a larger scale. You turn a class which
has many fine and truly aristocratic traditions towards revolt, and
there is nothing in these or any other of your proposals that shows any
sense of the need for leadership to replace these traditional leaders
you are ousting. This was the substance of my case, and I hammered at it
not only in the House, but in the press....

The Kinghampstead division remained for some time insensitive to my
defection.

Then it woke up suddenly, and began, in the columns of the
KINGSHAMPSTEAD GUARDIAN, an indignant, confused outcry. I was treated to
an open letter, signed "Junius Secundus," and I replied in provocative
terms. There were two thinly attended public meetings at different ends
of the constituency, and then I had a correspondence with my old friend
Parvill, the photographer, which ended in my seeing a deputation.

My impression is that it consisted of about eighteen or twenty people.
They had had to come upstairs to me and they were manifestly full of
indignation and a little short of breath. There was Parvill himself,
J.P., dressed wholly in black--I think to mark his sense of the
occasion--and curiously suggestive in his respect for my character and
his concern for the honourableness of the KINGHAMPSTEAD GUARDIAN editor,
of Mark Antony at the funeral of Cesar. There was Mrs. Bulger, also in
mourning; she had never abandoned the widow's streamers since the death
of her husband ten years ago, and her loyalty to Liberalism of the
severest type was part as it were of her weeds. There was a nephew of
Sir Roderick Newton, a bright young Hebrew of the graver type, and a
couple of dissenting ministers in high collars and hats that stopped
halfway between the bowler of this world and the shovel-hat of heaven.
There was also a young solicitor from Lurky done in the horsey style,
and there was a very little nervous man with a high brow and a face
contracting below as though the jawbones and teeth had been taken out
and the features compressed. The rest of the deputation, which included
two other public-spirited ladies and several ministers of religion,
might have been raked out of any omnibus going Strandward during the
May meetings. They thrust Parvill forward as spokesman, and manifested
a strong disposition to say "Hear, hear!" to his more strenuous protests
provided my eye wasn't upon them at the time.

I regarded this appalling deputation as Parvill's apologetic but quite
definite utterances drew to an end. I had a moment of vision. Behind
them I saw the wonderful array of skeleton forces that stand for public
opinion, that are as much public opinion as exists indeed at the present
time. The whole process of politics which bulks so solidly in history
seemed for that clairvoyant instant but a froth of petty motives above
abysms of indifference....

Some one had finished. I perceived I had to speak.

"Very well," I said, "I won't keep you long in replying. I'll resign if
there isn't a dissolution before next February, and if there is I shan't
stand again. You don't want the bother and expense of a bye-election
(approving murmurs) if it can be avoided. But I may tell you plainly now
that I don't think it will be necessary for me to resign, and the sooner
you find my successor the better for the party. The Lords are in a
corner; they've got to fight now or never, and I think they will throw
out the Budget. Then they will go on fighting. It is a fight that will
last for years. They have a sort of social discipline, and you haven't.
You Liberals will find yourselves with a country behind you, vaguely
indignant perhaps, but totally unprepared with any ideas whatever in
the matter, face to face with the problem of bringing the British
constitution up-to-date. Anything may happen, provided only that it is
sufficiently absurd. If the King backs the Lords--and I don't see why he
shouldn't--you have no Republican movement whatever to fall back
upon. You lost it during the Era of Good Taste. The country, I say, is
destitute of ideas, and you have no ideas to give it. I don't see what
you will do.... For my own part, I mean to spend a year or so between a
window and my writing-desk."

I paused. "I think, gentlemen," began Parvill, "that we hear all this
with very great regret...."



4


My estrangement from Margaret stands in my memory now as something that
played itself out within the four walls of our house in Radnor Square,
which was, indeed, confined to those limits. I went to and fro between
my house and the House of Commons, and the dining-rooms and clubs and
offices in which we were preparing our new developments, in a state
of aggressive and energetic dissociation, in the nascent state, as a
chemist would say. I was free now, and greedy for fresh combination. I
had a tremendous sense of released energies. I had got back to the sort
of thing I could do, and to the work that had been shaping itself for
so long in my imagination. Our purpose now was plain, bold, and
extraordinarily congenial. We meant no less than to organise a new
movement in English thought and life, to resuscitate a Public Opinion
and prepare the ground for a revised and renovated ruling culture.

For a time I seemed quite wonderfully able to do whatever I wanted to
do. Shoesmith responded to my first advances. We decided to create a
weekly paper as our nucleus, and Crupp and I set to work forthwith to
collect a group of writers and speakers, including Esmeer, Britten, Lord
Gane, Neal, and one or two younger men, which should constitute a more
or less definite editorial council about me, and meet at a weekly lunch
on Tuesday to sustain our general co-operations. We marked our claim
upon Toryism even in the colour of our wrapper, and spoke of ourselves
collectively as the Blue Weeklies. But our lunches were open to all
sorts of guests, and our deliberations were never of a character to
control me effectively in my editorial decisions. My only influential
councillor at first was old Britten, who became my sub-editor. It was
curious how we two had picked up our ancient intimacy again and resumed
the easy give and take of our speculative dreaming schoolboy days.

For a time my life centred altogether upon this journalistic work.
Britten was an experienced journalist, and I had most of the necessary
instincts for the business. We meant to make the paper right and
good down to the smallest detail, and we set ourselves at this with
extraordinary zeal. It wasn't our intention to show our political
motives too markedly at first, and through all the dust storm and
tumult and stress of the political struggle of 1910, we made a little
intellectual oasis of good art criticism and good writing. It was the
firm belief of nearly all of us that the Lords were destined to be
beaten badly in 1910, and our game was the longer game of reconstruction
that would begin when the shouting and tumult of that immediate conflict
were over. Meanwhile we had to get into touch with just as many good
minds as possible.

As we felt our feet, I developed slowly and carefully a broadly
conceived and consistent political attitude. As I will explain later,
we were feminist from the outset, though that caused Shoesmith and Gane
great searching of heart; we developed Esmeer's House of Lords reform
scheme into a general cult of the aristocratic virtues, and we did much
to humanise and liberalise the narrow excellencies of that Break-up of
the Poor Law agitation, which had been organised originally by Beatrice
and Sidney Webb. In addition, without any very definite explanation to
any one but Esmeer and Isabel Rivers, and as if it was quite a small
matter, I set myself to secure a uniform philosophical quality in our
columns.

That, indeed, was the peculiar virtue and characteristic of the BLUE
WEEKLY. I was now very definitely convinced that much of the confusion
and futility of contemporary thought was due to the general need of
metaphysical training.... The great mass of people--and not simply
common people, but people active and influential in intellectual
things--are still quite untrained in the methods of thought and
absolutely innocent of any criticism of method; it is scarcely a
caricature to call their thinking a crazy patchwork, discontinuous and
chaotic. They arrive at conclusions by a kind of accident, and do not
suspect any other way may be found to their attainment. A stage above
this general condition stands that minority of people who have at
some time or other discovered general terms and a certain use
for generalisations. They are--to fall back on the ancient
technicality--Realists of a crude sort. When I say Realist of course
I mean Realist as opposed to Nominalist, and not Realist in the almost
diametrically different sense of opposition to Idealist. Such are the
Baileys; such, to take their great prototype, was Herbert Spencer (who
couldn't read Kant); such are whole regiments of prominent and entirely
self-satisfied contemporaries. They go through queer little processes of
definition and generalisation and deduction with the completest belief
in the validity of the intellectual instrument they are using. They are
Realists--Cocksurists--in matter of fact; sentimentalists in behaviour.
The Baileys having got to this glorious stage in mental development--it
is glorious because it has no doubts--were always talking about training
"Experts" to apply the same simple process to all the affairs
of mankind. Well, Realism isn't the last word of human wisdom.
Modest-minded people, doubtful people, subtle people, and the like--the
kind of people William James writes of as "tough-minded," go on beyond
this methodical happiness, and are forever after critical of premises
and terms. They are truer--and less confident. They have reached
scepticism and the artistic method. They have emerged into the new
Nominalism.

Both Isabel and I believe firmly that these differences of intellectual
method matter profoundly in the affairs of mankind, that the collective
mind of this intricate complex modern state can only function properly
upon neo-Nominalist lines. This has always been her side of our mental
co-operation rather than mine. Her mind has the light movement that
goes so often with natural mental power; she has a wonderful art in
illustration, and, as the reader probably knows already, she writes of
metaphysical matters with a rare charm and vividness. So far there has
been no collection of her papers published, but they are to be found not
only in the BLUE WEEKLY columns but scattered about the monthlies; many
people must be familiar with her style. It was an intention we did
much to realise before our private downfall, that we would use the BLUE
WEEKLY to maintain a stream of suggestion against crude thinking, and
at last scarcely a week passed but some popular distinction, some
large imposing generalisation, was touched to flaccidity by her pen or
mine....

I was at great pains to give my philosophical, political, and social
matter the best literary and critical backing we could get in London. I
hunted sedulously for good descriptive writing and good criticism; I
was indefatigable in my readiness to hear and consider, if not to accept
advice; I watched every corner of the paper, and had a dozen men alert
to get me special matter of the sort that draws in the unattached
reader. The chief danger on the literary side of a weekly is that it
should fall into the hands of some particular school, and this I watched
for closely. It seems impossible to get vividness of apprehension and
breadth of view together in the same critic. So it falls to the wise
editor to secure the first and impose the second. Directly I detected
the shrill partisan note in our criticism, the attempt to puff a poor
thing because it was "in the right direction," or damn a vigorous piece
of work because it wasn't, I tackled the man and had it out with him.
Our pay was good enough for that to matter a good deal....

Our distinctive little blue and white poster kept up its neat persistent
appeal to the public eye, and before 1911 was out, the BLUE WEEKLY was
printing twenty pages of publishers' advertisements, and went into
all the clubs in London and three-quarters of the country houses where
week-end parties gather together. Its sale by newsagents and bookstalls
grew steadily. One got more and more the reassuring sense of being
discussed, and influencing discussion.



5


Our office was at the very top of a big building near the end of Adelphi
Terrace; the main window beside my desk, a big undivided window of
plate glass, looked out upon Cleopatra's Needle, the corner of the Hotel
Cecil, the fine arches of Waterloo Bridge, and the long sweep of south
bank with its shot towers and chimneys, past Bankside to the dimly seen
piers of the great bridge below the Tower. The dome of St. Paul's just
floated into view on the left against the hotel facade. By night and
day, in every light and atmosphere, it was a beautiful and various view,
alive as a throbbing heart; a perpetual flow of traffic ploughed and
splashed the streaming silver of the river, and by night the shapes of
things became velvet black and grey, and the water a shining mirror
of steel, wearing coruscating gems of light. In the foreground the
Embankment trams sailed glowing by, across the water advertisements
flashed and flickered, trains went and came and a rolling drift of smoke
reflected unseen fires. By day that spectacle was sometimes a marvel of
shining wet and wind-cleared atmosphere, sometimes a mystery of drifting
fog, sometimes a miracle of crowded details, minutely fine.

As I think of that view, so variously spacious in effect, I am back
there, and this sunlit paper might be lamp-lit and lying on my old desk.
I see it all again, feel it all again. In the foreground is a green
shaded lamp and crumpled galley slips and paged proofs and letters, two
or three papers in manuscript, and so forth. In the shadows are chairs
and another table bearing papers and books, a rotating bookcase dimly
seen, a long window seat black in the darkness, and then the cool
unbroken spectacle of the window. How often I would watch some tram-car,
some string of barges go from me slowly out of sight. The people were
black animalculae by day, clustering, collecting, dispersing, by night,
they were phantom face-specks coming, vanishing, stirring obscurely
between light and shade.

I recall many hours at my desk in that room before the crisis came,
hours full of the peculiar happiness of effective strenuous work. Once
some piece of writing went on, holding me intent and forgetful of time
until I looked up from the warm circle of my electric lamp to see the
eastward sky above the pale silhouette of the Tower Bridge, flushed and
banded brightly with the dawn.



CHAPTER THE FOURTH ~~ THE BESETTING OF SEX



1


Art is selection and so is most autobiography. But I am concerned with a
more tangled business than selection, I want to show a contemporary man
in relation to the state and social usage, and the social organism in
relation to that man. To tell my story at all I have to simplify. I have
given now the broad lines of my political development, and how I passed
from my initial liberal-socialism to the conception of a constructive
aristocracy. I have tried to set that out in the form of a man
discovering himself. Incidentally that self-development led to a
profound breach with my wife. One has read stories before of husband
and wife speaking severally two different languages and coming to an
understanding. But Margaret and I began in her dialect, and, as I came
more and more to use my own, diverged.

I had thought when I married that the matter of womankind had ended for
me. I have tried to tell all that sex and women had been to me up to my
married life with Margaret and our fatal entanglement, tried to show the
queer, crippled, embarrassed and limited way in which these interests
break upon the life of a young man under contemporary conditions. I
do not think my lot was a very exceptional one. I missed the chance of
sisters and girl playmates, but that is not an uncommon misadventure
in an age of small families; I never came to know any woman at all
intimately until I was married to Margaret. My earlier love affairs were
encounters of sex, under conditions of furtiveness and adventure that
made them things in themselves, restricted and unilluminating. From a
boyish disposition to be mystical and worshipping towards women I
had passed into a disregardful attitude, as though women were things
inferior or irrelevant, disturbers in great affairs. For a time Margaret
had blotted out all other women; she was so different and so near;
she was like a person who stands suddenly in front of a little window
through which one has been surveying a crowd. She didn't become
womankind for me so much as eliminate womankind from my world.... And
then came this secret separation....

Until this estrangement and the rapid and uncontrollable development of
my relations with Isabel which chanced to follow it, I seemed to have
solved the problem of women by marriage and disregard. I thought these
things were over. I went about my career with Margaret beside me, her
brow slightly knit, her manner faintly strenuous, helping, helping; and
if we had not altogether abolished sex we had at least so circumscribed
and isolated it that it would not have affected the general tenor of our
lives in the slightest degree if we had.

And then, clothing itself more and more in the form of Isabel and her
problems, this old, this fundamental obsession of my life returned. The
thing stole upon my mind so that I was unaware of its invasion and how
it was changing our long intimacy. I have already compared the lot of
the modern publicist to Machiavelli writing in his study; in his day
women and sex were as disregarded in these high affairs as, let us say,
the chemistry of air or the will of the beasts in the fields; in ours
the case has altogether changed, and woman has come now to stand beside
the tall candles, half in the light, half in the mystery of the
shadows, besetting, interrupting, demanding unrelentingly an altogether
unprecedented attention. I feel that in these matters my life has been
almost typical of my time. Woman insists upon her presence. She is
no longer a mere physical need, an aesthetic bye-play, a sentimental
background; she is a moral and intellectual necessity in a man's life.
She comes to the politician and demands, Is she a child or a citizen? Is
she a thing or a soul? She comes to the individual man, as she came
to me and asks, Is she a cherished weakling or an equal mate, an
unavoidable helper? Is she to be tried and trusted or guarded and
controlled, bond or free? For if she is a mate, one must at once trust
more and exact more, exacting toil, courage, and the hardest, most
necessary thing of all, the clearest, most shameless, explicitness of
understanding....



2


In all my earlier imaginings of statecraft I had tacitly assumed either
that the relations of the sexes were all right or that anyhow they
didn't concern the state. It was a matter they, whoever "they" were, had
to settle among themselves. That sort of disregard was possible then.
But even before 1906 there were endless intimations that the dams
holding back great reservoirs of discussion were crumbling. We political
schemers were ploughing wider than any one had ploughed before in the
field of social reconstruction. We had also, we realised, to plough
deeper. We had to plough down at last to the passionate elements of
sexual relationship and examine and decide upon them.

The signs multiplied. In a year or so half the police of the metropolis
were scarce sufficient to protect the House from one clamorous aspect
of the new problem. The members went about Westminster with an odd, new
sense of being beset. A good proportion of us kept up the pretence that
the Vote for Women was an isolated fad, and the agitation an epidemic
madness that would presently pass. But it was manifest to any one who
sought more than comfort in the matter that the streams of women and
sympathisers and money forthcoming marked far deeper and wider things
than an idle fancy for the franchise. The existing laws and conventions
of relationship between Man and Woman were just as unsatisfactory a
disorder as anything else in our tumbled confusion of a world, and that
also was coming to bear upon statecraft.

My first parliament was the parliament of the Suffragettes. I don't
propose to tell here of that amazing campaign, with its absurdities
and follies, its courage and devotion. There were aspects of that
unquenchable agitation that were absolutely heroic and aspects that were
absolutely pitiful. It was unreasonable, unwise, and, except for its
one central insistence, astonishingly incoherent. It was amazingly
effective. The very incoherence of the demand witnessed, I think, to the
forces that lay behind it. It wasn't a simple argument based on a
simple assumption; it was the first crude expression of a great mass and
mingling of convergent feelings, of a widespread, confused persuasion
among modern educated women that the conditions of their relations with
men were oppressive, ugly, dishonouring, and had to be altered. They
had not merely adopted the Vote as a symbol of equality; it was fairly
manifest to me that, given it, they meant to use it, and to use it
perhaps even vindictively and blindly, as a weapon against many things
they had every reason to hate....

I remember, with exceptional vividness, that great night early in the
session of 1909, when--I think it was--fifty or sixty women went to
prison. I had been dining at the Barham's, and Lord Barham and I came
down from the direction of St. James's Park into a crowd and a confusion
outside the Caxton Hall. We found ourselves drifting with an immense
multitude towards Parliament Square and parallel with a silent,
close-packed column of girls and women, for the most part white-faced
and intent. I still remember the effect of their faces upon me. It was
quite different from the general effect of staring about and divided
attention one gets in a political procession of men. There was an
expression of heroic tension.

There had been a pretty deliberate appeal on the part of the women's
organisers to the Unemployed, who had been demonstrating throughout that
winter, to join forces with the movement, and the result was shown
in the quality of the crowd upon the pavement. It was an ugly,
dangerous-looking crowd, but as yet good-tempered and sympathetic. When
at last we got within sight of the House the square was a seething seat
of excited people, and the array of police on horse and on foot might
have been assembled for a revolutionary outbreak. There were dense
masses of people up Whitehall, and right on to Westminster Bridge. The
scuffle that ended in the arrests was the poorest explosion to follow
such stupendous preparations....



3


Later on in that year the women began a new attack. Day and night, and
all through the long nights of the Budget sittings, at all the piers
of the gates of New Palace Yard and at St. Stephen's Porch, stood women
pickets, and watched us silently and reproachfully as we went to and
fro. They were women of all sorts, though, of course, the independent
worker-class predominated. There were grey-headed old ladies standing
there, sturdily charming in the rain; battered-looking, ambiguous women,
with something of the desperate bitterness of battered women showing in
their eyes; north-country factory girls; cheaply-dressed suburban women;
trim, comfortable mothers of families; valiant-eyed girl graduates
and undergraduates; lank, hungry-looking creatures, who stirred one's
imagination; one very dainty little woman in deep mourning, I recall,
grave and steadfast, with eyes fixed on distant things. Some of those
women looked defiant, some timidly aggressive, some full of the stir of
adventure, some drooping with cold and fatigue. The supply never ceased.
I had a mortal fear that somehow the supply might halt or cease. I
found that continual siege of the legislature extraordinarily
impressive--infinitely more impressive than the feeble-forcible
"ragging" of the more militant section. I thought of the appeal that
must be going through the country, summoning the women from countless
scattered homes, rooms, colleges, to Westminster.

I remember too the petty little difficulty I felt whether I should
ignore these pickets altogether, or lift a hat as I hurried past with
averted eyes, or look them in the face as I did so. Towards the end the
House evoked an etiquette of salutation.



4


There was a tendency, even on the part of its sympathisers, to treat the
whole suffrage agitation as if it were a disconnected issue, irrelevant
to all other broad developments of social and political life. We
struggled, all of us, to ignore the indicating finger it thrust out
before us. "Your schemes, for all their bigness," it insisted to
our reluctant, averted minds, "still don't go down to the essential
things...."

We have to go deeper, or our inadequate children's insufficient children
will starve amidst harvests of earless futility. That conservatism which
works in every class to preserve in its essentials the habitual daily
life is all against a profounder treatment of political issues. The
politician, almost as absurdly as the philosopher, tends constantly, in
spite of magnificent preludes, vast intimations, to specialise himself
out of the reality he has so stupendously summoned--he bolts back to
littleness. The world has to be moulded anew, he continues to admit, but
without, he adds, any risk of upsetting his week-end visits, his morning
cup of tea....

The discussion of the relations of men and women disturbs every one. It
reacts upon the private life of every one who attempts it. And at
any particular time only a small minority have a personal interest in
changing the established state of affairs. Habit and interest are in a
constantly recruited majority against conscious change and adjustment
in these matters. Drift rules us. The great mass of people, and an
overwhelming proportion of influential people, are people who have
banished their dreams and made their compromise. Wonderful and beautiful
possibilities are no longer to be thought about. They have given up
any aspirations for intense love, their splendid offspring, for keen
delights, have accepted a cultivated kindliness and an uncritical sense
of righteousness as their compensation. It's a settled affair with
them, a settled, dangerous affair. Most of them fear, and many hate, the
slightest reminder of those abandoned dreams. As Dayton once said to
the Pentagram Circle, when we were discussing the problem of a universal
marriage and divorce law throughout the Empire, "I am for leaving all
these things alone." And then, with a groan in his voice, "Leave them
alone! Leave them all alone!"

That was his whole speech for the evening, in a note of suppressed
passion, and presently, against all our etiquette, he got up and went
out.

For some years after my marriage, I too was for leaving them alone. I
developed a dread and dislike for romance, for emotional music, for the
human figure in art--turning my heart to landscape. I wanted to sneer
at lovers and their ecstasies, and was uncomfortable until I found
the effective sneer. In matters of private morals these were my most
uncharitable years. I didn't want to think of these things any more for
ever. I hated the people whose talk or practice showed they were not
of my opinion. I wanted to believe that their views were immoral and
objectionable and contemptible, because I had decided to treat them as
at that level. I was, in fact, falling into the attitude of the normal
decent man.

And yet one cannot help thinking! The sensible moralised man finds it
hard to escape the stream of suggestion that there are still dreams
beyond these commonplace acquiescences,--the appeal of beauty suddenly
shining upon one, the mothlike stirrings of serene summer nights, the
sweetness of distant music....

It is one of the paradoxical factors in our public life at the present
time, which penalises abandonment to love so abundantly and so heavily,
that power, influence and control fall largely to unencumbered people
and sterile people and people who have married for passionless purposes,
people whose very deficiency in feeling has left them free to follow
ambition, people beautyblind, who don't understand what it is to fall in
love, what it is to desire children or have them, what it is to feel in
their blood and bodies the supreme claim of good births and selective
births above all other affairs in life, people almost of necessity
averse from this most fundamental aspect of existence....



5


It wasn't, however, my deepening sympathy with and understanding of the
position of women in general, or the change in my ideas about all these
intimate things my fast friendship with Isabel was bringing about, that
led me to the heretical views I have in the last five years dragged from
the region of academic and timid discussion into the field of practical
politics. Those influences, no doubt, have converged to the same end,
and given me a powerful emotional push upon my road, but it was a
broader and colder view of things that first determined me in my attempt
to graft the Endowment of Motherhood in some form or other upon British
Imperialism. Now that I am exiled from the political world, it is
possible to estimate just how effectually that grafting has been done.

I have explained how the ideas of a trained aristocracy and a universal
education grew to paramount importance in my political scheme. It is but
a short step from this to the question of the quantity and quality of
births in the community, and from that again to these forbidden and
fear-beset topics of marriage, divorce, and the family organisation.
A sporadic discussion of these aspects had been going on for years, a
Eugenic society existed, and articles on the Falling Birth Rate, and the
Rapid Multiplication of the Unfit were staples of the monthly magazines.
But beyond an intermittent scolding of prosperous childless people
in general--one never addressed them in particular--nothing was done
towards arresting those adverse processes. Almost against my natural
inclination, I found myself forced to go into these things. I came to
the conclusion that under modern conditions the isolated private family,
based on the existing marriage contract, was failing in its work. It
wasn't producing enough children, and children good enough and well
trained enough for the demands of the developing civilised state.
Our civilisation was growing outwardly, and decaying in its intimate
substance, and unless it was presently to collapse, some very extensive
and courageous reorganisation was needed. The old haphazard system
of pairing, qualified more and more by worldly discretions, no longer
secures a young population numerous enough or good enough for the
growing needs and possibilities of our Empire. Statecraft sits weaving
splendid garments, no doubt, but with a puny, ugly, insufficient baby in
the cradle.

No one so far has dared to take up this problem as a present question
for statecraft, but it comes unheralded, unadvocated, and sits at
every legislative board. Every improvement is provisional except the
improvement of the race, and it became more and more doubtful to me if
we were improving the race at all! Splendid and beautiful and courageous
people must come together and have children, women with their fine
senses and glorious devotion must be freed from the net that compels
them to be celibate, compels them to be childless and useless, or to
bear children ignobly to men whom need and ignorance and the treacherous
pressure of circumstances have forced upon them. We all know that,
and so few dare even to whisper it for fear that they should seem, in
seeking to save the family, to threaten its existence. It is as if
a party of pigmies in a not too capacious room had been joined by a
carnivorous giant--and decided to go on living happily by cutting him
dead....

The problem the developing civilised state has to solve is how it can
get the best possible increase under the best possible conditions.
I became more and more convinced that the independent family unit
of to-day, in which the man is master of the wife and owner of the
children, in which all are dependent upon him, subordinated to his
enterprises and liable to follow his fortunes up or down, does not
supply anything like the best conceivable conditions. We want to
modernise the family footing altogether. An enormous premium both in
pleasure and competitive efficiency is put upon voluntary childlessness,
and enormous inducements are held out to women to subordinate
instinctive and selective preferences to social and material
considerations.

The practical reaction of modern conditions upon the old tradition of
the family is this: that beneath the pretence that nothing is changing,
secretly and with all the unwholesomeness of secrecy everything is
changed. Offspring fall away, the birth rate falls and falls most among
just the most efficient and active and best adapted classes in the
community. The species is recruited from among its failures and from
among less civilised aliens. Contemporary civilisations are in effect
burning the best of their possible babies in the furnaces that run the
machinery. In the United States the native Anglo-American strain has
scarcely increased at all since 1830, and in most Western European
countries the same is probably true of the ablest and most energetic
elements in the community. The women of these classes still remain
legally and practically dependent and protected, with the only natural
excuse for their dependence gone....

The modern world becomes an immense spectacle of unsatisfactory
groupings; here childless couples bored to death in the hopeless effort
to sustain an incessant honeymoon, here homes in which a solitary child
grows unsocially, here small two or three-child homes that do no more
than continue the culture of the parents at a great social cost, here
numbers of unhappy educated but childless married women, here careless,
decivilised fecund homes, here orphanages and asylums for the heedlessly
begotten. It is just the disorderly proliferation of Bromstead over
again, in lives instead of in houses.

What is the good, what is the common sense, of rectifying boundaries,
pushing research and discovery, building cities, improving all the
facilities of life, making great fleets, waging wars, while this aimless
decadence remains the quality of the biological outlook?...

It is difficult now to trace how I changed from my early aversion until
I faced this mass of problems. But so far back as 1910 I had it clear
in my mind that I would rather fail utterly than participate in all the
surrenders of mind and body that are implied in Dayton's snarl of "Leave
it alone; leave it all alone!" Marriage and the begetting and care of
children, is the very ground substance in the life of the community.
In a world in which everything changes, in which fresh methods, fresh
adjustments and fresh ideas perpetually renew the circumstances of life,
it is preposterous that we should not even examine into these matters,
should rest content to be ruled by the uncriticised traditions of a
barbaric age.

Now, it seems to me that the solution of this problem is also the
solution of the woman's individual problem. The two go together, are
right and left of one question. The only conceivable way out from our
IMPASSE lies in the recognition of parentage, that is to say of adequate
mothering, as no longer a chance product of individual passions but
a service rendered to the State. Women must become less and less
subordinated to individual men, since this works out in a more or less
complete limitation, waste, and sterilisation of their essentially
social function; they must become more and more subordinated as
individually independent citizens to the collective purpose. Or, to
express the thing by a familiar phrase, the highly organised, scientific
state we desire must, if it is to exist at all, base itself not upon
the irresponsible man-ruled family, but upon the matriarchal family,
the citizen-ship and freedom of women and the public endowment of
motherhood.

After two generations of confused and experimental revolt it grows clear
to modern women that a conscious, deliberate motherhood and mothering is
their special function in the State, and that a personal subordination
to an individual man with an unlimited power of control over this
intimate and supreme duty is a degradation. No contemporary woman of
education put to the test is willing to recognise any claim a man can
make upon her but the claim of her freely-given devotion to him. She
wants the reality of her choice and she means "family" while a man
too often means only possession. This alters the spirit of the family
relationships fundamentally. Their form remains just what it was
when woman was esteemed a pretty, desirable, and incidentally a
child-producing, chattel. Against these time-honoured ideas the new
spirit of womanhood struggles in shame, astonishment, bitterness, and
tears....

I confess myself altogether feminist. I have no doubts in the matter.
I want this coddling and browbeating of women to cease. I want to
see women come in, free and fearless, to a full participation in the
collective purpose of mankind. Women, I am convinced, are as fine
as men; they can be as wise as men; they are capable of far greater
devotion than men. I want to see them citizens, with a marriage law
framed primarily for them and for their protection and the good of the
race, and not for men's satisfactions. I want to see them bearing and
rearing good children in the State as a generously rewarded public duty
and service, choosing their husbands freely and discerningly, and in no
way enslaved by or subordinated to the men they have chosen. The social
consciousness of women seems to me an unworked, an almost untouched mine
of wealth for the constructive purpose of the world. I want to change
the respective values of the family group altogether, and make the home
indeed the women's kingdom and the mother the owner and responsible
guardian of her children.

It is no use pretending that this is not novel and revolutionary; it is.
The Endowment of Motherhood implies a new method of social organization,
a rearrangement of the social unit, untried in human experience--as
untried as electric traction was or flying in 1800. Of course, it may
work out to modify men's ideas of marriage profoundly. To me that is
a secondary consideration. I do not believe that particular assertion
myself, because I am convinced that a practical monogamy is a
psychological necessity to the mass of civilised people. But even if I
did believe it I should still keep to my present line, because it is the
only line that will prevent a highly organised civilisation from ending
in biological decay. The public Endowment of Motherhood is the only
possible way which will ensure the permanently developing civilised
state at which all constructive minds are aiming. A point is reached in
the life-history of a civilisation when either this reconstruction
must be effected or the quality and MORALE of the population prove
insufficient for the needs of the developing organisation. It is not so
much moral decadence that will destroy us as moral inadaptability.
The old code fails under the new needs. The only alternative to this
profound reconstruction is a decay in human quality and social collapse.
Either this unprecedented rearrangement must be achieved by our
civilisation, or it must presently come upon a phase of disorder and
crumble and perish, as Rome perished, as France declines, as the strain
of the Pilgrim Fathers dwindles out of America. Whatever hope there may
be in the attempt therefore, there is no alternative to the attempt.



6


I wanted political success now dearly enough, but not at the price
of constructive realities. These questions were no doubt monstrously
dangerous in the political world; there wasn't a politician alive who
didn't look scared at the mention of "The Family," but if raising these
issues were essential to the social reconstructions on which my life
was set, that did not matter. It only implied that I should take them
up with deliberate caution. There was no release because of risk or
difficulty.

The question of whether I should commit myself to some open project in
this direction was going on in my mind concurrently with my speculations
about a change of party, like bass and treble in a complex piece of
music. The two drew to a conclusion together. I would not only go over
to Imperialism, but I would attempt to biologise Imperialism.

I thought at first that I was undertaking a monstrous uphill task.
But as I came to look into the possibilities of the matter, a strong
persuasion grew up in my mind that this panic fear of legislative
proposals affecting the family basis was excessive, that things were
much riper for development in this direction than old-experienced people
out of touch with the younger generation imagined, that to phrase
the thing in a parliamentary fashion, "something might be done in the
constituencies" with the Endowment of Motherhood forthwith, provided
only that it was made perfectly clear that anything a sane person could
possibly intend by "morality" was left untouched by these proposals.

I went to work very carefully. I got Roper of the DAILY TELEPHONE and
Burkett of the DIAL to try over a silly-season discussion of State Help
for Mothers, and I put a series of articles on eugenics, upon the fall
in the birth-rate, and similar topics in the BLUE WEEKLY, leading up
to a tentative and generalised advocacy of the public endowment of the
nation's children. I was more and more struck by the acceptance won by a
sober and restrained presentation of this suggestion.

And then, in the fourth year of the BLUE WEEKLY'S career, came the
Handitch election, and I was forced by the clamour of my antagonist,
and very willingly forced, to put my convictions to the test. I returned
triumphantly to Westminster with the Public Endowment of Motherhood
as part of my open profession and with the full approval of the party
press. Applauding benches of Imperialists cheered me on my way to the
table between the whips.

That second time I took the oath I was not one of a crowd of new
members, but salient, an event, a symbol of profound changes and new
purposes in the national life.

Here it is my political book comes to an end, and in a sense my book
ends altogether. For the rest is but to tell how I was swept out of this
great world of political possibilities. I close this Third Book as I
opened it, with an admission of difficulties and complexities, but now
with a pile of manuscript before me I have to confess them unsurmounted
and still entangled.

Yet my aim was a final simplicity. I have sought to show my growing
realisation that the essential quality of all political and social
effort is the development of a great race mind behind the interplay of
individual lives. That is the collective human reality, the basis of
morality, the purpose of devotion. To that our lives must be given, from
that will come the perpetual fresh release and further ennoblement of
individual lives....

I have wanted to make that idea of a collective mind play in this book
the part United Italy plays in Machiavelli's PRINCE. I have called it
the hinterland of reality, shown it accumulating a dominating truth and
rightness which must force men's now sporadic motives more and more into
a disciplined and understanding relation to a plan. And I have tried
to indicate how I sought to serve this great clarification of our
confusions....

Now I come back to personality and the story of my self-betrayal, and
how it is I have had to leave all that far-reaching scheme of mine, a
mere project and beginning for other men to take or leave as it pleases
them.




BOOK THE FOURTH: ISABEL



CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ LOVE AND SUCCESS



1


I come to the most evasive and difficult part of my story, which is to
tell how Isabel and I have made a common wreck of our joint lives.

It is not the telling of one simple disastrous accident. There was a
vein in our natures that led to this collapse, gradually and at
this point and that it crept to the surface. One may indeed see our
destruction--for indeed politically we could not be more extinct if we
had been shot dead--in the form of a catastrophe as disconnected and
conclusive as a meteoric stone falling out of heaven upon two friends
and crushing them both. But I do not think that is true to our situation
or ourselves. We were not taken by surprise. The thing was in us and
not from without, it was akin to our way of thinking and our habitual
attitudes; it had, for all its impulsive effect, a certain necessity. We
might have escaped no doubt, as two men at a hundred yards may shoot at
each other with pistols for a considerable time and escape. But it isn't
particularly reasonable to talk of the contrariety of fate if they both
get hit.

Isabel and I were dangerous to each other for several years of
friendship, and not quite unwittingly so.

In writing this, moreover, there is a very great difficulty in steering
my way between two equally undesirable tones in the telling. In the
first place I do not want to seem to confess my sins with a penitence I
am very doubtful if I feel. Now that I have got Isabel we can no doubt
count the cost of it and feel unquenchable regrets, but I am not sure
whether, if we could be put back now into such circumstances as we
were in a year ago, or two years ago, whether with my eyes fully open I
should not do over again very much as I did. And on the other hand I do
not want to justify the things we have done. We are two bad people--if
there is to be any classification of good and bad at all, we have acted
badly, and quite apart from any other considerations we've largely
wasted our own very great possibilities. But it is part of a queer
humour that underlies all this, that I find myself slipping again and
again into a sentimental treatment of our case that is as unpremeditated
as it is insincere. When I am a little tired after a morning's writing
I find the faint suggestion getting into every other sentence that our
blunders and misdeeds embodied, after the fashion of the prophet Hosea,
profound moral truths. Indeed, I feel so little confidence in my ability
to keep this altogether out of my book that I warn the reader here that
in spite of anything he may read elsewhere in the story, intimating
however shyly an esoteric and exalted virtue in our proceedings, the
plain truth of this business is that Isabel and I wanted each other with
a want entirely formless, inconsiderate, and overwhelming. And though I
could tell you countless delightful and beautiful things about Isabel,
were this a book in her praise, I cannot either analyse that want or
account for its extreme intensity.

I will confess that deep in my mind there is a belief in a sort of wild
rightness about any love that is fraught with beauty, but that eludes
me and vanishes again, and is not, I feel, to be put with the real
veracities and righteousnesses and virtues in the paddocks and
menageries of human reason....

We have already a child, and Margaret was childless, and I find myself
prone to insist upon that, as if it was a justification. But, indeed,
when we became lovers there was small thought of Eugenics between us.
Ours was a mutual and not a philoprogenitive passion. Old Nature behind
us may have had such purposes with us, but it is not for us to annex
her intentions by a moralising afterthought. There isn't, in fact, any
decent justification for us whatever--at that the story must stand.

But if there is no justification there is at least a very effective
excuse in the mental confusedness of our time. The evasion of that
passionately thorough exposition of belief and of the grounds of
morality, which is the outcome of the mercenary religious compromises of
the late Vatican period, the stupid suppression of anything but the most
timid discussion of sexual morality in our literature and drama, the
pervading cultivated and protected muddle-headedness, leaves mentally
vigorous people with relatively enormous possibilities of destruction
and little effective help. They find themselves confronted by the
habits and prejudices of manifestly commonplace people, and by that
extraordinary patched-up Christianity, the cult of a "Bromsteadised"
deity, diffused, scattered, and aimless, which hides from examination
and any possibility of faith behind the plea of good taste. A god about
whom there is delicacy is far worse than no god at all. We are FORCED to
be laws unto ourselves and to live experimentally. It is inevitable that
a considerable fraction of just that bolder, more initiatory section of
the intellectual community, the section that can least be spared from
the collective life in a period of trial and change, will drift into
such emotional crises and such disaster as overtook us. Most perhaps
will escape, but many will go down, many more than the world can spare.
It is the unwritten law of all our public life, and the same holds true
of America, that an honest open scandal ends a career. England in the
last quarter of a century has wasted half a dozen statesmen on this
score; she would, I believe, reject Nelson now if he sought to serve
her. Is it wonderful that to us fretting here in exile this should seem
the cruellest as well as the most foolish elimination of a necessary
social element? It destroys no vice; for vice hides by nature. It
not only rewards dullness as if it were positive virtue, but sets an
enormous premium upon hypocrisy. That is my case, and that is why I am
telling this side of my story with so much explicitness.



2


Ever since the Kinghamstead election I had maintained what seemed a
desultory friendship with Isabel. At first it was rather Isabel kept
it up than I. Whenever Margaret and I went down to that villa, with its
three or four acres of garden and shrubbery about it, which fulfilled
our election promise to live at Kinghamstead, Isabel would turn up in
a state of frank cheerfulness, rejoicing at us, and talk all she was
reading and thinking to me, and stay for all the rest of the day. In
her shameless liking for me she was as natural as a savage. She would
exercise me vigorously at tennis, while Margaret lay and rested her
back in the afternoon, or guide me for some long ramble that dodged the
suburban and congested patches of the constituency with amazing skill.
She took possession of me in that unabashed, straight-minded way a girl
will sometimes adopt with a man, chose my path or criticised my
game with a motherly solicitude for my welfare that was absurd and
delightful. And we talked. We discussed and criticised the stories of
novels, scraps of history, pictures, social questions, socialism, the
policy of the Government. She was young and most unevenly informed, but
she was amazingly sharp and quick and good. Never before in my life had
I known a girl of her age, or a woman of her quality. I had never dreamt
there was such talk in the world. Kinghamstead became a lightless
place when she went to Oxford. Heaven knows how much that may not have
precipitated my abandonment of the seat!

She went to Ridout College, Oxford, and that certainly weighed with
me when presently after my breach with the Liberals various little
undergraduate societies began to ask for lectures and discussions. I
favoured Oxford. I declared openly I did so because of her. At that time
I think we neither of us suspected the possibility of passion that lay
like a coiled snake in the path before us. It seemed to us that we
had the quaintest, most delightful friendship in the world; she was
my pupil, and I was her guide, philosopher, and friend. People smiled
indulgently--even Margaret smiled indulgently--at our attraction for one
another.

Such friendships are not uncommon nowadays--among easy-going,
liberal-minded people. For the most part, there's no sort of harm, as
people say, in them. The two persons concerned are never supposed to
think of the passionate love that hovers so close to the friendship, or
if they do, then they banish the thought. I think we kept the thought as
permanently in exile as any one could do. If it did in odd moments come
into our heads we pretended elaborately it wasn't there.

Only we were both very easily jealous of each other's attention, and
tremendously insistent upon each other's preference.

I remember once during the Oxford days an intimation that should have
set me thinking, and I suppose discreetly disentangling myself. It was
one Sunday afternoon, and it must have been about May, for the trees and
shrubs of Ridout College were gay with blossom, and fresh with the new
sharp greens of spring. I had walked talking with Isabel and a couple of
other girls through the wide gardens of the place, seen and criticised
the new brick pond, nodded to the daughter of this friend and that
in the hammocks under the trees, and picked a way among the scattered
tea-parties on the lawn to our own circle on the grass under a Siberian
crab near the great bay window. There I sat and ate great quantities
of cake, and discussed the tactics of the Suffragettes. I had made some
comments upon the spirit of the movement in an address to the men in
Pembroke, and it had got abroad, and a group of girls and women dons
were now having it out with me.

I forget the drift of the conversation, or what it was made Isabel
interrupt me. She did interrupt me. She had been lying prone on the
ground at my right hand, chin on fists, listening thoughtfully, and
I was sitting beside old Lady Evershead on a garden seat. I turned to
Isabel's voice, and saw her face uplifted, and her dear cheeks and nose
and forehead all splashed and barred with sunlight and the shadows of
the twigs of the trees behind me. And something--an infinite tenderness,
stabbed me. It was a keen physical feeling, like nothing I had ever felt
before. It had a quality of tears in it. For the first time in my narrow
and concentrated life another human being had really thrust into my
being and gripped my very heart.

Our eyes met perplexed for an extraordinary moment. Then I turned
back and addressed myself a little stiffly to the substance of her
intervention. For some time I couldn't look at her again.

From that time forth I knew I loved Isabel beyond measure.

Yet it is curious that it never occurred to me for a year or so that
this was likely to be a matter of passion between us. I have told how
definitely I put my imagination into harness in those matters at my
marriage, and I was living now in a world of big interests, where there
is neither much time nor inclination for deliberate love-making. I
suppose there is a large class of men who never meet a girl or a woman
without thinking of sex, who meet a friend's daughter and decide:
"Mustn't get friendly with her--wouldn't DO," and set invisible bars
between themselves and all the wives in the world. Perhaps that is
the way to live. Perhaps there is no other method than this effectual
annihilation of half--and the most sympathetic and attractive half--of
the human beings in the world, so far as any frank intercourse is
concerned. I am quite convinced anyhow that such a qualified intimacy
as ours, such a drifting into the sense of possession, such untrammeled
conversation with an invisible, implacable limit set just where the
intimacy glows, it is no kind of tolerable compromise. If men and women
are to go so far together, they must be free to go as far as they may
want to go, without the vindictive destruction that has come upon us.
On the basis of the accepted codes the jealous people are right, and the
liberal-minded ones are playing with fire. If people are not to love,
then they must be kept apart. If they are not to be kept apart, then we
must prepare for an unprecedented toleration of lovers.

Isabel was as unforeseeing as I to begin with, but sex marches into the
life of an intelligent girl with demands and challenges far more urgent
than the mere call of curiosity and satiable desire that comes to a
young man. No woman yet has dared to tell the story of that unfolding.
She attracted men, and she encouraged them, and watched them, and tested
them, and dismissed them, and concealed the substance of her thoughts
about them in the way that seems instinctive in a natural-minded girl.
There was even an engagement--amidst the protests and disapproval of
the college authorities. I never saw the man, though she gave me a long
history of the affair, to which I listened with a forced and insincere
sympathy. She struck me oddly as taking the relationship for a thing
in itself, and regardless of its consequences. After a time she became
silent about him, and then threw him over; and by that time, I think,
for all that she was so much my junior, she knew more about herself and
me than I was to know for several years to come.

We didn't see each other for some months after my resignation, but we
kept up a frequent correspondence. She said twice over that she wanted
to talk to me, that letters didn't convey what one wanted to say, and
I went up to Oxford pretty definitely to see her--though I combined it
with one or two other engagements--somewhere in February. Insensibly she
had become important enough for me to make journeys for her.

But we didn't see very much of one another on that occasion. There was
something in the air between us that made a faint embarrassment; the
mere fact, perhaps, that she had asked me to come up.

A year before she would have dashed off with me quite unscrupulously
to talk alone, carried me off to her room for an hour with a minute of
chaperonage to satisfy the rules. Now there was always some one or other
near us that it seemed impossible to exorcise.

We went for a walk on the Sunday afternoon with old Fortescue, K. C.,
who'd come up to see his two daughters, both great friends of Isabel's,
and some mute inglorious don whose name I forget, but who was in a
state of marked admiration for her. The six of us played a game of
conversational entanglements throughout, and mostly I was impressing
the Fortescue girls with the want of mental concentration possible in a
rising politician. We went down Carfex, I remember, to Folly Bridge,
and inspected the Barges, and then back by way of Merton to the Botanic
Gardens and Magdalen Bridge. And in the Botanic Gardens she got almost
her only chance with me.

"Last months at Oxford," she said.

"And then?" I asked.

"I'm coming to London," she said.

"To write?"

She was silent for a moment. Then she said abruptly, with that quick
flush of hers and a sudden boldness in her eyes: "I'm going to work with
you. Why shouldn't I?"



3


Here, again, I suppose I had a fair warning of the drift of things.
I seem to remember myself in the train to Paddington, sitting with a
handful of papers--galley proofs for the BLUE WEEKLY, I suppose--on my
lap, and thinking about her and that last sentence of hers, and all that
it might mean to me.

It is very hard to recall even the main outline of anything so elusive
as a meditation. I know that the idea of working with her gripped me,
fascinated me. That my value in her life seemed growing filled me with
pride and a kind of gratitude. I was already in no doubt that her value
in my life was tremendous. It made it none the less, that in those days
I was obsessed by the idea that she was transitory, and bound to go out
of my life again. It is no good trying to set too fine a face upon this
complex business, there is gold and clay and sunlight and savagery in
every love story, and a multitude of elvish elements peeped out beneath
the fine rich curtain of affection that masked our future. I've never
properly weighed how immensely my vanity was gratified by her clear
preference for me. Nor can I for a moment determine how much deliberate
intention I hide from myself in this affair.

Certainly I think some part of me must have been saying in the train:
"Leave go of her. Get away from her. End this now." I can't have been so
stupid as not to have had that in my mind....

If she had been only a beautiful girl in love with me, I think I could
have managed the situation. Once or twice since my marriage and before
Isabel became of any significance in my life, there had been incidents
with other people, flashes of temptation--no telling is possible of
the thing resisted. I think that mere beauty and passion would not
have taken me. But between myself and Isabel things were incurably
complicated by the intellectual sympathy we had, the jolly march of
our minds together. That has always mattered enormously. I should have
wanted her company nearly as badly if she had been some crippled old
lady; we would have hunted shoulder to shoulder, as two men. Only two
men would never have had the patience and readiness for one another
we two had. I had never for years met any one with whom I could be so
carelessly sure of understanding or to whom I could listen so easily
and fully. She gave me, with an extraordinary completeness, that rare,
precious effect of always saying something fresh, and yet saying it so
that it filled into and folded about all the little recesses and corners
of my mind with an infinite, soft familiarity. It is impossible to
explain that. It is like trying to explain why her voice, her voice
heard speaking to any one--heard speaking in another room--pleased my
ears.

She was the only Oxford woman who took a first that year. She spent the
summer in Scotland and Yorkshire, writing to me continually of all she
now meant to do, and stirring my imagination. She came to London for
the autumn session. For a time she stayed with old Lady Colbeck, but she
fell out with her hostess when it became clear she wanted to write, not
novels, but journalism, and then she set every one talking by taking
a flat near Victoria and installing as her sole protector an elderly
German governess she had engaged through a scholastic agency. She began
writing, not in that copious flood the undisciplined young woman of
gifts is apt to produce, but in exactly the manner of an able young man,
experimenting with forms, developing the phrasing of opinions, taking
a definite line. She was, of course, tremendously discussed. She was
disapproved of, but she was invited out to dinner. She got rather a
reputation for the management of elderly distinguished men. It was an
odd experience to follow Margaret's soft rustle of silk into some
big drawing-room and discover my snub-nosed girl in the blue sack
transformed into a shining creature in the soft splendour of pearls and
ivory-white and lace, and with a silver band about her dusky hair.

For a time we did not meet very frequently, though always she professed
an unblushing preference for my company, and talked my views and sought
me out. Then her usefulness upon the BLUE WEEKLY began to link us
closelier. She would come up to the office, and sit by the window,
and talk over the proofs of the next week's articles, going through my
intentions with a keen investigatory scalpel. Her talk always puts me in
mind of a steel blade. Her writing became rapidly very good; she had
a wit and a turn of the phrase that was all her own. We seemed to have
forgotten the little shadow of embarrassment that had fallen over our
last meeting at Oxford. Everything seemed natural and easy between us in
those days; a little unconventional, but that made it all the brighter.

We developed something like a custom of walks, about once a week or so,
and letters and notes became frequent. I won't pretend things were not
keenly personal between us, but they had an air of being innocently
mental. She used to call me "Master" in our talks, a monstrous and
engaging flattery, and I was inordinately proud to have her as my pupil.
Who wouldn't have been? And we went on at that distance for a long
time--until within a year of the Handitch election.

After Lady Colbeck threw her up as altogether too "intellectual" for
comfortable control, Isabel was taken up by the Balfes in a less formal
and compromising manner, and week-ended with them and their cousin
Leonora Sparling, and spent large portions of her summer with them in
Herefordshire. There was a lover or so in that time, men who came a
little timidly at this brilliant young person with the frank manner and
the Amazonian mind, and, she declared, received her kindly refusals with
manifest relief. And Arnold Shoesmith struck up a sort of friendship
that oddly imitated mine. She took a liking to him because he was clumsy
and shy and inexpressive; she embarked upon the dangerous interest of
helping him to find his soul. I had some twinges of jealousy about that.
I didn't see the necessity of him. He invaded her time, and I thought
that might interfere with her work. If their friendship stole some hours
from Isabel's writing, it did not for a long while interfere with our
walks or our talks, or the close intimacy we had together.



4


Then suddenly Isabel and I found ourselves passionately in love.

The change came so entirely without warning or intention that I find it
impossible now to tell the order of its phases. What disturbed pebble
started the avalanche I cannot trace. Perhaps it was simply that the
barriers between us and this masked aspect of life had been wearing down
unperceived.

And there came a change in Isabel. It was like some change in the cycle
of nature, like the onset of spring--a sharp brightness, an uneasiness.
She became restless with her work; little encounters with men began to
happen, encounters not quite in the quality of the earlier proposals;
and then came an odd incident of which she told me, but somehow, I felt,
didn't tell me completely. She told me all she was able to tell me.
She had been at a dance at the Ropers', and a man, rather well known in
London, had kissed her. The thing amazed her beyond measure. It was the
sort of thing immediately possible between any man and any woman, that
one never expects to happen until it happens. It had the surprising
effect of a judge generally known to be bald suddenly whipping off his
wig in court. No absolutely unexpected revelation could have quite the
same quality of shock. She went through the whole thing to me with a
remarkable detachment, told me how she had felt--and the odd things it
seemed to open to her.

"I WANT to be kissed, and all that sort of thing," she avowed. "I
suppose every woman does."

She added after a pause: "And I don't want any one to do it."

This struck me as queerly expressive of the woman's attitude to these
things. "Some one presently will--solve that," I said.

"Some one will perhaps."

I was silent.

"Some one will," she said, almost viciously. "And then we'll have to
stop these walks and talks of ours, dear Master.... I'll be sorry to
give them up."

"It's part of the requirements of the situation," I said, "that he
should be--oh, very interesting! He'll start, no doubt, all sorts of new
topics, and open no end of attractive vistas.... You can't, you know,
always go about in a state of pupillage."

"I don't think I can," said Isabel. "But it's only just recently I've
begun to doubt about it."

I remember these things being said, but just how much we saw and
understood, and just how far we were really keeping opaque to each other
then, I cannot remember. But it must have been quite soon after this
that we spent nearly a whole day together at Kew Gardens, with the
curtains up and the barriers down, and the thing that had happened plain
before our eyes. I don't remember we ever made any declaration. We just
assumed the new footing....

It was a day early in that year--I think in January, because there was
thin, crisp snow on the grass, and we noted that only two other people
had been to the Pagoda that day. I've a curious impression of greenish
colour, hot, moist air and huge palm fronds about very much of our talk,
as though we were nearly all the time in the Tropical House. But I
also remember very vividly looking at certain orange and red spray-like
flowers from Patagonia, which could not have been there. It is a curious
thing that I do not remember we made any profession of passionate love
for one another; we talked as though the fact of our intense love for
each other had always been patent between us. There was so long and
frank an intimacy between us that we talked far more like brother and
sister or husband and wife than two people engaged in the war of the
sexes. We wanted to know what we were going to do, and whatever we
did we meant to do in the most perfect concert. We both felt an
extraordinary accession of friendship and tenderness then, and, what
again is curious, very little passion. But there was also, in spite of
the perplexities we faced, an immense satisfaction about that day. It
was as if we had taken off something that had hindered our view of each
other, like people who unvizored to talk more easily at a masked ball.

I've had since to view our relations from the standpoint of the ordinary
observer. I find that vision in the most preposterous contrast with all
that really went on between us. I suppose there I should figure as a
wicked seducer, while an unprotected girl succumbed to my fascinations.
As a matter of fact, it didn't occur to us that there was any personal
inequality between us. I knew her for my equal mentally; in so many
things she was beyond comparison cleverer than I; her courage outwent
mine. The quick leap of her mind evoked a flash of joy in mine like the
response of an induction wire; her way of thinking was like watching
sunlight reflected from little waves upon the side of a boat, it was so
bright, so mobile, so variously and easily true to its law. In the back
of our minds we both had a very definite belief that making love is full
of joyous, splendid, tender, and exciting possibilities, and we had to
discuss why we shouldn't be to the last degree lovers.

Now, what I should like to print here, if it were possible, in all the
screaming emphasis of red ink, is this: that the circumstances of my
upbringing and the circumstances of Isabel's upbringing had left not a
shadow of belief or feeling that the utmost passionate love between
us was in itself intrinsically WRONG. I've told with the fullest
particularity just all that I was taught or found out for myself
in these matters, and Isabel's reading and thinking, and the fierce
silences of her governesses and the breathless warnings of teachers, and
all the social and religious influences that had been brought to bear
upon her, had worked out to the same void of conviction. The code had
failed with us altogether. We didn't for a moment consider anything but
the expediency of what we both, for all our quiet faces and steady eyes,
wanted most passionately to do.

Well, here you have the state of mind of whole brigades of people, and
particularly of young people, nowadays. The current morality hasn't
gripped them; they don't really believe in it at all. They may render
it lip-service, but that is quite another thing. There are scarcely any
tolerable novels to justify its prohibitions; its prohibitions do, in
fact, remain unjustified amongst these ugly suppressions. You may, if
you choose, silence the admission of this in literature and current
discussion; you will not prevent it working out in lives. People come up
to the great moments of passion crudely unaware, astoundingly unprepared
as no really civilised and intelligently planned community would let any
one be unprepared. They find themselves hedged about with customs
that have no organic hold upon them, and mere discretions all generous
spirits are disposed to despise.

Consider the infinite absurdities of it! Multitudes of us are trying
to run this complex modern community on a basis of "Hush" without
explaining to our children or discussing with them anything about
love and marriage at all. Doubt and knowledge creep about in enforced
darknesses and silences. We are living upon an ancient tradition which
everybody doubts and nobody has ever analysed. We affect a tremendous
and cultivated shyness and delicacy about imperatives of the most
arbitrary appearance. What ensues? What did ensue with us, for example?
On the one hand was a great desire, robbed of any appearance of shame
and grossness by the power of love, and on the other hand, the possible
jealousy of so and so, the disapproval of so and so, material risks and
dangers. It is only in the retrospect that we have been able to grasp
something of the effectual case against us. The social prohibition lit
by the intense glow of our passion, presented itself as preposterous,
irrational, arbitrary, and ugly, a monster fit only for mockery. We
might be ruined! Well, there is a phase in every love affair, a sort
of heroic hysteria, when death and ruin are agreeable additions to the
prospect. It gives the business a gravity, a solemnity. Timid people may
hesitate and draw back with a vague instinctive terror of the immensity
of the oppositions they challenge, but neither Isabel nor I are timid
people.

We weighed what was against us. We decided just exactly as scores of
thousands of people have decided in this very matter, that if it were
possible to keep this thing to ourselves, there was nothing against it.
And so we took our first step. With the hunger of love in us, it was
easy to conclude we might be lovers, and still keep everything to
ourselves. That cleared our minds of the one persistent obstacle that
mattered to us--the haunting presence of Margaret.

And then we found, as all those scores of thousands of people scattered
about us have found, that we could not keep it to ourselves. Love will
out. All the rest of this story is the chronicle of that. Love with
sustained secrecy cannot be love. It is just exactly the point people do
not understand.



5


But before things came to that pass, some months and many phases and a
sudden journey to America intervened.

"This thing spells disaster," I said. "You are too big and I am too big
to attempt this secrecy. Think of the intolerable possibility of being
found out! At any cost we have to stop--even at the cost of parting."

"Just because we may be found out!"

"Just because we may be found out."

"Master, I shouldn't in the least mind being found out with you. I'm
afraid--I'd be proud."

"Wait till it happens."

There followed a struggle of immense insincerity between us. It is hard
to tell who urged and who resisted.

She came to me one night to the editorial room of the BLUE WEEKLY, and
argued and kissed me with wet salt lips, and wept in my arms; she told
me that now passionate longing for me and my intimate life possessed
her, so that she could not work, could not think, could not endure other
people for the love of me....

I fled absurdly. That is the secret of the futile journey to America
that puzzled all my friends.

I ran away from Isabel. I took hold of the situation with all my
strength, put in Britten with sketchy, hasty instructions to edit the
paper, and started headlong and with luggage, from which, among other
things, my shaving things were omitted, upon a tour round the world.

Preposterous flight that was! I remember as a thing almost farcical my
explanations to Margaret, and how frantically anxious I was to prevent
the remote possibility of her coming with me, and how I crossed in the
TUSCAN, a bad, wet boat, and mixed seasickness with ungovernable sorrow.
I wept--tears. It was inexpressibly queer and ridiculous--and, good God!
how I hated my fellow-passengers!

New York inflamed and excited me for a time, and when things slackened,
I whirled westward to Chicago--eating and drinking, I remember, in the
train from shoals of little dishes, with a sort of desperate voracity.
I did the queerest things to distract myself--no novelist would dare to
invent my mental and emotional muddle. Chicago also held me at first,
amazing lapse from civilisation that the place is! and then abruptly,
with hosts expecting me, and everything settled for some days in Denver,
I found myself at the end of my renunciations, and turned and came back
headlong to London.

Let me confess it wasn't any sense of perfect and incurable trust and
confidence that brought me back, or any idea that now I had strength to
refrain. It was a sudden realisation that after all the separation might
succeed; some careless phrasing in one of her jealously read letters set
that idea going in my mind--the haunting perception that I might return
to London and find it empty of the Isabel who had pervaded it. Honour,
discretion, the careers of both of us, became nothing at the thought. I
couldn't conceive my life resuming there without Isabel. I couldn't, in
short, stand it.

I don't even excuse my return. It is inexcusable. I ought to have kept
upon my way westward--and held out. I couldn't. I wanted Isabel, and
I wanted her so badly now that everything else in the world was
phantom-like until that want was satisfied. Perhaps you have never
wanted anything like that. I went straight to her.

But here I come to untellable things. There is no describing the reality
of love. The shapes of things are nothing, the actual happenings are
nothing, except that somehow there falls a light upon them and a wonder.
Of how we met, and the thrill of the adventure, the curious bright sense
of defiance, the joy of having dared, I can't tell--I can but hint of
just one aspect, of what an amazing LARK--it's the only word--it seemed
to us. The beauty which was the essence of it, which justifies it so far
as it will bear justification, eludes statement.

What can a record of contrived meetings, of sundering difficulties
evaded and overcome, signify here? Or what can it convey to say that
one looked deep into two dear, steadfast eyes, or felt a heart throb
and beat, or gripped soft hair softly in a trembling hand? Robbed of
encompassing love, these things are of no more value than the taste of
good wine or the sight of good pictures, or the hearing of music,--just
sensuality and no more. No one can tell love--we can only tell the gross
facts of love and its consequences. Given love--given mutuality, and one
has effected a supreme synthesis and come to a new level of life--but
only those who know can know. This business has brought me more
bitterness and sorrow than I had ever expected to bear, but even now
I will not say that I regret that wilful home-coming altogether. We
loved--to the uttermost. Neither of us could have loved any one else
as we did and do love one another. It was ours, that beauty; it existed
only between us when we were close together, for no one in the world
ever to know save ourselves.

My return to the office sticks out in my memory with an extreme
vividness, because of the wild eagle of pride that screamed within me.
It was Tuesday morning, and though not a soul in London knew of it yet
except Isabel, I had been back in England a week. I came in upon Britten
and stood in the doorway.

"GOD!" he said at the sight of me.

"I'm back," I said.

He looked at my excited face with those red-brown eyes of his. Silently
I defied him to speak his mind.

"Where did you turn back?" he said at last.



6


I had to tell what were, so far as I can remember my first positive lies
to Margaret in explaining that return. I had written to her from Chicago
and again from New York, saying that I felt I ought to be on the spot
in England for the new session, and that I was coming back--presently.
I concealed the name of my boat from her, and made a calculated
prevarication when I announced my presence in London. I telephoned
before I went back for my rooms to be prepared. She was, I knew, with
the Bunting Harblows in Durham, and when she came back to Radnor Square
I had been at home a day.

I remember her return so well.

My going away and the vivid secret of the present had wiped out from my
mind much of our long estrangement. Something, too, had changed in her.
I had had some hint of it in her letters, but now I saw it plainly. I
came out of my study upon the landing when I heard the turmoil of her
arrival below, and she came upstairs with a quickened gladness. It was a
cold March, and she was dressed in unfamiliar dark furs that suited her
extremely and reinforced the delicate flush of her sweet face. She held
out both her hands to me, and drew me to her unhesitatingly and kissed
me.

"So glad you are back, dear," she said. "Oh! so very glad you are back."

I returned her kiss with a queer feeling at my heart, too
undifferentiated to be even a definite sense of guilt or meanness. I
think it was chiefly amazement--at the universe--at myself.

"I never knew what it was to be away from you," she said.

I perceived suddenly that she had resolved to end our estrangement. She
put herself so that my arm came caressingly about her.

"These are jolly furs," I said.

"I got them for you."

The parlourmaid appeared below dealing with the maid and the luggage
cab.

"Tell me all about America," said Margaret. "I feel as though you'd been
away six year's."

We went arm in arm into our little sitting-room, and I took off the
fur's for her and sat down upon the chintz-covered sofa by the fire.
She had ordered tea, and came and sat by me. I don't know what I had
expected, but of all things I had certainly not expected this sudden
abolition of our distances.

"I want to know all about America," she repeated, with her eyes
scrutinising me. "Why did you come back?"

I repeated the substance of my letters rather lamely, and she sat
listening.

"But why did you turn back--without going to Denver?"

"I wanted to come back. I was restless."

"Restlessness," she said, and thought. "You were restless in Venice. You
said it was restlessness took you to America."

Again she studied me. She turned a little awkwardly to her tea things,
and poured needless water from the silver kettle into the teapot.
Then she sat still for some moments looking at the equipage with
expressionless eyes. I saw her hand upon the edge of the table tremble
slightly. I watched her closely. A vague uneasiness possessed me. What
might she not know or guess?

She spoke at last with an effort. "I wish you were in Parliament again,"
she said. "Life doesn't give you events enough."

"If I was in Parliament again, I should be on the Conservative side."

"I know," she said, and was still more thoughtful.

"Lately," she began, and paused. "Lately I've been reading--you."

I didn't help her out with what she had to say. I waited.

"I didn't understand what you were after. I had misjudged. I didn't
know. I think perhaps I was rather stupid." Her eyes were suddenly
shining with tears. "You didn't give me much chance to understand."

She turned upon me suddenly with a voice full of tears.

"Husband," she said abruptly, holding her two hands out to me, "I want
to begin over again!"

I took her hands, perplexed beyond measure. "My dear!" I said.

"I want to begin over again."

I bowed my head to hide my face, and found her hand in mine and kissed
it.

"Ah!" she said, and slowly withdrew her hand. She leant forward with her
arm on the sofa-back, and looked very intently into my face. I felt the
most damnable scoundrel in the world as I returned her gaze. The thought
of Isabel's darkly shining eyes seemed like a physical presence between
us....

"Tell me," I said presently, to break the intolerable tension, "tell me
plainly what you mean by this."

I sat a little away from her, and then took my teacup in hand, with an
odd effect of defending myself. "Have you been reading that old book of
mine?" I asked.

"That and the paper. I took a complete set from the beginning down
to Durham with me. I have read it over, thought it over. I didn't
understand--what you were teaching."

There was a little pause.

"It all seems so plain to me now," she said, "and so true."

I was profoundly disconcerted. I put down my teacup, stood up in the
middle of the hearthrug, and began talking. "I'm tremendously glad,
Margaret, that you've come to see I'm not altogether perverse," I began.
I launched out into a rather trite and windy exposition of my views, and
she sat close to me on the sofa, looking up into my face, hanging on my
words, a deliberate and invincible convert.

"Yes," she said, "yes."...

I had never doubted my new conceptions before; now I doubted them
profoundly. But I went on talking. It's the grim irony in the lives of
all politicians, writers, public teachers, that once the audience is at
their feet, a new loyalty has gripped them. It isn't their business to
admit doubt and imperfections. They have to go on talking. And I was
now so accustomed to Isabel's vivid interruptions, qualifications,
restatements, and confirmations....

Margaret and I dined together at home. She made me open out my political
projects to her. "I have been foolish," she said. "I want to help."

And by some excuse I have forgotten she made me come to her room. I
think it was some book I had to take her, some American book I had
brought back with me, and mentioned in our talk. I walked in with it,
and put it down on the table and turned to go.

"Husband!" she cried, and held out her slender arms to me. I was
compelled to go to her and kiss her, and she twined them softly about my
neck and drew me to her and kissed me. I disentangled them very gently,
and took each wrist and kissed it, and the backs of her hands.

"Good-night," I said. There came a little pause. "Good-night, Margaret,"
I repeated, and walked very deliberately and with a kind of sham
preoccupation to the door.

I did not look at her, but I could feel her standing, watching me. If I
had looked up, she would, I knew, have held out her arms to me....

At the very outset that secret, which was to touch no one but Isabel and
myself, had reached out to stab another human being.



7


The whole world had changed for Isabel and me; and we tried to pretend
that nothing had changed except a small matter between us. We believed
quite honestly at that time that it was possible to keep this thing
that had happened from any reaction at all, save perhaps through some
magically enhanced vigour in our work, upon the world about us! Seen in
retrospect, one can realise the absurdity of this belief; within a week
I realised it; but that does not alter the fact that we did believe as
much, and that people who are deeply in love and unable to marry will
continue to believe so to the very end of time. They will continue to
believe out of existence every consideration that separates them until
they have come together. Then they will count the cost, as we two had to
do.

I am telling a story, and not propounding theories in this book; and
chiefly I am telling of the ideas and influences and emotions that
have happened to me--me as a sort of sounding board for my world. The
moralist is at liberty to go over my conduct with his measure and
say, "At this point or at that you went wrong, and you ought to have
done"--so-and-so. The point of interest to the statesman is that it
didn't for a moment occur to us to do so-and-so when the time for doing
it came. It amazes me now to think how little either of us troubled
about the established rights or wrongs of the situation. We hadn't an
atom of respect for them, innate or acquired. The guardians of public
morals will say we were very bad people; I submit in defence that they
are very bad guardians--provocative guardians.... And when at last there
came a claim against us that had an effective validity for us, we were
in the full tide of passionate intimacy.

I had a night of nearly sleepless perplexity after Margaret's return.
She had suddenly presented herself to me like something dramatically
recalled, fine, generous, infinitely capable of feeling. I was amazed
how much I had forgotten her. In my contempt for vulgarised and
conventionalised honour I had forgotten that for me there was such
a reality as honour. And here it was, warm and near to me, living,
breathing, unsuspecting. Margaret's pride was my honour, that I had had
no right even to imperil.

I do not now remember if I thought at that time of going to Isabel and
putting this new aspect of the case before her. Perhaps I did. Perhaps
I may have considered even then the possibility of ending what had so
freshly and passionately begun. If I did, it vanished next day at
the sight of her. Whatever regrets came in the darkness, the daylight
brought an obstinate confidence in our resolution again. We would, we
declared, "pull the thing off." Margaret must not know. Margaret should
not know. If Margaret did not know, then no harm whatever would be done.
We tried to sustain that....

For a brief time we had been like two people in a magic cell, magically
cut off from the world and full of a light of its own, and then we began
to realise that we were not in the least cut off, that the world was all
about us and pressing in upon us, limiting us, threatening us, resuming
possession of us. I tried to ignore the injury to Margaret of her
unreciprocated advances. I tried to maintain to myself that this hidden
love made no difference to the now irreparable breach between husband
and wife. But I never spoke of it to Isabel or let her see that aspect
of our case. How could I? The time for that had gone....

Then in new shapes and relations came trouble. Distressful elements
crept in by reason of our unavoidable furtiveness; we ignored them,
hid them from each other, and attempted to hide them from ourselves.
Successful love is a thing of abounding pride, and we had to be secret.
It was delightful at first to be secret, a whispering, warm conspiracy;
then presently it became irksome and a little shameful. Her essential
frankness of soul was all against the masks and falsehoods that many
women would have enjoyed. Together in our secrecy we relaxed, then in
the presence of other people again it was tiresome to have to watch
for the careless, too easy phrase, to snatch back one's hand from the
limitless betrayal of a light, familiar touch.

Love becomes a poor thing, at best a poor beautiful thing, if it
develops no continuing and habitual intimacy. We were always meeting,
and most gloriously loving and beginning--and then we had to snatch at
remorseless ticking watches, hurry to catch trains, and go back to this
or that. That is all very well for the intrigues of idle people perhaps,
but not for an intense personal relationship. It is like lighting a
candle for the sake of lighting it, over and over again, and each time
blowing it out. That, no doubt, must be very amusing to children playing
with the matches, but not to people who love warm light, and want it in
order to do fine and honourable things together. We had achieved--I
give the ugly phrase that expresses the increasing discolouration in my
mind--"illicit intercourse." To end at that, we now perceived, wasn't in
our style. But where were we to end?...

Perhaps we might at this stage have given it up. I think if we could
have seen ahead and around us we might have done so. But the glow of our
cell blinded us.... I wonder what might have happened if at that time we
had given it up.... We propounded it, we met again in secret to discuss
it, and our overpowering passion for one another reduced that meeting to
absurdity....

Presently the idea of children crept between us. It came in from all our
conceptions of life and public service; it was, we found, in the quality
of our minds that physical love without children is a little weak,
timorous, more than a little shameful. With imaginative people there
very speedily comes a time when that realisation is inevitable. We
hadn't thought of that before--it isn't natural to think of that before.
We hadn't known. There is no literature in English dealing with such
things.

There is a necessary sequence of phases in love. These came in their
order, and with them, unanticipated tarnishings on the first bright
perfection of our relations. For a time these developing phases were
no more than a secret and private trouble between us, little shadows
spreading by imperceptible degrees across that vivid and luminous cell.



8


The Handitch election flung me suddenly into prominence.

It is still only two years since that struggle, and I will not trouble
the reader with a detailed history of events that must be quite
sufficiently present in his mind for my purpose already. Huge stacks of
journalism have dealt with Handitch and its significance. For the reader
very probably, as for most people outside a comparatively small circle,
it meant my emergence from obscurity. We obtruded no editor's name in
the BLUE WEEKLY; I had never as yet been on the London hoardings. Before
Handitch I was a journalist and writer of no great public standing;
after Handitch, I was definitely a person, in the little group of
persons who stood for the Young Imperialist movement. Handitch was, to a
very large extent, my affair. I realised then, as a man comes to do, how
much one can still grow after seven and twenty. In the second election
I was a man taking hold of things; at Kinghamstead I had been simply a
young candidate, a party unit, led about the constituency, told to
do this and that, and finally washed in by the great Anti-Imperialist
flood, like a starfish rolling up a beach.

My feminist views had earnt the mistrust of the party, and I do not
think I should have got the chance of Handitch or indeed any chance at
all of Parliament for a long time, if it had not been that the seat with
its long record of Liberal victories and its Liberal majority of 3642 at
the last election, offered a hopeless contest. The Liberal dissensions
and the belated but by no means contemptible Socialist candidate were
providential interpositions. I think, however, the conduct of Gane,
Crupp, and Tarvrille in coming down to fight for me, did count
tremendously in my favour. "We aren't going to win, perhaps," said
Crupp, "but we are going to talk." And until the very eve of victory, we
treated Handitch not so much as a battlefield as a hoarding. And so it
was the Endowment of Motherhood as a practical form of Eugenics got into
English politics.

Plutus, our agent, was scared out of his wits when the thing began.

"They're ascribing all sorts of queer ideas to you about the Family," he
said.

"I think the Family exists for the good of the children," I said; "is
that queer?"

"Not when you explain it--but they won't let you explain it. And about
marriage--?"

"I'm all right about marriage--trust me."

"Of course, if YOU had children," said Plutus, rather
inconsiderately....

They opened fire upon me in a little electioneering rag call
the HANDITCH SENTINEL, with a string of garbled quotations and
misrepresentations that gave me an admirable text for a speech. I spoke
for an hour and ten minutes with a more and more crumpled copy of the
SENTINEL in my hand, and I made the fullest and completest exposition
of the idea of endowing motherhood that I think had ever been made up
to that time in England. Its effect on the press was extraordinary. The
Liberal papers gave me quite unprecedented space under the impression
that I had only to be given rope to hang myself; the Conservatives cut
me down or tried to justify me; the whole country was talking. I had had
a pamphlet in type upon the subject, and I revised this carefully and
put it on the book-stalls within three days. It sold enormously and
brought me bushels of letters. We issued over three thousand in Handitch
alone. At meeting after meeting I was heckled upon nothing else. Long
before polling day Plutus was converted.

"It's catching on like old age pensions," he said. "We've dished the
Liberals! To think that such a project should come from our side!"

But it was only with the declaration of the poll that my battle was won.
No one expected more than a snatch victory, and I was in by over fifteen
hundred. At one bound Cossington's papers passed from apologetics varied
by repudiation to triumphant praise. "A renascent England, breeding
men," said the leader in his chief daily on the morning after the
polling, and claimed that the Conservatives had been ever the pioneers
in sanely bold constructive projects.

I came up to London with a weary but rejoicing Margaret by the night
train.



CHAPTER THE SECOND ~~ THE IMPOSSIBLE POSITION



1


To any one who did not know of that glowing secret between Isabel and
myself, I might well have appeared at that time the most successful and
enviable of men. I had recovered rapidly from an uncongenial start
in political life; I had become a considerable force through the BLUE
WEEKLY, and was shaping an increasingly influential body of opinion; I
had re-entered Parliament with quite dramatic distinction, and in spite
of a certain faltering on the part of the orthodox Conservatives
towards the bolder elements in our propaganda, I had loyal and unenvious
associates who were making me a power in the party. People were coming
to our group, understandings were developing. It was clear we should
play a prominent part in the next general election, and that, given a
Conservative victory, I should be assured of office. The world opened
out to me brightly and invitingly. Great schemes took shape in my mind,
always more concrete, always more practicable; the years ahead seemed
falling into order, shining with the credible promise of immense
achievement.

And at the heart of it all, unseen and unsuspected, was the secret of my
relations with Isabel--like a seed that germinates and thrusts, thrusts
relentlessly.

From the onset of the Handitch contest onward, my meetings with her had
been more and more pervaded by the discussion of our situation. It had
innumerable aspects. It was very present to us that we wanted to be
together as much as possible--we were beginning to long very much for
actual living together in the same house, so that one could come as
it were carelessly--unawares--upon the other, busy perhaps about some
trivial thing. We wanted to feel each other in the daily atmosphere.
Preceding our imperatively sterile passion, you must remember, outside
it, altogether greater than it so far as our individual lives were
concerned, there had grown and still grew an enormous affection and
intellectual sympathy between us. We brought all our impressions and all
our ideas to each other, to see them in each other's light. It is hard
to convey that quality of intellectual unison to any one who has not
experienced it. I thought more and more in terms of conversation with
Isabel; her possible comments upon things would flash into my mind,
oh!--with the very sound of her voice.

I remember, too, the odd effect of seeing her in the distance going
about Handitch, like any stranger canvasser; the queer emotion of her
approach along the street, the greeting as she passed. The morning of
the polling she vanished from the constituency. I saw her for an instant
in the passage behind our Committee rooms.

"Going?" said I.

She nodded.

"Stay it out. I want you to see the fun. I remember--the other time."

She didn't answer for a moment or so, and stood with face averted.

"It's Margaret's show," she said abruptly. "If I see her smiling there
like a queen by your side--! She did--last time. I remember." She caught
at a sob and dashed her hand across her face impatiently. "Jealous fool,
mean and petty, jealous fool!... Good luck, old man, to you! You're
going to win. But I don't want to see the end of it all the same...."

"Good-bye!" said I, clasping her hand as some supporter appeared in the
passage....

I came back to London victorious, and a little flushed and coarse with
victory; and so soon as I could break away I went to Isabel's flat and
found her white and worn, with the stain of secret weeping about her
eyes. I came into the room to her and shut the door.

"You said I'd win," I said, and held out my arms.

She hugged me closely for a moment.

"My dear," I whispered, "it's nothing--without you--nothing!"

We didn't speak for some seconds. Then she slipped from my hold. "Look!"
she said, smiling like winter sunshine. "I've had in all the morning
papers--the pile of them, and you--resounding."

"It's more than I dared hope."

"Or I."

She stood for a moment still smiling bravely, and then she was sobbing
in my arms. "The bigger you are--the more you show," she said--"the more
we are parted. I know, I know--"

I held her close to me, making no answer.

Presently she became still. "Oh, well," she said, and wiped her eyes and
sat down on the little sofa by the fire; and I sat down beside her.

"I didn't know all there was in love," she said, staring at the coals,
"when we went love-making."

I put my arm behind her and took a handful of her dear soft hair in my
hand and kissed it.

"You've done a great thing this time," she said. "Handitch will make
you."

"It opens big chances," I said. "But why are you weeping, dear one?"

"Envy," she said, "and love."

"You're not lonely?"

"I've plenty to do--and lots of people."

"Well?"

"I want you."

"You've got me."

She put her arm about me and kissed me. "I want you," she said, "just as
if I had nothing of you. You don't understand--how a woman wants a man.
I thought once if I just gave myself to you it would be enough. It was
nothing--it was just a step across the threshold. My dear, every moment
you are away I ache for you--ache! I want to be about when it isn't
love-making or talk. I want to be doing things for you, and watching
you when you're not thinking of me. All those safe, careless, intimate
things. And something else--" She stopped. "Dear, I don't want to bother
you. I just want you to know I love you...."

She caught my head in her hands and kissed it, then stood up abruptly.

I looked up at her, a little perplexed.

"Dear heart," said I, "isn't this enough? You're my councillor, my
colleague, my right hand, the secret soul of my life--"

"And I want to darn your socks," she said, smiling back at me.

"You're insatiable."

She smiled "No," she said. "I'm not insatiable, Master. But I'm a woman
in love. And I'm finding out what I want, and what is necessary to
me--and what I can't have. That's all."

"We get a lot."

"We want a lot. You and I are greedy people for the things we like,
Master. It's very evident we've got nearly all we can ever have of one
another--and I'm not satisfied."

"What more is there?

"For you--very little. I wonder. For me--every thing. Yes--everything.
You didn't mean it, Master; you didn't know any more than I did when I
began, but love between a man and a woman is sometimes very one-sided.
Fearfully one-sided! That's all...."

"Don't YOU ever want children?" she said abruptly.

"I suppose I do."

"You don't!"

"I haven't thought of them."

"A man doesn't, perhaps. But I have.... I want them--like hunger.
YOUR children, and home with you. Really, continually you! That's the
trouble.... I can't have 'em, Master, and I can't have you."

She was crying, and through her tears she laughed.

"I'm going to make a scene," she said, "and get this over. I'm so
discontented and miserable; I've got to tell you. It would come between
us if I didn't. I'm in love with you, with everything--with all my
brains. I'll pull through all right. I'll be good, Master, never you
fear. But to-day I'm crying out with all my being. This election--You're
going up; you're going on. In these papers--you're a great big fact.
It's suddenly come home to me. At the back of my mind I've always had
the idea I was going to have you somehow presently for myself--I mean to
have you to go long tramps with, to keep house for, to get meals for,
to watch for of an evening. It's a sort of habitual background to my
thought of you. And it's nonsense--utter nonsense!" She stopped. She was
crying and choking. "And the child, you know--the child!"

I was troubled beyond measure, but Handitch and its intimations were
clear and strong.

"We can't have that," I said.

"No," she said, "we can't have that."

"We've got our own things to do."

"YOUR things," she said.

"Aren't they yours too?"

"Because of you," she said.

"Aren't they your very own things?"

"Women don't have that sort of very own thing. Indeed, it's true!
And think! You've been down there preaching the goodness of children,
telling them the only good thing in a state is happy, hopeful children,
working to free mothers and children--"

"And we give our own children to do it?" I said.

"Yes," she said. "And sometimes I think it's too much to give--too much
altogether.... Children get into a woman's brain--when she mustn't have
them, especially when she must never hope for them. Think of the child
we might have now!--the little creature with soft, tender skin, and
little hands and little feet! At times it haunts me. It comes and says,
Why wasn't I given life? I can hear it in the night.... The world is
full of such little ghosts, dear lover--little things that asked for
life and were refused. They clamour to me. It's like a little fist
beating at my heart. Love children, beautiful children. Little cold
hands that tear at my heart! Oh, my heart and my lord!" She was holding
my arm with both her hands and weeping against it, and now she drew
herself to my shoulder and wept and sobbed in my embrace. "I shall never
sit with your child on my knee and you beside me-never, and I am a woman
and your lover!..."



2


But the profound impossibility of our relation was now becoming more and
more apparent to us. We found ourselves seeking justification, clinging
passionately to a situation that was coldly, pitilessly, impossible and
fated. We wanted quite intensely to live together and have a child, but
also we wanted very many other things that were incompatible with these
desires. It was extraordinarily difficult to weigh our political and
intellectual ambitions against those intimate wishes. The weights kept
altering according as one found oneself grasping this valued thing or
that. It wasn't as if we could throw everything aside for our love,
and have that as we wanted it. Love such as we bore one another isn't
altogether, or even chiefly, a thing in itself--it is for the most part
a value set upon things. Our love was interwoven with all our other
interests; to go out of the world and live in isolation seemed to us
like killing the best parts of each other; we loved the sight of each
other engaged finely and characteristically, we knew each other best
as activities. We had no delusions about material facts; we didn't want
each other alive or dead, we wanted each other fully alive. We wanted
to do big things together, and for us to take each other openly and
desperately would leave us nothing in the world to do. We wanted
children indeed passionately, but children with every helpful chance in
the world, and children born in scandal would be handicapped at every
turn. We wanted to share a home, and not a solitude.

And when we were at this stage of realisation, began the intimations
that we were found out, and that scandal was afoot against us....

I heard of it first from Esmeer, who deliberately mentioned it,
with that steady grey eye of his watching me, as an instance of the
preposterous falsehoods people will circulate. It came to Isabel
almost simultaneously through a married college friend, who made it her
business to demand either confirmation or denial. It filled us both with
consternation. In the surprise of the moment Isabel admitted her secret,
and her friend went off "reserving her freedom of action."

Discovery broke out in every direction. Friends with grave faces and
an atmosphere of infinite tact invaded us both. Other friends ceased to
invade either of us. It was manifest we had become--we knew not how--a
private scandal, a subject for duologues, an amazement, a perplexity,
a vivid interest. In a few brief weeks it seemed London passed from
absolute unsuspiciousness to a chattering exaggeration of its knowledge
of our relations.

It was just the most inappropriate time for that disclosure. The long
smouldering antagonism to my endowment of motherhood ideas had flared
up into an active campaign in the EXPURGATOR, and it would be altogether
disastrous to us if I should be convicted of any personal irregularity.
It was just because of the manifest and challenging respectability of my
position that I had been able to carry the thing as far as I had done.
Now suddenly my fortunes had sprung a leak, and scandal was pouring
in.... It chanced, too, that a wave of moral intolerance was sweeping
through London, one of those waves in which the bitterness of the
consciously just finds an ally in the panic of the undiscovered. A
certain Father Blodgett had been preaching against social corruption
with extraordinary force, and had roused the Church of England people
to a kind of competition in denunciation. The old methods of the
Anti-Socialist campaign had been renewed, and had offered far too wide
a scope and too tempting an opportunity for private animosity, to be
restricted to the private affairs of the Socialists. I had intimations
of an extensive circulation of "private and confidential" letters....

I think there can be nothing else in life quite like the unnerving
realisation that rumour and scandal are afoot about one. Abruptly
one's confidence in the solidity of the universe disappears. One
walks silenced through a world that one feels to be full of inaudible
accusations. One cannot challenge the assault, get it out into the open,
separate truth and falsehood. It slinks from you, turns aside its face.
Old acquaintances suddenly evaded me, made extraordinary excuses;
men who had presumed on the verge of my world and pestered me with an
intrusive enterprise, now took the bold step of flat repudiation. I
became doubtful about the return of a nod, retracted all those tentacles
of easy civility that I had hitherto spread to the world. I still grow
warm with amazed indignation when I recall that Edward Crampton, meeting
me full on the steps of the Climax Club, cut me dead. "By God!" I cried,
and came near catching him by the throat and wringing out of him what
of all good deeds and bad, could hearten him, a younger man than I and
empty beyond comparison, to dare to play the judge to me. And then I had
an open slight from Mrs. Millingham, whom I had counted on as one counts
upon the sunrise. I had not expected things of that sort; they were
disconcerting beyond measure; it was as if the world were giving way
beneath my feet, as though something failed in the essential confidence
of life, as though a hand of wet ice had touched my heart. Similar
things were happening to Isabel. Yet we went on working, visiting,
meeting, trying to ignore this gathering of implacable forces against
us.

For a time I was perplexed beyond measure to account for this campaign.
Then I got a clue. The centre of diffusion was the Bailey household. The
Baileys had never forgiven me my abandonment of the young Liberal group
they had done so much to inspire and organise; their dinner-table had
long been a scene of hostile depreciation of the BLUE WEEKLY and all its
allies; week after week Altiora proclaimed that I was "doing nothing,"
and found other causes for our bye-election triumphs; I counted Chambers
Street a dangerous place for me. Yet, nevertheless, I was astonished to
find them using a private scandal against me. They did. I think Handitch
had filled up the measure of their bitterness, for I had not only
abandoned them, but I was succeeding beyond even their power of
misrepresentation. Always I had been a wasp in their spider's web,
difficult to claim as a tool, uncritical, antagonistic. I admired their
work and devotion enormously, but I had never concealed my contempt for
a certain childish vanity they displayed, and for the frequent puerility
of their political intrigues. I suppose contempt galls more than
injuries, and anyhow they had me now. They had me. Bailey, I found,
was warning fathers of girls against me as a "reckless libertine," and
Altiora, flushed, roguish, and dishevelled, was sitting on her fender
curb after dinner, and pledging little parties of five or six women at a
time with infinite gusto not to let the matter go further. Our cell was
open to the world, and a bleak, distressful daylight streaming in.

I had a gleam of a more intimate motive in Altiora from the reports that
came to me. Isabel had been doing a series of five or six articles in
the POLITICAL REVIEW in support of our campaign, the POLITICAL REVIEW
which had hitherto been loyally Baileyite. Quite her best writing up to
the present, at any rate, is in those papers, and no doubt Altiora had
had not only to read her in those invaded columns, but listen to her
praises in the mouths of the tactless influential. Altiora, like so many
people who rely on gesture and vocal insistence in conversation, writes
a poor and slovenly prose and handles an argument badly; Isabel has her
University training behind her and wrote from the first with the stark
power of a clear-headed man. "Now we know," said Altiora, with just a
gleam of malice showing through her brightness, "now we know who helps
with the writing!"

She revealed astonishing knowledge.

For a time I couldn't for the life of me discover her sources. I had,
indeed, a desperate intention of challenging her, and then I bethought
me of a youngster named Curmain, who had been my supplemental typist and
secretary for a time, and whom I had sent on to her before the days of
our breach. "Of course!" said I, "Curmain!" He was a tall, drooping,
sidelong youth with sandy hair, a little forward head, and a long
thin neck. He stole stamps, and, I suspected, rifled my private letter
drawer, and I found him one day on a turn of the stairs looking guilty
and ruffled with a pretty Irish housemaid of Margaret's manifestly in
a state of hot indignation. I saw nothing, but I felt everything in the
air between them. I hate this pestering of servants, but at the same
time I didn't want Curmain wiped out of existence, so I had packed him
off without unnecessary discussion to Altiora. He was quick and cheap
anyhow, and I thought her general austerity ought to redeem him if
anything could; the Chambers Street housemaid wasn't for any man's
kissing and showed it, and the stamps and private letters were looked
after with an efficiency altogether surpassing mine. And Altiora, I've
no doubt left now whatever, pumped this young undesirable about me,
and scenting a story, had him to dinner alone one evening to get to the
bottom of the matter. She got quite to the bottom of it,--it must have
been a queer duologue. She read Isabel's careless, intimate letters
to me, so to speak, by this proxy, and she wasn't ashamed to use this
information in the service of the bitterness that had sprung up in her
since our political breach. It was essentially a personal bitterness; it
helped no public purpose of theirs to get rid of me. My downfall in
any public sense was sheer waste,--the loss of a man. She knew she was
behaving badly, and so, when it came to remonstrance, she behaved worse.
She'd got names and dates and places; the efficiency of her information
was irresistible. And she set to work at it marvellously. Never before,
in all her pursuit of efficient ideals, had Altiora achieved such levels
of efficiency. I wrote a protest that was perhaps ill-advised and angry,
I went to her and tried to stop her. She wouldn't listen, she wouldn't
think, she denied and lied, she behaved like a naughty child of six
years old which has made up its mind to be hurtful. It wasn't only, I
think, that she couldn't bear our political and social influence; she
also--I realised at that interview couldn't bear our loving. It seemed
to her the sickliest thing,--a thing quite unendurable. While such
things were, the virtue had gone out of her world.

I've the vividest memory of that call of mine. She'd just come in and
taken off her hat, and she was grey and dishevelled and tired, and in
a business-like dress of black and crimson that didn't suit her and
was muddy about the skirts; she'd a cold in her head and sniffed
penetratingly, she avoided my eye as she talked and interrupted
everything I had to say; she kept stabbing fiercely at the cushions of
her sofa with a long hat-pin and pretending she was overwhelmed with
grief at the DEBACLE she was deliberately organising.

"Then part," she cried, "part. If you don't want a smashing up,--part!
You two have got to be parted. You've got never to see each other ever,
never to speak." There was a zest in her voice. "We're not circulating
stories," she denied. "No! And Curmain never told us anything--Curmain
is an EXCELLENT young man; oh! a quite excellent young man. You
misjudged him altogether."...

I was equally unsuccessful with Bailey. I caught the little wretch in
the League Club, and he wriggled and lied. He wouldn't say where he had
got his facts, he wouldn't admit he had told any one. When I gave him
the names of two men who had come to me astonished and incredulous,
he attempted absurdly to make me think they had told HIM. He did his
horrible little best to suggest that honest old Quackett, who had just
left England for the Cape, was the real scandalmonger. That struck me
as mean, even for Bailey. I've still the odd vivid impression of his
fluting voice, excusing the inexcusable, his big, shifty face evading
me, his perspiration-beaded forehead, the shrugging shoulders, and the
would-be exculpatory gestures--Houndsditch gestures--of his enormous
ugly hands.

"I can assure you, my dear fellow," he said; "I can assure you we've
done everything to shield you--everything."...



3


Isabel came after dinner one evening and talked in the office. She made
a white-robed, dusky figure against the deep blues of my big window. I
sat at my desk and tore a quill pen to pieces as I talked.

"The Baileys don't intend to let this drop," I said. "They mean that
every one in London is to know about it."

"I know."

"Well!" I said.

"Dear heart," said Isabel, facing it, "it's no good waiting for things
to overtake us; we're at the parting of the ways."

"What are we to do?"

"They won't let us go on."

"Damn them!"

"They are ORGANISING scandal."

"It's no good waiting for things to overtake us," I echoed; "they have
overtaken us." I turned on her. "What do you want to do?"

"Everything," she said. "Keep you and have our work. Aren't we Mates?"

"We can't."

"And we can't!"

"I've got to tell Margaret," I said.

"Margaret!"

"I can't bear the idea of any one else getting in front with it. I've
been wincing about Margaret secretly--"

"I know. You'll have to tell her--and make your peace with her."

She leant back against the bookcases under the window.

"We've had some good times, Master;" she said, with a sigh in her voice.

And then for a long time we stared at one another in silence.

"We haven't much time left," she said.

"Shall we bolt?" I said.

"And leave all this?" she asked, with her eyes going round the room.
"And that?" And her head indicated Westminster. "No!"

I said no more of bolting.

"We've got to screw ourselves up to surrender," she said.

"Something."

"A lot."

"Master," she said, "it isn't all sex and stuff between us?"

"No!"

"I can't give up the work. Our work's my life."

We came upon another long pause.

"No one will believe we've ceased to be lovers--if we simply do," she
said.

"We shouldn't."

"We've got to do something more parting than that."

I nodded, and again we paused. She was coming to something.

"I could marry Shoesmith," she said abruptly.

"But--" I objected.

"He knows. It wasn't fair. I told him."

"Oh, that explains," I said. "There's been a kind of sulkiness--But--you
told him?"

She nodded. "He's rather badly hurt," she said. "He's been a good
friend to me. He's curiously loyal. But something, something he said one
day--forced me to let him know.... That's been the beastliness of all
this secrecy. That's the beastliness of all secrecy. You have to spring
surprises on people. But he keeps on. He's steadfast. He'd already
suspected. He wants me very badly to marry him...."

"But you don't want to marry him?"

"I'm forced to think of it."

"But does he want to marry you at that? Take you as a present from the
world at large?--against your will and desire?... I don't understand
him."

"He cares for me."

"How?"

"He thinks this is a fearful mess for me. He wants to pull it straight."

We sat for a time in silence, with imaginations that obstinately refused
to take up the realities of this proposition.

"I don't want you to marry Shoesmith," I said at last.

"Don't you like him?"

"Not as your husband."

"He's a very clever and sturdy person--and very generous and devoted to
me."

"And me?"

"You can't expect that. He thinks you are wonderful--and, naturally,
that you ought not to have started this."

"I've a curious dislike to any one thinking that but myself. I'm quite
ready to think it myself."

"He'd let us be friends--and meet."

"Let us be friends!" I cried, after a long pause. "You and me!"

"He wants me to be engaged soon. Then, he says, he can go round fighting
these rumours, defending us both--and force a quarrel on the Baileys."

"I don't understand him," I said, and added, "I don't understand you."

I was staring at her face. It seemed white and set in the dimness.

"Do you really mean this, Isabel?" I asked.

"What else is there to do, my dear?--what else is there to do at all?
I've been thinking day and night. You can't go away with me. You can't
smash yourself suddenly in the sight of all men. I'd rather die than
that should happen. Look what you are becoming in the country! Look at
all you've built up!--me helping. I wouldn't let you do it if you could.
I wouldn't let you--if it were only for Margaret's sake. THIS... closes
the scandal, closes everything."

"It closes all our life together," I cried.

She was silent.

"It never ought to have begun," I said.

She winced. Then abruptly she was on her knees before me, with her hands
upon my shoulder and her eyes meeting mine.

"My dear," she said very earnestly, "don't misunderstand me! Don't think
I'm retreating from the things we've done! Our love is the best thing I
could ever have had from life. Nothing can ever equal it; nothing could
ever equal the beauty and delight you and I have had together. Never!
You have loved me; you do love me...."

No one could ever know how to love you as I have loved you; no one could
ever love me as you have loved me, my king. And it's just because it's
been so splendid, dear; it's just because I'd die rather than have a
tithe of all this wiped out of my life again--for it's made me, it's all
I am--dear, it's years since I began loving you--it's just because of
its goodness that I want not to end in wreckage now, not to end in
the smashing up of all the big things I understand in you and love in
you....

"What is there for us if we keep on and go away?" she went on. "All
the big interests in our lives will vanish--everything. We shall become
specialised people--people overshadowed by a situation. We shall be
an elopement, a romance--all our breadth and meaning gone! People will
always think of it first when they think of us; all our work and aims
will be warped by it and subordinated to it. Is it good enough, dear?
Just to specialise.... I think of you. We've got a case, a passionate
case, the best of cases, but do we want to spend all our lives defending
it and justifying it? And there's that other life. I know now you care
for Margaret--you care more than you think you do. You have said fine
things of her. I've watched you about her. Little things have dropped
from you. She's given her life for you; she's nothing without you.
You feel that to your marrow all the time you are thinking about these
things. Oh, I'm not jealous, dear. I love you for loving her. I love you
in relation to her. But there it is, an added weight against us, another
thing worth saving."

Presently, I remember, she sat back on her heels and looked up into
my face. "We've done wrong--and parting's paying. It's time to pay.
We needn't have paid, if we'd kept to the track.... You and I, Master,
we've got to be men."

"Yes," I said; "we've got to be men."



4


I was driven to tell Margaret about our situation by my intolerable
dread that otherwise the thing might come to her through some stupid and
clumsy informant. She might even meet Altiora, and have it from her.

I can still recall the feeling of sitting at my desk that night in that
large study of mine in Radnor Square, waiting for Margaret to come home.
It was oddly like the feeling of a dentist's reception-room; only it was
for me to do the dentistry with clumsy, cruel hands. I had left the door
open so that she would come in to me.

I heard her silken rustle on the stairs at last, and then she was in the
doorway. "May I come in?" she said.

"Do," I said, and turned round to her.

"Working?" she said.

"Hard," I answered. "Where have YOU been?"

"At the Vallerys'. Mr. Evesham was talking about you. They were all
talking. I don't think everybody knew who I was. Just Mrs. Mumble I'd
been to them. Lord Wardenham doesn't like you."

"He doesn't."

"But they all feel you're rather big, anyhow. Then I went on to Park
Lane to hear a new pianist and some other music at Eva's."

"Yes."

"Then I looked in at the Brabants' for some midnight tea before I came
on here. They'd got some writers--and Grant was there."

"You HAVE been flying round...."

There was a little pause between us.

I looked at her pretty, unsuspecting face, and at the slender grace of
her golden-robed body. What gulfs there were between us! "You've been
amused," I said.

"It's been amusing. You've been at the House?"

"The Medical Education Bill kept me."...

After all, why should I tell her? She'd got to a way of living that
fulfilled her requirements. Perhaps she'd never hear. But all that day
and the day before I'd been making up my mind to do the thing.

"I want to tell you something," I said. "I wish you'd sit down for a
moment or so."...

Once I had begun, it seemed to me I had to go through with it.

Something in the quality of my voice gave her an intimation of unusual
gravity. She looked at me steadily for a moment and sat down slowly in
my armchair.

"What is it?" she said.

I went on awkwardly. "I've got to tell you--something extraordinarily
distressing," I said.

She was manifestly altogether unaware.

"There seems to be a good deal of scandal abroad--I've only recently
heard of it--about myself--and Isabel."

"Isabel!"

I nodded.

"What do they say?" she asked.

It was difficult, I found, to speak.

"They say she's my mistress."

"Oh! How abominable!"

She spoke with the most natural indignation. Our eyes met.

"We've been great friends," I said.

"Yes. And to make THAT of it. My poor dear! But how can they?" She
paused and looked at me. "It's so incredible. How can any one believe
it? I couldn't."

She stopped, with her distressed eyes regarding me. Her expression
changed to dread. There was a tense stillness for a second, perhaps.

I turned my face towards the desk, and took up and dropped a handful of
paper fasteners.

"Margaret," I said, "I'm afraid you'll have to believe it."



5


Margaret sat very still. When I looked at her again, her face was very
white, and her distressed eyes scrutinised me. Her lips quivered as she
spoke. "You really mean--THAT?" she said.

I nodded.

"I never dreamt."

"I never meant you to dream."

"And that is why--we've been apart?"

I thought. "I suppose it is."

"Why have you told me now?"

"Those rumours. I didn't want any one else to tell you."

"Or else it wouldn't have mattered?"

"No."

She turned her eyes from me to the fire. Then for a moment she looked
about the room she had made for me, and then quite silently, with a
childish quivering of her lips, with a sort of dismayed distress upon
her face, she was weeping. She sat weeping in her dress of cloth of
gold, with her bare slender arms dropped limp over the arms of her
chair, and her eyes averted from me, making no effort to stay or staunch
her tears. "I am sorry, Margaret," I said. "I was in love.... I did not
understand...."

Presently she asked: "What are you going to do?"

"You see, Margaret, now it's come to be your affair--I want to know what
you--what you want."

"You want to leave me?"

"If you want me to, I must."

"Leave Parliament--leave all the things you are doing,--all this fine
movement of yours?"

"No." I spoke sullenly. "I don't want to leave anything. I want to stay
on. I've told you, because I think we--Isabel and I, I mean--have got to
drive through a storm of scandal anyhow. I don't know how far things may
go, how much people may feel, and I can't, I can't have you unconscious,
unarmed, open to any revelation--"

She made no answer.

"When the thing began--I knew it was stupid but I thought it was a
thing that wouldn't change, wouldn't be anything but itself, wouldn't
unfold--consequences.... People have got hold of these vague rumours....
Directly it reached any one else but--but us two--I saw it had to come
to you."

I stopped. I had that distressful feeling I have always had with
Margaret, of not being altogether sure she heard, of being doubtful
if she understood. I perceived that once again I had struck at her and
shattered a thousand unsubstantial pinnacles. And I couldn't get at
her, to help her, or touch her mind! I stood up, and at my movement she
moved. She produced a dainty little handkerchief, and made an effort to
wipe her face with it, and held it to her eyes. "Oh, my Husband!" she
sobbed.

"What do you mean to do?" she said, with her voice muffled by her
handkerchief.

"We're going to end it," I said.

Something gripped me tormentingly as I said that. I drew a chair beside
her and sat down. "You and I, Margaret, have been partners," I began.
"We've built up this life of ours together; I couldn't have done it
without you. We've made a position, created a work--"

She shook her head. "You," she said.

"You helping. I don't want to shatter it--if you don't want it
shattered. I can't leave my work. I can't leave you. I want you to
have--all that you have ever had. I've never meant to rob you. I've made
an immense and tragic blunder. You don't know how things took us, how
different they seemed! My character and accident have conspired--We'll
pay--in ourselves, not in our public service."

I halted again. Margaret remained very still.

"I want you to understand that the thing is at an end. It is definitely
at an end. We--we talked--yesterday. We mean to end it altogether." I
clenched my hands. "She's--she's going to marry Arnold Shoesmith."

I wasn't looking now at Margaret any more, but I heard the rustle of her
movement as she turned on me.

"It's all right," I said, clinging to my explanation. "We're doing
nothing shabby. He knows. He will. It's all as right--as things can
be now. We're not cheating any one, Margaret. We're doing things
straight--now. Of course, you know.... We shall--we shall have to make
sacrifices. Give things up pretty completely. Very completely.... We
shall have not to see each other for a time, you know. Perhaps not a
long time. Two or three years. Or write--or just any of that sort of
thing ever--"

Some subconscious barrier gave way in me. I found myself crying
uncontrollably--as I have never cried since I was a little child. I was
amazed and horrified at myself. And wonderfully, Margaret was on her
knees beside me, with her arms about me, mingling her weeping with mine.
"Oh, my Husband!" she cried, "my poor Husband! Does it hurt you so? I
would do anything! Oh, the fool I am! Dear, I love you. I love you over
and away and above all these jealous little things!"

She drew down my head to her as a mother might draw down the head of
a son. She caressed me, weeping bitterly with me. "Oh! my dear," she
sobbed, "my dear! I've never seen you cry! I've never seen you cry.
Ever! I didn't know you could. Oh! my dear! Can't you have her, my dear,
if you want her? I can't bear it! Let me help you, dear. Oh! my Husband!
My Man! I can't bear to have you cry!" For a time she held me in
silence.

"I've thought this might happen, I dreamt it might happen. You two, I
mean. It was dreaming put it into my head. When I've seen you together,
so glad with each other.... Oh! Husband mine, believe me! believe me!
I'm stupid, I'm cold, I'm only beginning to realise how stupid and cold,
but all I want in all the world is to give my life to you."...



6


"We can't part in a room," said Isabel.

"We'll have one last talk together," I said, and planned that we should
meet for a half a day between Dover and Walmer and talk ourselves out.
I still recall that day very well, recall even the curious exaltation of
grief that made our mental atmosphere distinctive and memorable. We had
seen so much of one another, had become so intimate, that we talked of
parting even as we parted with a sense of incredible remoteness. We went
together up over the cliffs, and to a place where they fall towards the
sea, past the white, quaint-lanterned lighthouses of the South Foreland.
There, in a kind of niche below the crest, we sat talking. It was a
spacious day, serenely blue and warm, and on the wrinkled water remotely
below a black tender and six hooded submarines came presently, and
engaged in mysterious manoeuvers. Shrieking gulls and chattering
jackdaws circled over us and below us, and dived and swooped; and a
skerry of weedy, fallen chalk appeared, and gradually disappeared again,
as the tide fell and rose.

We talked and thought that afternoon on every aspect of our relations.
It seems to me now we talked so wide and far that scarcely an issue in
the life between man and woman can arise that we did not at least touch
upon. Lying there at Isabel's feet, I have become for myself a symbol of
all this world-wide problem between duty and conscious, passionate love
the world has still to solve. Because it isn't solved; there's a wrong
in it either way.. .. The sky, the wide horizon, seemed to lift us out
of ourselves until we were something representative and general. She was
womanhood become articulate, talking to her lover.

"I ought," I said, "never to have loved you."

"It wasn't a thing planned," she said.

"I ought never to have let our talk slip to that, never to have turned
back from America."

"I'm glad we did it," she said. "Don't think I repent."

I looked at her.

"I will never repent," she said. "Never!" as though she clung to her
life in saying it.

I remember we talked for a long time of divorce. It seemed to us then,
and it seems to us still, that it ought to have been possible for
Margaret to divorce me, and for me to marry without the scandalous and
ugly publicity, the taint and ostracism that follow such a readjustment.
We went on to the whole perplexing riddle of marriage. We criticised
the current code, how muddled and conventionalised it had become, how
modified by subterfuges and concealments and new necessities, and the
increasing freedom of women. "It's all like Bromstead when the building
came," I said; for I had often talked to her of that early impression of
purpose dissolving again into chaotic forces. "There is no clear right
in the world any more. The world is Byzantine. The justest man to-day
must practise a tainted goodness."

These questions need discussion--a magnificent frankness of
discussion--if any standards are again to establish an effective hold
upon educated people. Discretions, as I have said already, will never
hold any one worth holding--longer than they held us. Against every
"shalt not" there must be a "why not" plainly put,--the "why not"
largest and plainest, the law deduced from its purpose. "You and I,
Isabel," I said, "have always been a little disregardful of duty, partly
at least because the idea of duty comes to us so ill-clad. Oh! I know
there's an extravagant insubordinate strain in us, but that wasn't all.
I wish humbugs would leave duty alone. I wish all duty wasn't covered
with slime. That's where the real mischief comes in. Passion can always
contrive to clothe itself in beauty, strips itself splendid. That
carried us. But for all its mean associations there is this duty....

"Don't we come rather late to it?"

"Not so late that it won't be atrociously hard to do."

"It's queer to think of now," said Isabel. "Who could believe we did all
we have done honestly? Well, in a manner honestly. Who could believe we
thought this might be hidden? Who could trace it all step by step from
the time when we found that a certain boldness in our talk was pleasing?
We talked of love.... Master, there's not much for us to do in the way
of Apologia that any one will credit. And yet if it were possible to
tell the very heart of our story....

"Does Margaret really want to go on with you?" she asked--"shield
you--knowing of... THIS?"

"I'm certain. I don't understand--just as I don't understand Shoesmith,
but she does. These people walk on solid ground which is just thin air
to us. They've got something we haven't got. Assurances? I wonder."...

Then it was, or later, we talked of Shoesmith, and what her life might
be with him.

"He's good," she said; "he's kindly. He's everything but magic. He's the
very image of the decent, sober, honourable life. You can't say a thing
against him or I--except that something--something in his imagination,
something in the tone of his voice--fails for me. Why don't I love
him?--he's a better man than you! Why don't you? IS he a better man than
you? He's usage, he's honour, he's the right thing, he's the breed and
the tradition,--a gentleman. You're your erring, incalculable self. I
suppose we women will trust this sort and love your sort to the very end
of time...."

We lay side by side and nibbled at grass stalks as we talked. It seemed
enormously unreasonable to us that two people who had come to the pitch
of easy and confident affection and happiness that held between us
should be obliged to part and shun one another, or murder half the
substance of their lives. We felt ourselves crushed and beaten by an
indiscriminating machine which destroys happiness in the service of
jealousy. "The mass of people don't feel these things in quite the same
manner as we feel them," she said. "Is it because they're different in
grain, or educated out of some primitive instinct?"

"It's because we've explored love a little, and they know no more
than the gateway," I said. "Lust and then jealousy; their simple
conception--and we have gone past all that and wandered hand in
hand...."

I remember that for a time we watched two of that larger sort of gull,
whose wings are brownish-white, circle and hover against the blue. And
then we lay and looked at a band of water mirror clear far out to sea,
and wondered why the breeze that rippled all the rest should leave it so
serene.

"And in this State of ours," I resumed.

"Eh!" said Isabel, rolling over into a sitting posture and looking out
at the horizon. "Let's talk no more of things we can never see. Talk to
me of the work you are doing and all we shall do--after we have parted.
We've said too little of that. We've had our red life, and it's over.
Thank Heaven!--though we stole it! Talk about your work, dear, and the
things we'll go on doing--just as though we were still together. We'll
still be together in a sense--through all these things we have in
common."

And so we talked of politics and our outlook. We were interested to the
pitch of self-forgetfulness. We weighed persons and forces, discussed
the probabilities of the next general election, the steady drift of
public opinion in the north and west away from Liberalism towards us.
It was very manifest that in spite of Wardenham and the EXPURGATOR, we
should come into the new Government strongly. The party had no one else,
all the young men were formally or informally with us; Esmeer would have
office, Lord Tarvrille, I... and very probably there would be something
for Shoesmith. "And for my own part," I said, "I count on backing on the
Liberal side. For the last two years we've been forcing competition in
constructive legislation between the parties. The Liberals have not been
long in following up our Endowment of Motherhood lead. They'll have to
give votes and lip service anyhow. Half the readers of the BLUE WEEKLY,
they say, are Liberals....

"I remember talking about things of this sort with old Willersley," I
said, "ever so many years ago. It was some place near Locarno, and we
looked down the lake that shone weltering--just as now we look over the
sea. And then we dreamt in an indistinct featureless way of all that you
and I are doing now."

"I!" said Isabel, and laughed.

"Well, of some such thing," I said, and remained for awhile silent,
thinking of Locarno.

I recalled once more the largeness, the release from small personal
things that I had felt in my youth; statecraft became real and wonderful
again with the memory, the gigantic handling of gigantic problems. I
began to talk out my thoughts, sitting up beside her, as I could never
talk of them to any one but Isabel; began to recover again the
purpose that lay under all my political ambitions and adjustments and
anticipations. I saw the State, splendid and wide as I had seen it in
that first travel of mine, but now it was no mere distant prospect of
spires and pinnacles, but populous with fine-trained, bold-thinking,
bold-doing people. It was as if I had forgotten for a long time and now
remembered with amazement.

At first, I told her, I had been altogether at a loss how I could do
anything to battle against the aimless muddle of our world; I had
wanted a clue--until she had come into my life questioning, suggesting,
unconsciously illuminating. "But I have done nothing," she protested. I
declared she had done everything in growing to education under my eyes,
in reflecting again upon all the processes that had made myself, so
that instead of abstractions and blue-books and bills and devices, I had
realised the world of mankind as a crowd needing before all things fine
women and men. We'd spoilt ourselves in learning that, but anyhow we had
our lesson. Before her I was in a nineteenth-century darkness, dealing
with the nation as if it were a crowd of selfish men, forgetful of women
and children and that shy wild thing in the hearts of men, love, which
must be drawn upon as it has never been drawn upon before, if the State
is to live. I saw now how it is possible to bring the loose factors of a
great realm together, to create a mind of literature and thought in it,
and the expression of a purpose to make it self-conscious and fine.
I had it all clear before me, so that at a score of points I could
presently begin. The BLUE WEEKLY was a centre of force. Already we had
given Imperialism a criticism, and leavened half the press from our
columns. Our movement consolidated and spread. We should presently come
into power. Everything moved towards our hands. We should be able to get
at the schools, the services, the universities, the church; enormously
increase the endowment of research, and organise what was sorely wanted,
a criticism of research; contrive a closer contact between the press and
creative intellectual life; foster literature, clarify, strengthen the
public consciousness, develop social organisation and a sense of the
State. Men were coming to us every day, brilliant young peers like Lord
Dentonhill, writers like Carnot and Cresswell. It filled me with pride
to win such men. "We stand for so much more than we seem to stand for,"
I said. I opened my heart to her, so freely that I hesitate to open my
heart even to the reader, telling of projects and ambitions I cherished,
of my consciousness of great powers and widening opportunities....

Isabel watched me as I talked.

She too, I think, had forgotten these things for a while. For it is
curious and I think a very significant thing that since we had become
lovers, we had talked very little of the broader things that had once so
strongly gripped our imaginations.

"It's good," I said, "to talk like this to you, to get back to youth and
great ambitions with you. There have been times lately when politics has
seemed the pettiest game played with mean tools for mean ends--and none
the less so that the happiness of three hundred million people might be
touched by our follies. I talk to no one else like this.... And now I
think of parting, I think but of how much more I might have talked to
you."...

Things drew to an end at last, but after we had spoken of a thousand
things.

"We've talked away our last half day," I said, staring over my shoulder
at the blazing sunset sky behind us. "Dear, it's been the last day of
our lives for us.... It doesn't seem like the last day of our lives. Or
any day."

"I wonder how it will feel?" said Isabel.

"It will be very strange at first--not to be able to tell you things."

"I've a superstition that after--after we've parted--if ever I go into
my room and talk, you'll hear. You'll be--somewhere."

"I shall be in the world--yes."

"I don't feel as though these days ahead were real. Here we are, here we
remain."

"Yes, I feel that. As though you and I were two immortals, who didn't
live in time and space at all, who never met, who couldn't part, and
here we lie on Olympus. And those two poor creatures who did meet, poor
little Richard Remington and Isabel Rivers, who met and loved too much
and had to part, they part and go their ways, and we lie here and watch
them, you and I. She'll cry, poor dear."

"She'll cry. She's crying now!"

"Poor little beasts! I think he'll cry too. He winces. He could--for
tuppence. I didn't know he had lachrymal glands at all until a little
while ago. I suppose all love is hysterical--and a little foolish. Poor
mites! Silly little pitiful creatures! How we have blundered! Think how
we must look to God! Well, we'll pity them, and then we'll inspire him
to stiffen up again--and do as we've determined he shall do. We'll see
it through,--we who lie here on the cliff. They'll be mean at times, and
horrid at times; we know them! Do you see her, a poor little fine lady
in a great house,--she sometimes goes to her room and writes."

"She writes for his BLUE WEEKLY still."

"Yes. Sometimes--I hope. And he's there in the office with a bit of her
copy in his hand."

"Is it as good as if she still talked it over with him before she wrote
it? Is it?"

"Better, I think. Let's play it's better--anyhow. It may be that talking
over was rather mixed with love-making. After all, love-making is joy
rather than magic. Don't let's pretend about that even.... Let's go on
watching him. (I don't see why her writing shouldn't be better. Indeed I
don't.) See! There he goes down along the Embankment to Westminster just
like a real man, for all that he's smaller than a grain of dust. What is
running round inside that speck of a head of his? Look at him going past
the Policemen, specks too--selected large ones from the country. I think
he's going to dinner with the Speaker--some old thing like that. Is his
face harder or commoner or stronger?--I can't quite see.... And now he's
up and speaking in the House. Hope he'll hold on to the thread. He'll
have to plan his speeches to the very end of his days--and learn the
headings."

"Isn't she up in the women's gallery to hear him?"

"No. Unless it's by accident."

"She's there," she said.

"Well, by accident it happens. Not too many accidents, Isabel. Never any
more adventures for us, dear, now. No!... They play the game, you know.
They've begun late, but now they've got to. You see it's not so
very hard for them since you and I, my dear, are here always, always
faithfully here on this warm cliff of love accomplished, watching and
helping them under high heaven. It isn't so VERY hard. Rather good in
some ways. Some people HAVE to be broken a little. Can you see Altiora
down there, by any chance?"

"She's too little to be seen," she said.

"Can you see the sins they once committed?"

"I can only see you here beside me, dear--for ever. For all my life,
dear, till I die. Was that--the sin?"...

I took her to the station, and after she had gone I was to drive to
Dover, and cross to Calais by the night boat. I couldn't, I felt, return
to London. We walked over the crest and down to the little station of
Martin Mill side by side, talking at first in broken fragments, for the
most part of unimportant things.

"None of this," she said abruptly, "seems in the slightest degree real
to me. I've got no sense of things ending."

"We're parting," I said.

"We're parting--as people part in a play. It's distressing. But I don't
feel as though you and I were really never to see each other again for
years. Do you?"

I thought. "No," I said.

"After we've parted I shall look to talk it over with you."

"So shall I."

"That's absurd."

"Absurd."

"I feel as if you'd always be there, just about where you are now.
Invisible perhaps, but there. We've spent so much of our lives joggling
elbows."...

"Yes. Yes. I don't in the least realise it. I suppose I shall begin to
when the train goes out of the station. Are we wanting in imagination,
Isabel?"

"I don't know. We've always assumed it was the other way about."

"Even when the train goes out of the station--! I've seen you into so
many trains."

"I shall go on thinking of things to say to you--things to put in your
letters. For years to come. How can I ever stop thinking in that way
now? We've got into each other's brains."

"It isn't real," I said; "nothing is real. The world's no more than a
fantastic dream. Why are we parting, Isabel?"

"I don't know. It seems now supremely silly. I suppose we have to. Can't
we meet?--don't you think we shall meet even in dreams?"

"We'll meet a thousand times in dreams," I said.

"I wish we could dream at the same time," said Isabel.... "Dream walks.
I can't believe, dear, I shall never have a walk with you again."

"If I'd stayed six months in America," I said, "we might have walked
long walks and talked long talks for all our lives."

"Not in a world of Baileys," said Isabel. "And anyhow--"

She stopped short. I looked interrogation.

"We've loved," she said.

I took her ticket, saw to her luggage, and stood by the door of the
compartment. "Good-bye," I said a little stiffly, conscious of the
people upon the platform. She bent above me, white and dusky, looking at
me very steadfastly.

"Come here," she whispered. "Never mind the porters. What can they know?
Just one time more--I must."

She rested her hand against the door of the carriage and bent down upon
me, and put her cold, moist lips to mine.



CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ THE BREAKING POINT



1


And then we broke down. We broke our faith with both Margaret and
Shoesmith, flung career and duty out of our lives, and went away
together.

It is only now, almost a year after these events, that I can begin to
see what happened to me. At the time it seemed to me I was a rational,
responsible creature, but indeed I had not parted from her two days
before I became a monomaniac to whom nothing could matter but Isabel.
Every truth had to be squared to that obsession, every duty. It astounds
me to think how I forgot Margaret, forgot my work, forgot everything
but that we two were parted. I still believe that with better chances
we might have escaped the consequences of the emotional storm that
presently seized us both. But we had no foresight of that, and no
preparation for it, and our circumstances betrayed us. It was partly
Shoesmith's unwisdom in delaying his marriage until after the end of the
session--partly my own amazing folly in returning within four days to
Westminster. But we were all of us intent upon the defeat of scandal
and the complete restoration of appearances. It seemed necessary that
Shoesmith's marriage should not seem to be hurried, still more necessary
that I should not vanish inexplicably. I had to be visible with Margaret
in London just as much as possible; we went to restaurants, we visited
the theatre; we could even contemplate the possibility of my presence at
the wedding. For that, however, we had schemed a weekend visit to Wales,
and a fictitious sprained ankle at the last moment which would justify
my absence....

I cannot convey to you the intolerable wretchedness and rebellion of
my separation from Isabel. It seemed that in the past two years all
my thoughts had spun commisures to Isabel's brain and I could think of
nothing that did not lead me surely to the need of the one intimate I
had found in the world. I came back to the House and the office and my
home, I filled all my days with appointments and duty, and it did not
save me in the least from a lonely emptiness such as I had never felt
before in all my life. I had little sleep. In the daytime I did a
hundred things, I even spoke in the House on two occasions, and by my
own low standards spoke well, and it seemed to me that I was going about
in my own brain like a hushed survivor in a house whose owner lies dead
upstairs.

I came to a crisis after that wild dinner of Tarvrille's. Something in
that stripped my soul bare.

It was an occasion made absurd and strange by the odd accident that the
house caught fire upstairs while we were dining below. It was a men's
dinner--"A dinner of all sorts," said Tarvrille, when he invited me;
"everything from Evesham and Gane to Wilkins the author, and Heaven
knows what will happen!" I remember that afterwards Tarvrille was
accused of having planned the fire to make his dinner a marvel and a
memory. It was indeed a wonderful occasion, and I suppose if I had not
been altogether drenched in misery, I should have found the same wild
amusement in it that glowed in all the others. There were one or two
university dons, Lord George Fester, the racing man, Panmure, the
artist, two or three big City men, Weston Massinghay and another
prominent Liberal whose name I can't remember, the three men Tarvrille
had promised and Esmeer, Lord Wrassleton, Waulsort, the member for
Monckton, Neal and several others. We began a little coldly, with
duologues, but the conversation was already becoming general--so far as
such a long table permitted--when the fire asserted itself.

It asserted itself first as a penetrating and emphatic smell of burning
rubber,--it was caused by the fusing of an electric wire. The reek
forced its way into the discussion of the Pekin massacres that had
sprung up between Evesham, Waulsort, and the others at the end of the
table. "Something burning," said the man next to me.

"Something must be burning," said Panmure.

Tarvrille hated undignified interruptions. He had a particularly
imperturbable butler with a cadaverous sad face and an eye of rigid
disapproval. He spoke to this individual over his shoulder. "Just see,
will you," he said, and caught up the pause in the talk to his left.

Wilkins was asking questions, and I, too, was curious. The story of the
siege of the Legations in China in the year 1900 and all that followed
upon that, is just one of those disturbing interludes in history that
refuse to join on to that general scheme of protestation by which
civilisation is maintained. It is a break in the general flow of
experience as disconcerting to statecraft as the robbery of my knife and
the scuffle that followed it had been to me when I was a boy at Penge.
It is like a tear in a curtain revealing quite unexpected backgrounds. I
had never given the business a thought for years; now this talk brought
back a string of pictures to my mind; how the reliefs arrived and the
plundering began, how section after section of the International Army
was drawn into murder and pillage, how the infection spread upward
until the wives of Ministers were busy looting, and the very sentinels
stripped and crawled like snakes into the Palace they were set to guard.
It did not stop at robbery, men were murdered, women, being plundered,
were outraged, children were butchered, strong men had found themselves
with arms in a lawless, defenceless city, and this had followed. Now it
was all recalled.

"Respectable ladies addicted to district visiting at home were as bad as
any one," said Panmure. "Glazebrook told me of one--flushed like a woman
at a bargain sale, he said--and when he pointed out to her that the silk
she'd got was bloodstained, she just said, 'Oh, bother!' and threw it
aside and went back...."

We became aware that Tarvrille's butler had returned. We tried not to
seem to listen.

"Beg pardon, m'lord," he said. "The house IS on fire, m'lord."

"Upstairs, m'lord."

"Just overhead, m'lord."

"The maids are throwing water, m'lord, and I've telephoned FIRE."

"No, m'lord, no immediate danger."

"It's all right," said Tarvrille to the table generally. "Go on! It's
not a general conflagration, and the fire brigade won't be five minutes.
Don't see that it's our affair. The stuff's insured. They say old Lady
Paskershortly was dreadful. Like a harpy. The Dowager Empress had shown
her some little things of hers. Pet things--hidden away. Susan went
straight for them--used to take an umbrella for the silks. Born
shoplifter."

It was evident he didn't want his dinner spoilt, and we played up
loyally.

"This is recorded history," said Wilkins,--"practically. It makes one
wonder about unrecorded history. In India, for example."

But nobody touched that.

"Thompson," said Tarvrille to the imperturbable butler, and indicating
the table generally, "champagne. Champagne. Keep it going."

"M'lord," and Thompson marshalled his assistants.

Some man I didn't know began to remember things about Mandalay. "It's
queer," he said, "how people break out at times;" and told his story
of an army doctor, brave, public-spirited, and, as it happened,
deeply religious, who was caught one evening by the excitement of
plundering--and stole and hid, twisted the wrist of a boy until it
broke, and was afterwards overcome by wild remorse.

I watched Evesham listening intently. "Strange," he said, "very strange.
We are such stuff as thieves are made of. And in China, too, they
murdered people--for the sake of murdering. Apart, so to speak, from
mercenary considerations. I'm afraid there's no doubt of it in certain
cases. No doubt at all. Young soldiers fresh from German high schools
and English homes!"

"Did OUR people?" asked some patriot.

"Not so much. But I'm afraid there were cases.... Some of the Indian
troops were pretty bad."

Gane picked up the tale with confirmations.

It is all printed in the vividest way as a picture upon my memory, so
that were I a painter I think I could give the deep rich browns and warm
greys beyond the brightly lit table, the various distinguished faces,
strongly illuminated, interested and keen, above the black and white of
evening dress, the alert menservants with their heavier, clean-shaved
faces indistinctly seen in the dimness behind. Then this was coloured
emotionally for me by my aching sense of loss and sacrifice, and by
the chance trend of our talk to the breaches and unrealities of the
civilised scheme. We seemed a little transitory circle of light in a
universe of darkness and violence; an effect to which the diminishing
smell of burning rubber, the trampling of feet overhead, the swish
of water, added enormously. Everybody--unless, perhaps, it was
Evesham--drank rather carelessly because of the suppressed excitement of
our situation, and talked the louder and more freely.

"But what a flimsy thing our civilisation is!" said Evesham; "a mere
thin net of habits and associations!"

"I suppose those men came back," said Wilkins.

"Lady Paskershortly did!" chuckled Evesham.

"How do they fit it in with the rest of their lives?" Wilkins
speculated. "I suppose there's Pekin-stained police officers,
Pekin-stained J. P.'s--trying petty pilferers in the severest
manner."...

Then for a time things became preposterous. There was a sudden cascade
of water by the fireplace, and then absurdly the ceiling began to rain
upon us, first at this point and then that. "My new suit!" cried some
one. "Perrrrrr-up pe-rr"--a new vertical line of blackened water would
establish itself and form a spreading pool upon the gleaming cloth. The
men nearest would arrange catchment areas of plates and flower bowls.
"Draw up!" said Tarvrille, "draw up. That's the bad end of the table!"
He turned to the imperturbable butler. "Take round bath towels," he
said; and presently the men behind us were offering--with inflexible
dignity--"Port wine, Sir. Bath towel, Sir!" Waulsort, with streaks of
blackened water on his forehead, was suddenly reminded of a wet year
when he had followed the French army manoeuvres. An animated dispute
sprang up between him and Neal about the relative efficiency of the new
French and German field guns. Wrassleton joined in and a little drunken
shrivelled Oxford don of some sort with a black-splashed shirt front who
presently silenced them all by the immensity and particularity of his
knowledge of field artillery. Then the talk drifted to Sedan and the
effect of dead horses upon drinking-water, which brought Wrassleton
and Weston Massinghay into a dispute of great vigour and emphasis. "The
trouble in South Africa," said Weston Massinghay, "wasn't that we didn't
boil our water. It was that we didn't boil our men. The Boers drank the
same stuff we did. THEY didn't get dysentery."

That argument went on for some time. I was attacked across the table by
a man named Burshort about my Endowment of Motherhood schemes, but
in the gaps of that debate I could still hear Weston Massinghay
at intervals repeat in a rather thickened voice: "THEY didn't get
dysentery."

I think Evesham went early. The rest of us clustered more and more
closely towards the drier end of the room, the table was pushed along,
and the area beneath the extinguished conflagration abandoned to a
tinkling, splashing company of pots and pans and bowls and baths.
Everybody was now disposed to be hilarious and noisy, to say startling
and aggressive things; we must have sounded a queer clamour to a
listener in the next room. The devil inspired them to begin baiting me.
"Ours isn't the Tory party any more," said Burshort. "Remington has made
it the Obstetric Party."

"That's good!" said Weston Massinghay, with all his teeth gleaming; "I
shall use that against you in the House!"

"I shall denounce you for abusing private confidences if you do," said
Tarvrille.

"Remington wants us to give up launching Dreadnoughts and launch babies
instead," Burshort urged. "For the price of one Dreadnought--"

The little shrivelled don who had been omniscient about guns joined in
the baiting, and displayed himself a venomous creature. Something in
his eyes told me he knew Isabel and hated me for it. "Love and fine
thinking," he began, a little thickly, and knocking over a wine-glass
with a too easy gesture. "Love and fine thinking. Two things don't go
together. No philosophy worth a damn ever came out of excesses of love.
Salt Lake City--Piggott--Ag--Agapemone again--no works to matter."

Everybody laughed.

"Got to rec'nise these facts," said my assailant. "Love and fine think'n
pretty phrase--attractive. Suitable for p'litical dec'rations. Postcard,
Christmas, gilt lets, in a wreath of white flow's. Not oth'wise
valu'ble."

I made some remark, I forget what, but he overbore me.

Real things we want are Hate--Hate and COARSE think'n. I b'long to the
school of Mrs. F's Aunt--"

"What?" said some one, intent.

"In 'Little Dorrit,'" explained Tarvrille; "go on!"

"Hate a fool," said my assailant.

Tarvrille glanced at me. I smiled to conceal the loss of my temper.

"Hate," said the little man, emphasising his point with a clumsy fist.
"Hate's the driving force. What's m'rality?--hate of rotten goings
on. What's patriotism?--hate of int'loping foreigners. What's
Radicalism?--hate of lords. What's Toryism?--hate of disturbance. It's
all hate--hate from top to bottom. Hate of a mess. Remington owned it
the other day, said he hated a mu'll. There you are! If you couldn't
get hate into an election, damn it (hic) people wou'n't poll. Poll for
love!--no' me!"

He paused, but before any one could speak he had resumed.

"Then this about fine thinking. Like going into a bear pit armed with a
tagle--talgent--talgent galv'nometer. Like going to fight a mad dog with
Shasepear and the Bible. Fine thinking--what we want is the thickes'
thinking we can get. Thinking that stands up alone. Taf Reform means
work for all, thassort of thing."

The gentleman from Cambridge paused. "YOU a flag!" he said. "I'd as soon
go to ba'ell und' wet tissue paper!"

My best answer on the spur of the moment was:

"The Japanese did." Which was absurd.

I went on to some other reply, I forget exactly what, and the talk of
the whole table drew round me. It was an extraordinary revelation to me.
Every one was unusually careless and outspoken, and it was amazing how
manifestly they echoed the feeling of this old Tory spokesman. They were
quite friendly to me, they regarded me and the BLUE WEEKLY as valuable
party assets for Toryism, but it was clear they attached no more
importance to what were my realities than they did to the remarkable
therapeutic claims of Mrs. Eddy. They were flushed and amused, perhaps
they went a little too far in their resolves to draw me, but they left
the impression on my mind of men irrevocably set upon narrow and cynical
views of political life. For them the political struggle was a game,
whose counters were human hate and human credulity; their real aim was
just every one's aim, the preservation of the class and way of living to
which their lives were attuned. They did not know how tired I was, how
exhausted mentally and morally, nor how cruel their convergent attack
on me chanced to be. But my temper gave way, I became tart and fierce,
perhaps my replies were a trifle absurd, and Tarvrille, with that quick
eye and sympathy of his, came to the rescue. Then for a time I sat
silent and drank port wine while the others talked. The disorder of
the room, the still dripping ceiling, the noise, the displaced ties and
crumpled shirts of my companions, jarred on my tormented nerves....

It was long past midnight when we dispersed. I remember Tarvrille coming
with me into the hall, and then suggesting we should go upstairs to see
the damage. A manservant carried up two flickering candles for us.
One end of the room was gutted, curtains, hangings, several chairs and
tables were completely burnt, the panelling was scorched and warped,
three smashed windows made the candles flare and gutter, and some scraps
of broken china still lay on the puddled floor.

As we surveyed this, Lady Tarvrille appeared, back from some party,
a slender, white-cloaked, satin-footed figure with amazed blue eyes
beneath her golden hair. I remember how stupidly we laughed at her
surprise.



2


I parted from Panmure at the corner of Aldington Street, and went my way
alone. But I did not go home, I turned westward and walked for a long
way, and then struck northward aimlessly. I was too miserable to go to
my house.

I wandered about that night like a man who has discovered his Gods
are dead. I can look back now detached yet sympathetic upon that wild
confusion of moods and impulses, and by it I think I can understand, oh!
half the wrongdoing and blundering in the world.

I do not feel now the logical force of the process that must have
convinced me then that I had made my sacrifice and spent my strength in
vain. At no time had I been under any illusion that the Tory party had
higher ideals than any other party, yet it came to me like a thing newly
discovered that the men I had to work with had for the most part no such
dreams, no sense of any collective purpose, no atom of the faith I held.
They were just as immediately intent upon personal ends, just as limited
by habits of thought, as the men in any other group or party. Perhaps I
had slipped unawares for a time into the delusions of a party man--but I
do not think so.

No, it was the mood of profound despondency that had followed upon the
abrupt cessation of my familiar intercourse with Isabel, that gave this
fact that had always been present in my mind its quality of devastating
revelation. It seemed as though I had never seen before nor suspected
the stupendous gap between the chaotic aims, the routine, the
conventional acquiescences, the vulgarisations of the personal life, and
that clearly conscious development and service of a collective thought
and purpose at which my efforts aimed. I had thought them but a little
way apart, and now I saw they were separated by all the distance
between earth and heaven. I saw now in myself and every one around me,
a concentration upon interests close at hand, an inability to detach
oneself from the provocations, tendernesses, instinctive hates, dumb
lusts and shy timidities that touched one at every point; and, save
for rare exalted moments, a regardlessness of broader aims and remoter
possibilities that made the white passion of statecraft seem as
unearthly and irrelevant to human life as the story an astronomer will
tell, half proven but altogether incredible, of habitable planets and
answering intelligences, suns' distances uncounted across the deep. It
seemed to me I had aspired too high and thought too far, had mocked my
own littleness by presumption, had given the uttermost dear reality of
life for a theoriser's dream.

All through that wandering agony of mine that night a dozen threads of
thought interwove; now I was a soul speaking in protest to God against
a task too cold and high for it, and now I was an angry man, scorned and
pointed upon, who had let life cheat him of the ultimate pride of his
soul. Now I was the fool of ambition, who opened his box of gold to find
blank emptiness, and now I was a spinner of flimsy thoughts, whose web
tore to rags at a touch. I realised for the first time how much I had
come to depend upon the mind and faith of Isabel, how she had confirmed
me and sustained me, how little strength I had to go on with our
purposes now that she had vanished from my life. She had been the
incarnation of those great abstractions, the saving reality, the voice
that answered back. There was no support that night in the things that
had been. We were alone together on the cliff for ever more!--that was
very pretty in its way, but it had no truth whatever that could help
me now, no ounce of sustaining value. I wanted Isabel that night, no
sentiment or memory of her, but Isabel alive,--to talk to me, to touch
me, to hold me together. I wanted unendurably the dusky gentleness of
her presence, the consolation of her voice.

We were alone together on the cliff! I startled a passing cabman into
interest by laughing aloud at that magnificent and characteristic
sentimentality. What a lie it was, and how satisfying it had been! That
was just where we shouldn't remain. We of all people had no distinction
from that humanity whose lot is to forget. We should go out to other
interests, new experiences, new demands. That tall and intricate fabric
of ambitious understandings we had built up together in our intimacy
would be the first to go; and last perhaps to endure with us would be
a few gross memories of sights and sounds, and trivial incidental
excitements....

I had a curious feeling that night that I had lost touch with life for
a long time, and had now been reminded of its quality. That infernal
little don's parody of my ruling phrase, "Hate and coarse thinking,"
stuck in my thoughts like a poisoned dart, a centre of inflammation.
Just as a man who is debilitated has no longer the vitality to resist
an infection, so my mind, slackened by the crisis of my separation from
Isabel, could find no resistance to his emphatic suggestion. It seemed
to me that what he had said was overpoweringly true, not only of
contemporary life, but of all possible human life. Love is the rare
thing, the treasured thing; you lock it away jealously and watch, and
well you may; hate and aggression and force keep the streets and rule
the world. And fine thinking is, in the rough issues of life, weak
thinking, is a balancing indecisive process, discovers with disloyal
impartiality a justice and a defect on each disputing side. "Good honest
men," as Dayton calls them, rule the world, with a way of thinking
out decisions like shooting cartloads of bricks, and with a steadfast
pleasure in hostility. Dayton liked to call his antagonists "blaggards
and scoundrels"--it justified his opposition--the Lords were
"scoundrels," all people richer than he were "scoundrels," all
Socialists, all troublesome poor people; he liked to think of jails and
justice being done. His public spirit was saturated with the sombre
joys of conflict and the pleasant thought of condign punishment for
all recalcitrant souls. That was the way of it, I perceived. That had
survival value, as the biologists say. He was fool enough in politics to
be a consistent and happy politician....

Hate and coarse thinking; how the infernal truth of the phrase beat me
down that night! I couldn't remember that I had known this all along,
and that it did not really matter in the slightest degree. I had worked
it all out long ago in other terms, when I had seen how all parties
stood for interests inevitably, and how the purpose in life achieves
itself, if it achieves itself at all, as a bye product of the war
of individuals and classes. Hadn't I always known that science and
philosophy elaborate themselves in spite of all the passion and
narrowness of men, in spite of the vanities and weakness of their
servants, in spite of all the heated disorder of contemporary things?
Wasn't it my own phrase to speak of "that greater mind in men, in which
we are but moments and transitorily lit cells?" Hadn't I known that the
spirit of man still speaks like a thing that struggles out of mud and
slime, and that the mere effort to speak means choking and disaster?
Hadn't I known that we who think without fear and speak without
discretion will not come to our own for the next two thousand years?

It was the last was most forgotten of all that faith mislaid. Before
mankind, in my vision that night, stretched new centuries of confusion,
vast stupid wars, hastily conceived laws, foolish temporary triumphs
of order, lapses, set-backs, despairs, catastrophes, new beginnings, a
multitudinous wilderness of time, a nigh plotless drama of wrong-headed
energies. In order to assuage my parting from Isabel we had set
ourselves to imagine great rewards for our separation, great personal
rewards; we had promised ourselves success visible and shining in our
lives. To console ourselves in our separation we had made out of
the BLUE WEEKLY and our young Tory movement preposterously enormous
things-as though those poor fertilising touches at the soil were indeed
the germinating seeds of the millennium, as though a million lives such
as ours had not to contribute before the beginning of the beginning.
That poor pretence had failed. That magnificent proposition shrivelled
to nothing in the black loneliness of that night.

I saw that there were to be no such compensations. So far as my real
services to mankind were concerned I had to live an unrecognised
and unrewarded life. If I made successes it would be by the way. Our
separation would alter nothing of that. My scandal would cling to me
now for all my life, a thing affecting relationships, embarrassing and
hampering my spirit. I should follow the common lot of those who live by
the imagination, and follow it now in infinite loneliness of soul; the
one good comforter, the one effectual familiar, was lost to me for
ever; I should do good and evil together, no one caring to understand;
I should produce much weary work, much bad-spirited work, much absolute
evil; the good in me would be too often ill-expressed and missed or
misinterpreted. In the end I might leave one gleaming flake or so amidst
the slag heaps for a moment of postmortem sympathy. I was afraid beyond
measure of my derelict self. Because I believed with all my soul in love
and fine thinking that did not mean that I should necessarily either
love steadfastly or think finely. I remember how I fell talking to
God--I think I talked out loud. "Why do I care for these things?"
I cried, "when I can do so little! Why am I apart from the jolly
thoughtless fighting life of men? These dreams fade to nothingness, and
leave me bare!"

I scolded. "Why don't you speak to a man, show yourself? I thought I
had a gleam of you in Isabel,--and then you take her away. Do you really
think I can carry on this game alone, doing your work in darkness and
silence, living in muddled conflict, half living, half dying?"

Grotesque analogies arose in my mind. I discovered a strange parallelism
between my now tattered phrase of "Love and fine thinking" and the
"Love and the Word" of Christian thought. Was it possible the Christian
propaganda had at the outset meant just that system of attitudes I had
been feeling my way towards from the very beginning of my life? Had
I spent a lifetime making my way back to Christ? It mocks humanity
to think how Christ has been overlaid. I went along now, recalling
long-neglected phrases and sentences; I had a new vision of that great
central figure preaching love with hate and coarse thinking even in the
disciples about Him, rising to a tidal wave at last in that clamour for
Barabbas, and the public satisfaction in His fate....

It's curious to think that hopeless love and a noisy disordered dinner
should lead a man to these speculations, but they did. "He DID mean
that!" I said, and suddenly thought of what a bludgeon they'd made
of His Christianity. Athwart that perplexing, patient enigma sitting
inaudibly among publicans and sinners, danced and gibbered a long
procession of the champions of orthodoxy. "He wasn't human," I said,
and remembered that last despairing cry, "My God! My God! why hast Thou
forsaken Me?"

"Oh, HE forsakes every one," I said, flying out as a tired mind will,
with an obvious repartee....

I passed at a bound from such monstrous theology to a towering rage
against the Baileys. In an instant and with no sense of absurdity I
wanted--in the intervals of love and fine thinking--to fling about that
strenuously virtuous couple; I wanted to kick Keyhole of the PEEPSHOW
into the gutter and make a common massacre of all the prosperous
rascaldom that makes a trade and rule of virtue. I can still feel that
transition. In a moment I had reached that phase of weakly decisive
anger which is for people of my temperament the concomitant of
exhaustion.

"I will have her," I cried. "By Heaven! I WILL have her! Life mocks me
and cheats me. Nothing can be made good to me again.... Why shouldn't I
save what I can? I can't save myself without her...."

I remember myself--as a sort of anti-climax to that--rather tediously
asking my way home. I was somewhere in the neighbourhood of Holland
Park....

It was then between one and two. I felt that I could go home now without
any risk of meeting Margaret. It had been the thought of returning to
Margaret that had sent me wandering that night. It is one of the ugliest
facts I recall about that time of crisis, the intense aversion I felt
for Margaret. No sense of her goodness, her injury and nobility, and
the enormous generosity of her forgiveness, sufficed to mitigate that.
I hope now that in this book I am able to give something of her silvery
splendour, but all through this crisis I felt nothing of that. There was
a triumphant kindliness about her that I found intolerable. She meant to
be so kind to me, to offer unstinted consolation, to meet my needs, to
supply just all she imagined Isabel had given me.

When I left Tarvrille's, I felt I could anticipate exactly how she would
meet my homecoming. She would be perplexed by my crumpled shirt front,
on which I had spilt some drops of wine; she would overlook that by an
effort, explain it sentimentally, resolve it should make no difference
to her. She would want to know who had been present, what we had talked
about, show the alertest interest in whatever it was--it didn't matter
what.... No, I couldn't face her.

So I did not reach my study until two o'clock.

There, I remember, stood the new and very beautiful old silver
candlesticks that she had set there two days since to please me--the
foolish kindliness of it! But in her search for expression, Margaret
heaped presents upon me. She had fitted these candlesticks with electric
lights, and I must, I suppose, have lit them to write my note to Isabel.
"Give me a word--the world aches without you," was all I scrawled,
though I fully meant that she should come to me. I knew, though I ought
not to have known, that now she had left her flat, she was with the
Balfes--she was to have been married from the Balfes--and I sent my
letter there. And I went out into the silent square and posted the note
forthwith, because I knew quite clearly that if I left it until morning
I should never post it at all.



3


I had a curious revulsion of feeling that morning of our meeting. (Of
all places for such a clandestine encounter she had chosen the bridge
opposite Buckingham Palace.) Overnight I had been full of self pity, and
eager for the comfort of Isabel's presence. But the ill-written scrawl
in which she had replied had been full of the suggestion of her own
weakness and misery. And when I saw her, my own selfish sorrows were
altogether swept away by a wave of pitiful tenderness. Something had
happened to her that I did not understand. She was manifestly ill. She
came towards me wearily, she who had always borne herself so bravely;
her shoulders seemed bent, and her eyes were tired, and her face white
and drawn. All my life has been a narrow self-centred life; no brothers,
no sisters or children or weak things had ever yet made any intimate
appeal to me, and suddenly--I verily believe for the first time in my
life!--I felt a great passion of protective ownership; I felt that here
was something that I could die to shelter, something that meant more
than joy or pride or splendid ambitions or splendid creation to me, a
new kind of hold upon me, a new power in the world. Some sealed fountain
was opened in my breast. I knew that I could love Isabel broken, Isabel
beaten, Isabel ugly and in pain, more than I could love any sweet
or delightful or glorious thing in life. I didn't care any more for
anything in the world but Isabel, and that I should protect her. I
trembled as I came near her, and could scarcely speak to her for the
emotion that filled me....

"I had your letter," I said.

"I had yours."

"Where can we talk?"

I remember my lame sentences. "We'll have a boat. That's best here."

I took her to the little boat-house, and there we hired a boat, and
I rowed in silence under the bridge and into the shade of a tree. The
square grey stone masses of the Foreign Office loomed through the twigs,
I remember, and a little space of grass separated us from the pathway
and the scrutiny of passers-by. And there we talked.

"I had to write to you," I said.

"I had to come."

"When are you to be married?"

"Thursday week."

"Well?" I said. "But--can we?"

She leant forward and scrutinised my face with eyes wide open. "What do
you mean?" she said at last in a whisper.

"Can we stand it? After all?"

I looked at her white face. "Can you?" I said.

She whispered. "Your career?"

Then suddenly her face was contorted,--she wept silently, exactly as a
child tormented beyond endurance might suddenly weep....

"Oh! I don't care," I cried, "now. I don't care. Damn the whole system
of things! Damn all this patching of the irrevocable! I want to take
care of you, Isabel! and have you with me."

"I can't stand it," she blubbered.

"You needn't stand it. I thought it was best for you.... I thought
indeed it was best for you. I thought even you wanted it like that."

"Couldn't I live alone--as I meant to do?"

"No," I said, "you couldn't. You're not strong enough. I've thought of
that; I've got to shelter you."

"And I want you," I went on. "I'm not strong enough--I can't stand life
without you."

She stopped weeping, she made a great effort to control herself, and
looked at me steadfastly for a moment. "I was going to kill myself," she
whispered. "I was going to kill myself quietly--somehow. I meant to wait
a bit and have an accident. I thought--you didn't understand. You were a
man, and couldn't understand...."

"People can't do as we thought we could do," I said. "We've gone too far
together."

"Yes," she said, and I stared into her eyes.

"The horror of it," she whispered. "The horror of being handed over.
It's just only begun to dawn upon me, seeing him now as I do. He tries
to be kind to me.... I didn't know. I felt adventurous before.... It
makes me feel like all the women in the world who have ever been owned
and subdued.... It's not that he isn't the best of men, it's because I'm
a part of you.... I can't go through with it. If I go through with it, I
shall be left--robbed of pride--outraged--a woman beaten...."

"I know," I said, "I know."

"I want to live alone.... I don't care for anything now but just escape.
If you can help me...."

"I must take you away. There's nothing for us but to go away together."

"But your work," she said; "your career! Margaret! Our promises!"

"We've made a mess of things, Isabel--or things have made a mess of us.
I don't know which. Our flags are in the mud, anyhow. It's too late
to save those other things! They have to go. You can't make terms with
defeat. I thought it was Margaret needed me most. But it's you. And I
need you. I didn't think of that either. I haven't a doubt left in the
world now. We've got to leave everything rather than leave each other.
I'm sure of it. Now we have gone so far. We've got to go right down to
earth and begin again.... Dear, I WANT disgrace with you...."

So I whispered to her as she sat crumpled together on the faded cushions
of the boat, this white and weary young woman who had been so valiant
and careless a girl. "I don't care," I said. "I don't care for anything,
if I can save you out of the wreckage we have made together."



4


The next day I went to the office of the BLUE WEEKLY in order to get as
much as possible of its affairs in working order before I left London
with Isabel. I just missed Shoesmith in the lower office. Upstairs I
found Britten amidst a pile of outside articles, methodically reading
the title of each and sometimes the first half-dozen lines, and either
dropping them in a growing heap on the floor for a clerk to return, or
putting them aside for consideration. I interrupted him, squatted on
the window-sill of the open window, and sketched out my ideas for the
session.

"You're far-sighted," he remarked at something of mine which reached out
ahead.

"I like to see things prepared," I answered.

"Yes," he said, and ripped open the envelope of a fresh aspirant.

I was silent while he read.

"You're going away with Isabel Rivers," he said abruptly.

"Well!" I said, amazed.

"I know," he said, and lost his breath. "Not my business. Only--"

It was queer to find Britten afraid to say a thing.

"It's not playing the game," he said.

"What do you know?"

"Everything that matters."

"Some games," I said, "are too hard to play."

There came a pause between us.

"I didn't know you were watching all this," I said.

"Yes," he answered, after a pause, "I've watched."

"Sorry--sorry you don't approve."

"It means smashing such an infernal lot of things, Remington."

I did not answer.

"You're going away then?"

"Yes."

"Soon?"

"Right away."

"There's your wife."

"I know."

"Shoesmith--whom you're pledged to in a manner. You've just picked him
out and made him conspicuous. Every one will know. Oh! of course--it's
nothing to you. Honour--"

"I know."

"Common decency."

I nodded.

"All this movement of ours. That's what I care for most.... It's come to
be a big thing, Remington."

"That will go on."

"We have a use for you--no one else quite fills it. No one.... I'm not
sure it will go on."

"Do you think I haven't thought of all these things?"

He shrugged his shoulders, and rejected two papers unread.

"I knew," he remarked, "when you came back from America. You were alight
with it." Then he let his bitterness gleam for a moment. "But I thought
you would stick to your bargain."

"It's not so much choice as you think," I said.

"There's always a choice."

"No," I said.

He scrutinised my face.

"I can't live without her--I can't work. She's all mixed up with
this--and everything. And besides, there's things you can't understand.
There's feelings you've never felt.... You don't understand how much
we've been to one another."

Britten frowned and thought.

"Some things one's GOT to do," he threw out.

"Some things one can't do."

"These infernal institutions--"

"Some one must begin," I said.

He shook his head. "Not YOU," he said. "No!"

He stretched out his hands on the desk before him, and spoke again.

"Remington," he said, "I've thought of this business day and night too.
It matters to me. It matters immensely to me. In a way--it's a thing
one doesn't often say to a man--I've loved you. I'm the sort of man who
leads a narrow life.... But you've been something fine and good for me,
since that time, do you remember? when we talked about Mecca together."

I nodded.

"Yes. And you'll always be something fine and good for me anyhow. I know
things about you,--qualities--no mere act can destroy them.. .. Well, I
can tell you, you're doing wrong. You're going on now like a man who is
hypnotised and can't turn round. You're piling wrong on wrong. It was
wrong for you two people ever to be lovers."

He paused.

"It gripped us hard," I said.

"Yes!--but in your position! And hers! It was vile!"

"You've not been tempted."

"How do you know? Anyhow--having done that, you ought to have stood the
consequences and thought of other people. You could have ended it at the
first pause for reflection. You didn't. You blundered again. You kept
on. You owed a certain secrecy to all of us! You didn't keep it.
You were careless. You made things worse. This engagement and this
publicity!--Damn it, Remington!"

"I know," I said, with smarting eyes. "Damn it! with all my heart! It
came of trying to patch.... You CAN'T patch."

"And now, as I care for anything under heaven, Remington, you two ought
to stand these last consequences--and part. You ought to part. Other
people have to stand things! Other people have to part. You ought to.
You say--what do you say? It's loss of so much life to lose each other.
So is losing a hand or a leg. But it's what you've incurred. Amputate.
Take your punishment--After all, you chose it."

"Oh, damn!" I said, standing up and going to the window.

"Damn by all means. I never knew a topic so full of justifiable damns.
But you two did choose it. You ought to stick to your undertaking."

I turned upon him with a snarl in my voice. "My dear Britten!" I cried.
"Don't I KNOW I'm doing wrong? Aren't I in a net? Suppose I don't go!
Is there any right in that? Do you think we're going to be much to
ourselves or any one after this parting? I've been thinking all
last night of this business, trying it over and over again from the
beginning. How was it we went wrong? Since I came back from America--I
grant you THAT--but SINCE, there's never been a step that wasn't forced,
that hadn't as much right in it or more, as wrong. You talk as though I
was a thing of steel that could bend this way or that and never change.
You talk as though Isabel was a cat one could give to any kind of
owner.... We two are things that change and grow and alter all the time.
We're--so interwoven that being parted now will leave us just misshapen
cripples.... You don't know the motives, you don't know the rush and
feel of things, you don't know how it was with us, and how it is with
us. You don't know the hunger for the mere sight of one another; you
don't know anything."

Britten looked at his finger-nails closely. His red face puckered to
a wry frown. "Haven't we all at times wanted the world put back?" he
grunted, and looked hard and close at one particular nail.

There was a long pause.

"I want her," I said, "and I'm going to have her. I'm too tired for
balancing the right or wrong of it any more. You can't separate them.
I saw her yesterday.... She's--ill.... I'd take her now, if death were
just outside the door waiting for us."

"Torture?"

I thought. "Yes."

"For her?"

"There isn't," I said.

"If there was?"

I made no answer.

"It's blind Want. And there's nothing ever been put into you to stand
against it. What are you going to do with the rest of your lives?"

"No end of things."

"Nothing."

"I don't believe you are right," I said. "I believe we can save
something--"

Britten shook his head. "Some scraps of salvage won't excuse you," he
said.

His indignation rose. "In the middle of life!" he said. "No man has a
right to take his hand from the plough!"

He leant forward on his desk and opened an argumentative palm. "You
know, Remington," he said, "and I know, that if this could be fended off
for six months--if you could be clapped in prison, or got out of the way
somehow,--until this marriage was all over and settled down for a year,
say--you know then you two could meet, curious, happy, as friends.
Saved! You KNOW it."

I turned and stared at him. "You're wrong, Britten," I said. "And does
it matter if we could?"

I found that in talking to him I could frame the apologetics I had not
been able to find for myself alone.

"I am certain of one thing, Britten. It is our duty not to hush up this
scandal."

He raised his eyebrows. I perceived now the element of absurdity in me,
but at the time I was as serious as a man who is burning.

"It's our duty," I went on, "to smash now openly in the sight of every
one. Yes! I've got that as clean and plain--as prison whitewash. I am
convinced that we have got to be public to the uttermost now--I mean
it--until every corner of our world knows this story, knows it fully,
adds it to the Parnell story and the Ashton Dean story and the Carmel
story and the Witterslea story, and all the other stories that have
picked man after man out of English public life, the men with active
imaginations, the men of strong initiative. To think this tottering
old-woman ridden Empire should dare to waste a man on such a score! You
say I ought to be penitent--"

Britten shook his head and smiled very faintly.

"I'm boiling with indignation," I said. "I lay in bed last night and
went through it all. What in God's name was to be expected of us but
what has happened? I went through my life bit by bit last night, I
recalled all I've had to do with virtue and women, and all I was told
and how I was prepared. I was born into cowardice and debasement. We all
are. Our generation's grimy with hypocrisy. I came to the most beautiful
things in life--like peeping Tom of Coventry. I was never given a light,
never given a touch of natural manhood by all this dingy, furtive,
canting, humbugging English world. Thank God! I'll soon be out of it!
The shame of it! The very savages in Australia initiate their children
better than the English do to-day. Neither of us was ever given a
view of what they call morality that didn't make it show as shabby
subservience, as the meanest discretion, an abject submission to
unreasonable prohibitions! meek surrender of mind and body to the
dictation of pedants and old women and fools. We weren't taught--we
were mumbled at! And when we found that the thing they called unclean,
unclean, was Pagan beauty--God! it was a glory to sin, Britten, it was a
pride and splendour like bathing in the sunlight after dust and grime!"

"Yes," said Britten. "That's all very well--"

I interrupted him. "I know there's a case--I'm beginning to think it a
valid case against us; but we never met it! There's a steely pride in
self restraint, a nobility of chastity, but only for those who see and
think and act--untrammeled and unafraid. The other thing, the current
thing, why! it's worth as much as the chastity of a monkey kept in a
cage by itself!" I put my foot in a chair, and urged my case upon him.
"This is a dirty world, Britten, simply because it is a muddled world,
and the thing you call morality is dirtier now than the thing you call
immorality. Why don't the moralists pick their stuff out of the slime
if they care for it, and wipe it?--damn them! I am burning now to say:
'Yes, we did this and this,' to all the world. All the world!... I
will!"

Britten rubbed the palm of his hand on the corner of his desk. "That's
all very well, Remington," he said. "You mean to go."

He stopped and began again. "If you didn't know you were in the wrong
you wouldn't be so damned rhetorical. You're in the wrong. It's as plain
to you as it is to me. You're leaving a big work, you're leaving a wife
who trusted you, to go and live with your jolly mistress.... You won't
see you're a statesman that matters, that no single man, maybe, might
come to such influence as you in the next ten years. You're throwing
yourself away and accusing your country of rejecting you."

He swung round upon his swivel at me. "Remington," he said, "have you
forgotten the immense things our movement means?"

I thought. "Perhaps I am rhetorical," I said.

"But the things we might achieve! If you'd only stay now--even now! Oh!
you'd suffer a little socially, but what of that? You'd be able to go
on--perhaps all the better for hostility of the kind you'd get. You
know, Remington--you KNOW."

I thought and went back to his earlier point. "If I am rhetorical,
at any rate it's a living feeling behind it. Yes, I remember all the
implications of our aims--very splendid, very remote. But just now it's
rather like offering to give a freezing man the sunlit Himalayas from
end to end in return for his camp-fire. When you talk of me and my jolly
mistress, it isn't fair. That misrepresents everything. I'm not going
out of this--for delights. That's the sort of thing men like Snuffles
and Keyhole imagine--that excites them! When I think of the things
these creatures think! Ugh! But YOU know better? You know that physical
passion that burns like a fire--ends clean. I'm going for love,
Britten--if I sinned for passion. I'm going, Britten, because when I saw
her the other day she HURT me. She hurt me damnably, Britten.... I've
been a cold man--I've led a rhetorical life--you hit me with that
word!--I put things in a windy way, I know, but what has got hold of
me at last is her pain. She's ill. Don't you understand? She's a sick
thing--a weak thing. She's no more a goddess than I'm a god.... I'm
not in love with her now; I'm RAW with love for her. I feel like a man
that's been flayed. I have been flayed.... You don't begin to imagine
the sort of helpless solicitude.... She's not going to do things easily;
she's ill. Her courage fails.... It's hard to put things when one isn't
rhetorical, but it's this, Britten--there are distresses that matter
more than all the delights or achievements in the world.... I made
her what she is--as I never made Margaret. I've made her--I've broken
her.... I'm going with my own woman. The rest of my life and England,
and so forth, must square itself to that...."

For a long time, as it seemed, we remained silent and motionless. We'd
said all we had to say. My eyes caught a printed slip upon the desk
before him, and I came back abruptly to the paper.

I picked up this galley proof. It was one of Winter's essays. "This
man goes on doing first-rate stuff," I said. "I hope you will keep him
going."

He did not answer for a moment or so. "I'll keep him going," he said at
last with a sigh.



5


I have a letter Margaret wrote me within a week of our flight. I cannot
resist transcribing some of it here, because it lights things as no word
of mine can do. It is a string of nearly inconsecutive thoughts written
in pencil in a fine, tall, sprawling hand. Its very inconsecutiveness is
essential. Many words are underlined. It was in answer to one from me;
but what I wrote has passed utterly from my mind....

"Certainly," she says, "I want to hear from you, but I do not want
to see you. There's a sort of abstract YOU that I want to go on with.
Something I've made out of you.... I want to know things about you--but
I don't want to see or feel or imagine. When some day I have got rid
of my intolerable sense of proprietorship, it may be different. Then
perhaps we may meet again. I think it is even more the loss of our
political work and dreams that I am feeling than the loss of your
presence. Aching loss. I thought so much of the things we were DOING for
the world--had given myself so unreservedly. You've left me with nothing
to DO. I am suddenly at loose ends....

"We women are trained to be so dependent on a man. I've got no life of
my own at all. It seems now to me that I wore my clothes even for you
and your schemes....

"After I have told myself a hundred times why this has happened, I ask
again, 'Why did he give things up? Why did he give things up?'...

"It is just as though you were wilfully dead....

"Then I ask again and again whether this thing need have happened at
all, whether if I had had a warning, if I had understood better, I might
not have adapted myself to your restless mind and made this catastrophe
impossible....

"Oh, my dear! why hadn't you the pluck to hurt me at the beginning, and
tell me what you thought of me and life? You didn't give me a chance;
not a chance. I suppose you couldn't. All these things you and I stood
away from. You let my first repugnances repel you....

"It is strange to think after all these years that I should be asking
myself, do I love you? have I loved you? In a sense I think I HATE
you. I feel you have taken my life, dragged it in your wake for a time,
thrown it aside. I am resentful. Unfairly resentful, for why should I
exact that you should watch and understand my life, when clearly I have
understood so little of yours. But I am savage--savage at the wrecking
of all you were to do.

"Oh, why--why did you give things up?

"No human being is his own to do what he likes with. You were not
only pledged to my tiresome, ineffectual companionship, but to great
purposes. They ARE great purposes....

"If only I could take up your work as you leave it, with the strength
you had--then indeed I feel I could let you go--you and your young
mistress.... All that matters so little to me....

"Yet I think I must indeed love you yourself in my slower way. At times
I am mad with jealousy at the thought of all I hadn't the wit to give
you.... I've always hidden my tears from you--and what was in my heart.
It's my nature to hide--and you, you want things brought to you to see.
You are so curious as to be almost cruel. You don't understand reserves.
You have no mercy with restraints and reservations. You are not really
a CIVILISED man at all. You hate pretences--and not only pretences but
decent coverings....

"It's only after one has lost love and the chance of loving that slow
people like myself find what they might have done. Why wasn't I bold and
reckless and abandoned? It's as reasonable to ask that, I suppose, as to
ask why my hair is fair....

"I go on with these perhapses over and over again here when I find
myself alone....

"My dear, my dear, you can't think of the desolation of things--I shall
never go back to that house we furnished together, that was to have been
the laboratory (do you remember calling it a laboratory?) in which you
were to forge so much of the new order....

"But, dear, if I can help you--even now--in any way--help both of you, I
mean.... It tears me when I think of you poor and discredited. You will
let me help you if I can--it will be the last wrong not to let me do
that....

"You had better not get ill. If you do, and I hear of it--I shall come
after you with a troupe of doctor's and nurses. If I am a failure as a
wife, no one has ever said I was anything but a success as a district
visitor...."

There are other sheets, but I cannot tell whether they were written
before or after the ones from which I have quoted. And most of them
have little things too intimate to set down. But this oddly penetrating
analysis of our differences must, I think, be given.

"There are all sorts of things I can't express about this and want to.
There's this difference that has always been between us, that you like
nakedness and wildness, and I, clothing and restraint. It goes through
everything. You are always TALKING of order and system, and the splendid
dream of the order that might replace the muddled system you hate, but
by a sort of instinct you seem to want to break the law. I've watched
you so closely. Now I want to obey laws, to make sacrifices, to follow
rules. I don't want to make, but I do want to keep. You are at once
makers and rebels, you and Isabel too. You're bad people--criminal
people, I feel, and yet full of something the world must have. You're
so much better than me, and so much viler. It may be there is no making
without destruction, but it seems to me sometimes that it is nothing
but an instinct for lawlessness that drives you. You remind me--do you
remember?--of that time we went from Naples to Vesuvius, and walked
over the hot new lava there. Do you remember how tired I was? I know it
disappointed you that I was tired. One walked there in spite of the heat
because there was a crust; like custom, like law. But directly a crust
forms on things, you are restless to break down to the fire again.
You talk of beauty, both of you, as something terrible, mysterious,
imperative. YOUR beauty is something altogether different from anything
I know or feel. It has pain in it. Yet you always speak as though it was
something I ought to feel and am dishonest not to feel. MY beauty is
a quiet thing. You have always laughed at my feeling for old-fashioned
chintz and blue china and Sheraton. But I like all these familiar USED
things. My beauty is STILL beauty, and yours, is excitement. I
know nothing of the fascination of the fire, or why one should go
deliberately out of all the decent fine things of life to run dangers
and be singed and tormented and destroyed. I don't understand...."



6


I remember very freshly the mood of our departure from London, the
platform of Charing Cross with the big illuminated clock overhead, the
bustle of porters and passengers with luggage, the shouting of newsboys
and boys with flowers and sweets, and the groups of friends seeing
travellers off by the boat train. Isabel sat very quiet and still in the
compartment, and I stood upon the platform with the door open, with
a curious reluctance to take the last step that should sever me from
London's ground. I showed our tickets, and bought a handful of red roses
for her. At last came the guards crying: "Take your seats," and I got
in and closed the door on me. We had, thank Heaven! a compartment to
ourselves. I let down the window and stared out.

There was a bustle of final adieux on the platform, a cry of "Stand
away, please, stand away!" and the train was gliding slowly and smoothly
out of the station.

I looked out upon the river as the train rumbled with slowly gathering
pace across the bridge, and the bobbing black heads of the pedestrians
in the footway, and the curve of the river and the glowing great hotels,
and the lights and reflections and blacknesses of that old, familiar
spectacle. Then with a common thought, we turned our eyes westward to
where the pinnacles of Westminster and the shining clock tower rose hard
and clear against the still, luminous sky.

"They'll be in Committee on the Reformatory Bill to-night," I said, a
little stupidly.

"And so," I added, "good-bye to London!"

We said no more, but watched the south-side streets below--bright gleams
of lights and movement, and the dark, dim, monstrous shapes of houses
and factories. We ran through Waterloo Station, London Bridge, New
Cross, St. John's. We said never a word. It seemed to me that for a time
we had exhausted our emotions. We had escaped, we had cut our knot,
we had accepted the last penalty of that headlong return of mine from
Chicago a year and a half ago. That was all settled. That harvest of
feelings we had reaped. I thought now only of London, of London as the
symbol of all we were leaving and all we had lost in the world. I felt
nothing now but an enormous and overwhelming regret....

The train swayed and rattled on its way. We ran through old Bromstead,
where once I had played with cities and armies on the nursery floor. The
sprawling suburbs with their scattered lights gave way to dim tree-set
country under a cloud-veiled, intermittently shining moon. We passed
Cardcaster Place. Perhaps old Wardingham, that pillar of the old
Conservatives, was there, fretting over his unsuccessful struggle with
our young Toryism. Little he recked of this new turn of the wheel and
how it would confirm his contempt of all our novelties. Perhaps some
faint intimation drew him to the window to see behind the stems of the
young fir trees that bordered his domain, the little string of lighted
carriage windows gliding southward....

Suddenly I began to realise just what it was we were doing.

And now, indeed, I knew what London had been to me, London where I
had been born and educated, the slovenly mother of my mind and all my
ambitions, London and the empire! It seemed to me we must be going
out to a world that was utterly empty. All our significance fell from
us--and before us was no meaning any more. We were leaving London; my
hand, which had gripped so hungrily upon its complex life, had been
forced from it, my fingers left their hold. That was over. I should
never have a voice in public affairs again. The inexorable unwritten
law which forbids overt scandal sentenced me. We were going out to a
new life, a life that appeared in that moment to be a mere shrivelled
remnant of me, a mere residuum of sheltering and feeding and seeing
amidst alien scenery and the sound of unfamiliar tongues. We were going
to live cheaply in a foreign place, so cut off that I meet now the
merest stray tourist, the commonest tweed-clad stranger with a mixture
of shyness and hunger.... And suddenly all the schemes I was leaving
appeared fine and adventurous and hopeful as they had never done before.
How great was this purpose I had relinquished, this bold and subtle
remaking of the English will! I had doubted so many things, and now
suddenly I doubted my unimportance, doubted my right to this suicidal
abandonment. Was I not a trusted messenger, greatly trusted and
favoured, who had turned aside by the way? Had I not, after all, stood
for far more than I had thought; was I not filching from that dear great
city of my birth and life, some vitally necessary thing, a key, a link,
a reconciling clue in her political development, that now she might seek
vaguely for in vain? What is one life against the State? Ought I not
to have sacrificed Isabel and all my passion and sorrow for Isabel, and
held to my thing--stuck to my thing?

I heard as though he had spoken it in the carriage Britten's "It WAS
a good game." No end of a game. And for the first time I imagined the
faces and voices of Crupp and Esmeer and Gane when they learnt of
this secret flight, this flight of which they were quite unwarned. And
Shoesmith might be there in the house,--Shoesmith who was to have been
married in four days--the thing might hit him full in front of any kind
of people. Cruel eyes might watch him. Why the devil hadn't I written
letters to warn them all? I could have posted them five minutes before
the train started. I had never thought to that moment of the immense
mess they would be in; how the whole edifice would clatter about their
ears. I had a sudden desire to stop the train and go back for a day,
for two days, to set that negligence right. My brain for a moment
brightened, became animated and prolific of ideas. I thought of a
brilliant line we might have taken on that confounded Reformatory
Bill....

That sort of thing was over....

What indeed wasn't over? I passed to a vaguer, more multitudinous
perception of disaster, the friends I had lost already since Altiora
began her campaign, the ampler remnant whom now I must lose. I thought
of people I had been merry with, people I had worked with and played
with, the companions of talkative walks, the hostesses of houses that
had once glowed with welcome for us both. I perceived we must lose them
all. I saw life like a tree in late autumn that had once been rich and
splendid with friends--and now the last brave dears would be hanging on
doubtfully against the frosty chill of facts, twisting and tortured in
the universal gale of indignation, trying to evade the cold blast of the
truth. I had betrayed my party, my intimate friend, my wife, the
wife whose devotion had made me what I was. For awhile the figure of
Margaret, remote, wounded, shamed, dominated my mind, and the thought of
my immense ingratitude. Damn them! they'd take it out of her too. I had
a feeling that I wanted to go straight back and grip some one by the
throat, some one talking ill of Margaret. They'd blame her for not
keeping me, for letting things go so far.... I wanted the whole world
to know how fine she was. I saw in imagination the busy, excited
dinner tables at work upon us all, rather pleasantly excited, brightly
indignant, merciless.

Well, it's the stuff we are!...

Then suddenly, stabbing me to the heart, came a vision of Margaret's
tears and the sound of her voice saying, "Husband mine! Oh! husband
mine! To see you cry!"...

I came out of a cloud of thoughts to discover the narrow compartment,
with its feeble lamp overhead, and our rugs and hand-baggage swaying on
the rack, and Isabel, very still in front of me, gripping my wilting red
roses tightly in her bare and ringless hand.

For a moment I could not understand her attitude, and then I perceived
she was sitting bent together with her head averted from the light to
hide the tears that were streaming down her face. She had not got her
handkerchief out for fear that I should see this, but I saw her tears,
dark drops of tears, upon her sleeve....

I suppose she had been watching my expression, divining my thoughts.

For a time I stared at her and was motionless, in a sort of still and
weary amazement. Why had we done this injury to one another? WHY? Then
something stirred within me.

"ISABEL!" I whispered.

She made no sign.

"Isabel!" I repeated, and then crossed over to her and crept closely to
her, put my arm about her, and drew her wet cheek to mine.

========================================
========================================

GOD THE INVISIBLE KING

by H. G. Wells



CONTENTS


PREFACE

1. THE COSMOGONY OF MODERN RELIGION

2. HERESIES; OR THE THINGS THAT GOD IS NOT

3. THE LIKENESS OF GOD

4. THE RELIGION OF ATHEISTS

5. THE INVISIBLE KING

6. MODERN IDEAS OF SIN AND DAMNATION

7. THE IDEA OF A CHURCH

THE ENVOY




PREFACE


This book sets out as forcibly and exactly as possible the religious
belief of the writer. That belief is not orthodox Christianity; it is
not, indeed, Christianity at all; its core nevertheless is a profound
belief in a personal and intimate God. There is nothing in its
statements that need shock or offend anyone who is prepared for the
expression of a faith different from and perhaps in several particulars
opposed to his own. The writer will be found to be sympathetic with
all sincere religious feeling. Nevertheless it is well to prepare the
prospective reader for statements that may jar harshly against deeply
rooted mental habits. It is well to warn him at the outset that the
departure from accepted beliefs is here no vague scepticism, but a quite
sharply defined objection to dogmas very widely revered. Let the writer
state the most probable occasion of trouble forthwith. An issue upon
which this book will be found particularly uncompromising is the dogma
of the Trinity. The writer is of opinion that the Council of Nicaea,
which forcibly crystallised the controversies of two centuries and
formulated the creed upon which all the existing Christian churches are
based, was one of the most disastrous and one of the least venerable of
all religious gatherings, and he holds that the Alexandrine speculations
which were then conclusively imposed upon Christianity merit only
disrespectful attention at the present time. There you have a chief
possibility of offence. He is quite unable to pretend any awe for what
he considers the spiritual monstrosities established by that undignified
gathering. He makes no attempt to be obscure or propitiatory in this
connection. He criticises the creeds explicitly and frankly, because he
believes it is particularly necessary to clear them out of the way of
those who are seeking religious consolation at this present time of
exceptional religious need. He does little to conceal his indignation at
the role played by these dogmas in obscuring, perverting, and preventing
the religious life of mankind. After this warning such readers from
among the various Christian churches and sects as are accessible
to storms of theological fear or passion to whom the Trinity is an
ineffable mystery and the name of God almost unspeakably awful, read on
at their own risk. This is a religious book written by a believer,
but so far as their beliefs and religion go it may seem to them more
sceptical and more antagonistic than blank atheism. That the writer
cannot tell. He is not simply denying their God. He is declaring that
there is a living God, different altogether from that Triune God and
nearer to the heart of man. The spirit of this book is like that of a
missionary who would only too gladly overthrow and smash some Polynesian
divinity of shark's teeth and painted wood and mother-of-pearl. To the
writer such elaborations as "begotten of the Father before all worlds"
are no better than intellectual shark's teeth and oyster shells. His
purpose, like the purpose of that missionary, is not primarily to shock
and insult; but he is zealous to liberate, and he is impatient with a
reverence that stands between man and God. He gives this fair warning
and proceeds with his matter.

His matter is modern religion as he sees it. It is only incidentally and
because it is unavoidable that he attacks doctrinal Christianity.

In a previous book, "First and Last Things" (Constable and Co.), he has
stated his convictions upon certain general ideas of life and thought
as clearly as he could. All of philosophy, all of metaphysics that
is, seems to him to be a discussion of the relations of class and
individual. The antagonism of the Nominalist and the Realist, the
opposition of the One and the Many, the contrast of the Ideal and the
Actual, all these oppositions express a certain structural and essential
duality in the activity of the human mind. From an imperfect recognition
of that duality ensue great masses of misconception. That was the
substance of "First and Last Things." In this present book there is no
further attack on philosophical or metaphysical questions. Here we
work at a less fundamental level and deal with religious feeling and
religious ideas. But just as the writer was inclined to attribute a
whole world of disputation and inexactitudes to confused thinking about
the exact value of classes and terms, so here he is disposed to think
that interminable controversies and conflicts arise out of a confusion
of intention due to a double meaning of the word "God"; that the word
"God" conveys not one idea or set of ideas, but several essentially
different ideas, incompatible one with another, and falling mainly into
one or other of two divergent groups; and that people slip carelessly
from one to the other of these groups of ideas and so get into
ultimately inextricable confusions.

The writer believes that the centuries of fluid religious thought that
preceded the violent ultimate crystallisation of Nicaea, was essentially
a struggle--obscured, of course, by many complexities--to reconcile and
get into a relationship these two separate main series of God-ideas.

Putting the leading idea of this book very roughly, these two
antagonistic typical conceptions of God may be best contrasted by
speaking of one of them as God-as-Nature or the Creator, and of the
other as God-as-Christ or the Redeemer. One is the great Outward God;
the other is the Inmost God. The first idea was perhaps developed most
highly and completely in the God of Spinoza. It is a conception of God
tending to pantheism, to an idea of a comprehensive God as ruling
with justice rather than affection, to a conception of aloofness and
awestriking worshipfulness. The second idea, which is opposed to this
idea of an absolute God, is the God of the human heart. The writer would
suggest that the great outline of the theological struggles of that
phase of civilisation and world unity which produced Christianity, was a
persistent but unsuccessful attempt to get these two different ideas
of God into one focus. It was an attempt to make the God of Nature
accessible and the God of the Heart invincible, to bring the former into
a conception of love and to vest the latter with the beauty of stars and
flowers and the dignity of inexorable justice. There could be no finer
metaphor for such a correlation than Fatherhood and Sonship. But the
trouble is that it seems impossible to most people to continue to
regard the relations of the Father to the Son as being simply a mystical
metaphor. Presently some materialistic bias swings them in a moment of
intellectual carelessness back to the idea of sexual filiation.

And it may further be suggested that the extreme aloofness and
inhumanity, which is logically necessary in the idea of a Creator God,
of an Infinite God, was the reason, so to speak, for the invention of a
Holy Spirit, as something proceeding from him, as something bridging the
great gulf, a Comforter, a mediator descending into the sphere of the
human understanding. That, and the suggestive influence of the Egyptian
Trinity that was then being worshipped at the Serapeum, and which had
saturated the thought of Alexandria with the conception of a trinity in
unity, are probably the realities that account for the Third Person of
the Christian Trinity. At any rate the present writer believes that the
discussions that shaped the Christian theology we know were dominated
by such natural and fundamental thoughts. These discussions were,
of course, complicated from the outset; and particularly were they
complicated by the identification of the man Jesus with the theological
Christ, by materialistic expectations of his second coming, by
materialistic inventions about his "miraculous" begetting, and by the
morbid speculations about virginity and the like that arose out of
such grossness. They were still further complicated by the idea of the
textual inspiration of the scriptures, which presently swamped thought
in textual interpretation. That swamping came very early in the
development of Christianity. The writer of St. John's gospel appears
still to be thinking with a considerable freedom, but Origen is already
hopelessly in the net of the texts. The writer of St. John's gospel
was a free man, but Origen was a superstitious man. He was emasculated
mentally as well as bodily through his bibliolatry. He quotes; his
predecessor thinks.

But the writer throws out these guesses at the probable intentions of
early Christian thought in passing. His business here is the definition
of a position. The writer's position here in this book is, firstly,
complete Agnosticism in the matter of God the Creator, and secondly,
entire faith in the matter of God the Redeemer. That, so to speak, is
the key of his book. He cannot bring the two ideas under the same term
God. He uses the word God therefore for the God in our hearts only,
and he uses the term the Veiled Being for the ultimate mysteries of the
universe, and he declares that we do not know and perhaps cannot know in
any comprehensible terms the relation of the Veiled Being to that living
reality in our lives who is, in his terminology, the true God. Speaking
from the point of view of practical religion, he is restricting and
defining the word God, as meaning only the personal God of mankind, he
is restricting it so as to exclude all cosmogony and ideas of providence
from our religious thought and leave nothing but the essentials of the
religious life.

Many people, whom one would class as rather liberal Christians of an
Arian or Arminian complexion, may find the larger part of this book
acceptable to them if they will read "the Christ God" where the writer
has written "God." They will then differ from him upon little more than
the question whether there is an essential identity in aim and quality
between the Christ God and the Veiled Being, who answer to their
Creator God. This the orthodox post Nicaean Christians assert, and many
pre-Nicaeans and many heretics (as the Cathars) contradicted with its
exact contrary. The Cathars, Paulicians, Albigenses and so on held, with
the Manichaeans, that the God of Nature, God the Father, was evil. The
Christ God was his antagonist. This was the idea of the poet Shelley.
And passing beyond Christian theology altogether a clue can still be
found to many problems in comparative theology in this distinction
between the Being of Nature (cf. Kant's "starry vault above") and the
God of the heart (Kant's "moral law within"). The idea of an antagonism
seems to have been cardinal in the thought of the Essenes and the
Orphic cult and in the Persian dualism. So, too, Buddhism seems to
be "antagonistic." On the other hand, the Moslem teaching and modern
Judaism seem absolutely to combine and identify the two; God the creator
is altogether and without distinction also God the King of Mankind.
Christianity stands somewhere between such complete identification and
complete antagonism. It admits a difference in attitude between Father
and Son in its distinction between the Old Dispensation (of the Old
Testament) and the New. Every possible change is rung in the great
religions of the world between identification, complete separation,
equality, and disproportion of these Beings; but it will be found that
these two ideas are, so to speak, the basal elements of all theology in
the world. The writer is chary of assertion or denial in these
matters. He believes that they are speculations not at all necessary to
salvation. He believes that men may differ profoundly in their opinions
upon these points and still be in perfect agreement upon the essentials
of religion. The reality of religion he believes deals wholly and
exclusively with the God of the Heart. He declares as his own opinion,
and as the opinion which seems most expressive of modern thought, that
there is no reason to suppose the Veiled Being either benevolent or
malignant towards men. But if the reader believes that God is Almighty
and in every way Infinite the practical outcome is not very different.
For the purposes of human relationship it is impossible to deny that
God PRESENTS HIMSELF AS FINITE, as struggling and taking a part against
evil.

The writer believes that these dogmas of relationship are not merely
extraneous to religion, but an impediment to religion. His aim in this
book is to give a statement of religion which is no longer entangled in
such speculations and disputes.


Let him add only one other note of explanation in this preface, and that
is to remark that except for one incidental passage (in Chapter IV.,
1), nowhere does he discuss the question of personal immortality. [It
is discussed in "First and Last Things," Book IV, 4.] He omits this
question because he does not consider that it has any more bearing upon
the essentials of religion, than have the theories we may hold about the
relation of God and the moral law to the starry universe. The latter is
a question for the theologian, the former for the psychologist. Whether
we are mortal or immortal, whether the God in our hearts is the Son of
or a rebel against the Universe, the reality of religion, the fact of
salvation, is still our self-identification with God, irrespective of
consequences, and the achievement of his kingdom, in our hearts and
in the world. Whether we live forever or die tomorrow does not affect
righteousness. Many people seem to find the prospect of a final personal
death unendurable. This impresses me as egotism. I have no such appetite
for a separate immortality. God is my immortality; what, of me, is
identified with God, is God; what is not is of no more permanent value
than the snows of yester-year.

H. G. W.

Dunmow, May, 1917.




GOD THE INVISIBLE KING


CHAPTER THE FIRST

THE COSMOGONY OF MODERN RELIGION


1. MODERN RELIGION HAS NO FOUNDER


Perhaps all religions, unless the flaming onset of Mohammedanism be an
exception, have dawned imperceptibly upon the world. A little while ago
and the thing was not; and then suddenly it has been found in existence,
and already in a state of diffusion. People have begun to hear of the
new belief first here and then there. It is interesting, for example,
to trace how Christianity drifted into the consciousness of the Roman
world. But when a religion has been interrogated it has always had
hitherto a tale of beginnings, the name and story of a founder. The
renascent religion that is now taking shape, it seems, had no founder;
it points to no origins. It is the Truth, its believers declare; it has
always been here; it has always been visible to those who had eyes to
see. It is perhaps plainer than it was and to more people--that is all.

It is as if it still did not realise its own difference. Many of those
who hold it still think of it as if it were a kind of Christianity.
Some, catching at a phrase of Huxley's, speak of it as Christianity
without Theology. They do not know the creed they are carrying. It has,
as a matter of fact, a very fine and subtle theology, flatly opposed
to any belief that could, except by great stretching of charity and
the imagination, be called Christianity. One might find, perhaps, a
parallelism with the system ascribed to some Gnostics, but that is far
more probably an accidental rather than a sympathetic coincidence. Of
that the reader shall presently have an opportunity of judging.

This indefiniteness of statement and relationship is probably only the
opening phase of the new faith. Christianity also began with an extreme
neglect of definition. It was not at first anything more than a sect
of Judaism. It was only after three centuries, amidst the uproar
and emotions of the council of Nicaea, when the more enthusiastic
Trinitarians stuffed their fingers in their ears in affected horror at
the arguments of old Arius, that the cardinal mystery of the Trinity
was established as the essential fact of Christianity. Throughout those
three centuries, the centuries of its greatest achievements and noblest
martyrdoms, Christianity had not defined its God. And even to-day it has
to be noted that a large majority of those who possess and repeat
the Christian creeds have come into the practice so insensibly from
unthinking childhood, that only in the slightest way do they realise the
nature of the statements to which they subscribe. They will speak
and think of both Christ and God in ways flatly incompatible with the
doctrine of the Triune deity upon which, theoretically, the entire
fabric of all the churches rests. They will show themselves as frankly
Arians as though that damnable heresy had not been washed out of the
world forever after centuries of persecution in torrents of blood. But
whatever the present state of Christendom in these matters may be,
there can be no doubt of the enormous pains taken in the past to give
Christian beliefs the exactest, least ambiguous statement possible.
Christianity knew itself clearly for what it was in its maturity,
whatever the indecisions of its childhood or the confusions of its
decay. The renascent religion that one finds now, a thing active and
sufficient in many minds, has still scarcely come to self-consciousness.
But it is so coming, and this present book is very largely an attempt
to state the shape it is assuming and to compare it with the beliefs
and imperatives and usages of the various Christian, pseudo-Christian,
philosophical, and agnostic cults amidst which it has appeared.

The writer's sympathies and convictions are entirely with this that he
speaks of as renascent or modern religion; he is neither atheist
nor Buddhist nor Mohammedan nor Christian. He will make no pretence,
therefore, to impartiality and detachment. He will do his best to be as
fair as possible and as candid as possible, but the reader must reckon
with this bias. He has found this faith growing up in himself; he has
found it, or something very difficult to distinguish from it, growing
independently in the minds of men and women he has met. They have been
people of very various origins; English, Americans, Bengalis, Russians,
French, people brought up in a "Catholic atmosphere," Positivists,
Baptists, Sikhs, Mohammedans. Their diversity of source is as remarkable
as their convergence of tendency. A miscellany of minds thinking upon
parallel lines has come out to the same light. The new teaching is also
traceable in many professedly Christian religious books and it is to be
heard from Christian pulpits. The phase of definition is manifestly at
hand.



2. MODERN RELIGION HAS A FINITE GOD


Perhaps the most fundamental difference between this new faith and any
recognised form of Christianity is that, knowingly or unknowingly, it
worships A FINITE GOD. Directly the believer is fairly confronted with
the plain questions of the case, the vague identifications that are
still carelessly made with one or all of the persons of the Trinity
dissolve away. He will admit that his God is neither all-wise, nor
all-powerful, nor omnipresent; that he is neither the maker of heaven
nor earth, and that he has little to identify him with that hereditary
God of the Jews who became the "Father" in the Christian system. On the
other hand he will assert that his God is a god of salvation, that he is
a spirit, a person, a strongly marked and knowable personality, loving,
inspiring, and lovable, who exists or strives to exist in every human
soul. He will be much less certain in his denials that his God has a
close resemblance to the Pauline (as distinguished from the Trinitarian)
"Christ." . . .

The modern religious man will almost certainly profess a kind of
universalism; he will assert that whensoever men have called upon any
God and have found fellowship and comfort and courage and that sense
of God within them, that inner light which is the quintessence of the
religious experience, it was the True God that answered them. For the
True God is a generous God, not a jealous God; the very antithesis of
that bickering monopolist who "will have none other gods but Me"; and
when a human heart cries out--to what name it matters not--for a larger
spirit and a stronger help than the visible things of life can give,
straightway the nameless Helper is with it and the God of Man answers to
the call. The True God has no scorn nor hate for those who have accepted
the many-handed symbols of the Hindu or the lacquered idols of China.
Where there is faith, where there is need, there is the True God ready
to clasp the hands that stretch out seeking for him into the darkness
behind the ivory and gold.

The fact that God is FINITE is one upon which those who think clearly
among the new believers are very insistent. He is, above everything
else, a personality, and to be a personality is to have characteristics,
to be limited by characteristics; he is a Being, not us but dealing
with us and through us, he has an aim and that means he has a past and
future; he is within time and not outside it. And they point out that
this is really what everyone who prays sincerely to God or gets help
from God, feels and believes. Our practice with God is better than our
theory. None of us really pray to that fantastic, unqualified danse a
trois, the Trinity, which the wranglings and disputes of the worthies
of Alexandria and Syria declared to be God. We pray to one single
understanding person. But so far the tactics of those Trinitarians at
Nicaea, who stuck their fingers in their ears, have prevailed in this
world; this was no matter for discussion, they declared, it was a Holy
Mystery full of magical terror, and few religious people have thought
it worth while to revive these terrors by a definite contradiction. The
truly religious have been content to lapse quietly into the comparative
sanity of an unformulated Arianism, they have left it to the scoffing
Atheist to mock at the patent absurdities of the official creed. But one
magnificent protest against this theological fantasy must have been
the work of a sincerely religious man, the cold superb humour of that
burlesque creed, ascribed, at first no doubt facetiously and then quite
seriously, to Saint Athanasius the Great, which, by an irony far beyond
its original intention, has become at last the accepted creed of the
church.

The long truce in the criticism of Trinitarian theology is drawing to
its end. It is when men most urgently need God that they become least
patient with foolish presentations and dogmas. The new believers are
very definitely set upon a thorough analysis of the nature and growth
of the Christian creeds and ideas. There has grown up a practice of
assuming that, when God is spoken of, the Hebrew-Christian God of Nicaea
is meant. But that God trails with him a thousand misconceptions and
bad associations; his alleged infinite nature, his jealousy, his strange
preferences, his vindictive Old Testament past. These things do not even
make a caricature of the True God; they compose an altogether different
and antagonistic figure.

It is a very childish and unphilosophical set of impulses that has led
the theologians of nearly every faith to claim infinite qualities for
their deity. One has to remember the poorness of the mental and moral
quality of the churchmen of the third, fourth, and fifth centuries who
saddled Christendom with its characteristic dogmas, and the extreme
poverty and confusion of the circle of ideas within which they thought.
Many of these makers of Christianity, like Saint Ambrose of Milan (who
had even to be baptised after his election to his bishopric), had been
pitchforked into the church from civil life; they lived in a time
of pitiless factions and personal feuds; they had to conduct their
disputations amidst the struggles of would-be emperors; court eunuchs
and favourites swayed their counsels, and popular rioting clinched their
decisions. There was less freedom of discussion then in the Christian
world than there is at present (1916) in Belgium, and the whole audience
of educated opinion by which a theory could be judged did not equal,
either in numbers or accuracy of information, the present population of
Constantinople. To these conditions we owe the claim that the Christian
God is a magic god, very great medicine in battle, "in hoc signo
vinces," and the argument so natural to the minds of those days and so
absurd to ours, that since he had ALL power, all knowledge, and existed
for ever and ever, it was no use whatever to set up any other god
against him. . . .

By the fifth century Christianity had adopted as its fundamental belief,
without which everyone was to be "damned everlastingly," a conception
of God and of Christ's relation to God, of which even by the Christian
account of his teaching, Jesus was either totally unaware or so
negligent and careless of the future comfort of his disciples as
scarcely to make mention. The doctrine of the Trinity, so far as the
relationship of the Third Person goes, hangs almost entirely upon one
ambiguous and disputed utterance in St. John's gospel (XV. 26). Most of
the teachings of Christian orthodoxy resolve themselves to the attentive
student into assertions of the nature of contradiction and repartee.
Someone floats an opinion in some matter that has been hitherto vague,
in regard, for example, to the sonship of Christ or to the method of
his birth. The new opinion arouses the hostility and alarm of minds
unaccustomed to so definite a statement, and in the zeal of their recoil
they fly to a contrary proposition. The Christians would neither admit
that they worshipped more gods than one because of the Greeks, nor
deny the divinity of Christ because of the Jews. They dreaded to be
polytheistic; equally did they dread the least apparent detraction from
the power and importance of their Saviour. They were forced into the
theory of the Trinity by the necessity of those contrary assertions,
and they had to make it a mystery protected by curses to save it from a
reductio ad absurdam. The entire history of the growth of the Christian
doctrine in those disordered early centuries is a history of theology
by committee; a history of furious wrangling, of hasty compromises, and
still more hasty attempts to clinch matters by anathema. When the muddle
was at its very worst, the church was confronted by enormous political
opportunities. In order that it should seize these one chief thing
appeared imperative: doctrinal uniformity. The emperor himself, albeit
unbaptised and very ignorant of Greek, came and seated himself in the
midst of Christian thought upon a golden throne. At the end of it all
Eusebius, that supreme Trimmer, was prepared to damn everlastingly all
those who doubted that consubstantiality he himself had doubted at the
beginning of the conference. It is quite clear that Constantine did not
care who was damned or for what period, so long as the Christians ceased
to wrangle among themselves. The practical unanimity of Nicaea was
secured by threats, and then, turning upon the victors, he sought by
threats to restore Arius to communion. The imperial aim was a common
faith to unite the empire. The crushing out of the Arians and of the
Paulicians and suchlike heretics, and more particularly the systematic
destruction by the orthodox of all heretical writings, had about it none
of that quality of honest conviction which comes to those who have a
real knowledge of God; it was a bawling down of dissensions that, left
to work themselves out, would have spoilt good business; it was the fist
of Nicolas of Myra over again, except that after the days of Ambrose the
sword of the executioner and the fires of the book-burner were added to
the weapon of the human voice. Priscillian was the first human sacrifice
formally offered up under these improved conditions to the greater glory
of the reinforced Trinity. Thereafter the blood of the heretics was the
cement of Christian unity.

It is with these things in mind that those who profess the new faith are
becoming so markedly anxious to distinguish God from the Trinitarian's
deity. At present if anyone who has left the Christian communion
declares himself a believer in God, priest and parson swell with
self-complacency. There is no reason why they should do so. That many of
us have gone from them and found God is no concern of theirs. It is
not that we who went out into the wilderness which we thought to be
a desert, away from their creeds and dogmas, have turned back and are
returning. It is that we have gone on still further, and are beyond that
desolation. Never more shall we return to those who gather under the
cross. By faith we disbelieved and denied. By faith we said of that
stuffed scarecrow of divinity, that incoherent accumulation of antique
theological notions, the Nicene deity, "This is certainly no God." And
by faith we have found God. . . .



3. THE INFINITE BEING IS NOT GOD


There has always been a demand upon the theological teacher that he
should supply a cosmogony. It has always been an effective propagandist
thing to say: "OUR God made the whole universe. Don't you think that
it would be wise to abandon YOUR deity, who did not, as you admit, do
anything of the sort?"

The attentive reader of the lives of the Saints will find that this
style of argument did in the past bring many tribes and nations into
the Christian fold. It was second only to the claim of magic advantages,
demonstrated by a free use of miracles. Only one great religious system,
the Buddhist, seems to have resisted the temptation to secure for
its divinity the honour and title of Creator. Modern religion is like
Buddhism in that respect. It offers no theory whatever about the origin
of the universe. It does not reach behind the appearances of space
and time. It sees only a featureless presumption in that playing with
superlatives which has entertained so many minds from Plotinus to the
Hegelians with the delusion that such negative terms as the Absolute or
the Unconditioned, can assert anything at all. At the back of all known
things there is an impenetrable curtain; the ultimate of existence is
a Veiled Being, which seems to know nothing of life or death or good or
ill. Of that Being, whether it is simple or complex or divine, we
know nothing; to us it is no more than the limit of understanding,
the unknown beyond. It may be of practically limitless intricacy and
possibility. The new religion does not pretend that the God of its life
is that Being, or that he has any relation of control or association
with that Being. It does not even assert that God knows all or much more
than we do about that ultimate Being.

For us life is a matter of our personalities in space and time. Human
analysis probing with philosophy and science towards the Veiled Being
reveals nothing of God, reveals space and time only as necessary forms
of consciousness, glimpses a dance of atoms, of whirls in the
ether. Some day in the endless future there may be a knowledge, an
understanding of relationship, a power and courage that will pierce into
those black wrappings. To that it may be our God, the Captain of Mankind
will take us.

That now is a mere speculation. The veil of the unknown is set with
the stars; its outer texture is ether and atom and crystal. The Veiled
Being, enigmatical and incomprehensible, broods over the mirror upon
which the busy shapes of life are moving. It is as if it waited in a
great stillness. Our lives do not deal with it, and cannot deal with it.
It may be that they may never be able to deal with it.



4. THE LIFE FORCE IS NOT GOD


So it is that comprehensive setting of the universe presents itself to
the modern mind. It is altogether outside good and evil and love and
hate. It is outside God, who is love and goodness. And coming out
of this veiled being, proceeding out of it in a manner altogether
inconceivable, is another lesser being, an impulse thrusting through
matter and clothing itself in continually changing material forms,
the maker of our world, Life, the Will to Be. It comes out of that
inscrutable being as a wave comes rolling to us from beyond the horizon.
It is as it were a great wave rushing through matter and possessed by
a spirit. It is a breeding, fighting thing; it pants through the jungle
track as the tiger and lifts itself towards heaven as the tree; it is
the rabbit bolting for its life and the dove calling to her mate; it
crawls, it flies, it dives, it lusts and devours, it pursues and eats
itself in order to live still more eagerly and hastily; it is every
living thing, of it are our passions and desires and fears. And it
is aware of itself not as a whole, but dispersedly as individual
self-consciousness, starting out dispersedly from every one of the
sentient creatures it has called into being. They look out for their
little moments, red-eyed and fierce, full of greed, full of the passions
of acquisition and assimilation and reproduction, submitting only to
brief fellowships of defence or aggression. They are beings of strain
and conflict and competition. They are living substance still mingled
painfully with the dust. The forms in which this being clothes itself
bear thorns and fangs and claws, are soaked with poison and bright with
threats or allurements, prey slyly or openly on one another, hold their
own for a little while, breed savagely and resentfully, and pass. . . .

This second Being men have called the Life Force, the Will to Live, the
Struggle for Existence. They have figured it too as Mother Nature. We
may speculate whether it is not what the wiser among the Gnostics meant
by the Demiurge, but since the Christians destroyed all the Gnostic
books that must remain a mere curious guess. We may speculate whether
this heat and haste and wrath of life about us is the Dark God of the
Manichees, the evil spirit of the sun worshippers. But in contemporary
thought there is no conviction apparent that this Demiurge is either
good or evil; it is conceived of as both good and evil. If it gives all
the pain and conflict of life, it gives also the joy of the sunshine,
the delight and hope of youth, the pleasures. If it has elaborated a
hundred thousand sorts of parasite, it has also moulded the beautiful
limbs of man and woman; it has shaped the slug and the flower. And
in it, as part of it, taking its rewards, responding to its goads,
struggling against the final abandonment to death, do we all live,
as the beasts live, glad, angry, sorry, revengeful, hopeful, weary,
disgusted, forgetful, lustful, happy, excited, bored, in pain, mood
after mood but always fearing death, with no certainty and no coherence
within us, until we find God. And God comes to us neither out of the
stars nor out of the pride of life, but as a still small voice within.



5. GOD IS WITHIN


God comes we know not whence, into the conflict of life. He works in men
and through men. He is a spirit, a single spirit and a single person; he
has begun and he will never end. He is the immortal part and leader of
mankind. He has motives, he has characteristics, he has an aim. He is
by our poor scales of measurement boundless love, boundless courage,
boundless generosity. He is thought and a steadfast will. He is our
friend and brother and the light of the world. That briefly is the
belief of the modern mind with regard to God. There is no very novel
idea about this God, unless it be the idea that he had a beginning. This
is the God that men have sought and found in all ages, as God or as
the Messiah or the Saviour. The finding of him is salvation from the
purposelessness of life. The new religion has but disentangled the idea
of him from the absolutes and infinities and mysteries of the Christian
theologians; from mythological virgin births and the cosmogonies and
intellectual pretentiousness of a vanished age.

Modern religion appeals to no revelation, no authoritative teaching,
no mystery. The statement it makes is, it declares, a mere statement
of what we may all perceive and experience. We all live in the storm of
life, we all find our understandings limited by the Veiled Being; if
we seek salvation and search within for God, presently we find him. All
this is in the nature of things. If every one who perceives and states
it were to be instantly killed and blotted out, presently other people
would find their way to the same conclusions; and so on again and again.
To this all true religion, casting aside its hulls of misconception,
must ultimately come. To it indeed much religion is already coming.
Christian thought struggles towards it, with the millstones of Syrian
theology and an outrageous mythology of incarnation and resurrection
about its neck. When at last our present bench of bishops join the
early fathers of the church in heaven there will be, I fear, a note of
reproach in their greeting of the ingenious person who saddled them with
OMNIPOTENS. Still more disastrous for them has been the virgin birth,
with the terrible fascination of its detail for unpoetic minds. How rich
is the literature of authoritative Christianity with decisions upon the
continuing virginity of Mary and the virginity of Joseph--ideas that
first arose in Arabia as a Moslem gloss upon Christianity--and how
little have these peepings and pryings to do with the needs of the heart
and the finding of God!

Within the last few years there have been a score or so of such volumes
as that recently compiled by Dr. Foakes Jackson, entitled "The Faith and
the War," a volume in which the curious reader may contemplate deans and
canons, divines and church dignitaries, men intelligent and enquiring
and religiously disposed, all lying like overladen camels, panting
under this load of obsolete theological responsibility, groaning great
articles, outside the needle's eye that leads to God.



6. THE COMING OF GOD


Modern religion bases its knowledge of God and its account of God
entirely upon experience. It has encountered God. It does not argue
about God; it relates. It relates without any of those wrappings of awe
and reverence that fold so necessarily about imposture, it relates as
one tells of a friend and his assistance, of a happy adventure, of a
beautiful thing found and picked up by the wayside.

So far as its psychological phases go the new account of personal
salvation tallies very closely with the account of "conversion" as it
is given by other religions. It has little to tell that is not already
familiar to the reader of William James's "Varieties of Religious
Experience." It describes an initial state of distress with the
aimlessness and cruelties of life, and particularly with the futility of
the individual life, a state of helpless self-disgust, of inability to
form any satisfactory plan of living. This is the common prelude known
to many sorts of Christian as "conviction of sin"; it is, at any rate, a
conviction of hopeless confusion. . . . Then in some way the idea of
God comes into the distressed mind, at first simply as an idea, without
substance or belief. It is read about or it is remembered; it is
expounded by some teacher or some happy convert. In the case of all
those of the new faith with whose personal experience I have any
intimacy, the idea of God has remained for some time simply as an idea
floating about in a mind still dissatisfied. God is not believed in,
but it is realised that if there were such a being he would supply the
needed consolation and direction, his continuing purpose would knit
together the scattered effort of life, his immortality would take
the sting from death. Under this realisation the idea is pursued and
elaborated. For a time there is a curious resistance to the suggestion
that God is truly a person; he is spoken of preferably by such phrases
as the Purpose in Things, as the Racial Consciousness, as the Collective
Mind.

I believe that this resistance in so many contemporary minds to the idea
of God as a person is due very largely to the enormous prejudice against
divine personality created by the absurdities of the Christian teaching
and the habitual monopoly of the Christian idea. The picture of Christ
as the Good Shepherd thrusts itself before minds unaccustomed to the
idea that they are lambs. The cross in the twilight bars the way. It is
a novelty and an enormous relief to such people to realise that one may
think of God without being committed to think of either the Father, the
Son, or the Holy Ghost, or of all of them at once. That freedom had not
seemed possible to them. They had been hypnotised and obsessed by the
idea that the Christian God is the only thinkable God. They had heard so
much about that God and so little of any other. With that release their
minds become, as it were, nascent and ready for the coming of God.

Then suddenly, in a little while, in his own time, God comes. This
cardinal experience is an undoubting, immediate sense of God. It is the
attainment of an absolute certainty that one is not alone in oneself.
It is as if one was touched at every point by a being akin to oneself,
sympathetic, beyond measure wiser, steadfast and pure in aim. It is
completer and more intimate, but it is like standing side by side with
and touching someone that we love very dearly and trust completely. It
is as if this being bridged a thousand misunderstandings and brought us
into fellowship with a great multitude of other people. . . .

"Closer he is than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet."

The moment may come while we are alone in the darkness, under the stars,
or while we walk by ourselves or in a crowd, or while we sit and muse.
It may come upon the sinking ship or in the tumult of the battle. There
is no saying when it may not come to us. . . . But after it has come
our lives are changed, God is with us and there is no more doubt of
God. Thereafter one goes about the world like one who was lonely and has
found a lover, like one who was perplexed and has found a solution.
One is assured that there is a Power that fights with us against the
confusion and evil within us and without. There comes into the heart an
essential and enduring happiness and courage.

There is but one God, there is but one true religious experience, but
under a multitude of names, under veils and darknesses, God has in this
manner come into countless lives. There is scarcely a faith, however
mean and preposterous, that has not been a way to holiness. God who is
himself finite, who himself struggles in his great effort from strength
to strength, has no spite against error. Far beyond halfway he hastens
to meet the purblind. But God is against the darkness in their eyes. The
faith which is returning to men girds at veils and shadows, and would
see God plainly. It has little respect for mysteries. It rends the veil
of the temple in rags and tatters. It has no superstitious fear of
this huge friendliness, of this great brother and leader of our little
beings. To find God is but the beginning of wisdom, because then for all
our days we have to learn his purpose with us and to live our lives with
him.



CHAPTER THE SECOND

HERESIES; OR THE THINGS THAT GOD IS NOT


1. HERESIES ARE MISCONCEPTIONS OF GOD


Religion is not a plant that has grown from one seed; it is like a lake
that has been fed by countless springs. It is a great pool of living
water, mingled from many sources and tainted with much impurity. It is
synthetic in its nature; it becomes simpler from original complexities;
the sediment subsides.

A life perfectly adjusted to its surroundings is a life without
mentality; no judgment is called for, no inhibition, no disturbance
of the instinctive flow of perfect reactions. Such a life is bliss, or
nirvana. It is unconsciousness below dreaming. Consciousness is discord
evoking the will to adjust; it is inseparable from need. At every need
consciousness breaks into being. Imperfect adjustments, needs, are the
rents and tatters in the smooth dark veil of being through which the
light of consciousness shines--the light of consciousness and will of
which God is the sun.

So that every need of human life, every disappointment and
dissatisfaction and call for help and effort, is a means whereby men may
and do come to the realisation of God.

There is no cardinal need, there is no sort of experience in human life
from which there does not come or has not come a contribution to men's
religious ideas. At every challenge men have to put forth effort, feel
doubt of adequacy, be thwarted, perceive the chill shadow of their
mortality. At every challenge comes the possibility of help from
without, the idea of eluding frustration, the aspiration towards
immortality. It is possible to classify the appeals men make for God
under the headings of their chief system of effort, their efforts to
understand, their fear and their struggles for safety and happiness, the
craving of their restlessness for peace, their angers against
disorder and their desire for the avenger; their sexual passions and
perplexities. . . .

Each of these great systems of needs and efforts brings its own sort
of sediment into religion. Each, that is to say, has its own kind
of heresy, its distinctive misapprehension of God. It is only in the
synthesis and mutual correction of many divergent ideas that the idea of
God grows clear. The effort to understand completely, for example,
leads to the endless Heresies of Theory. Men trip over the inherent
infirmities of the human mind. But in these days one does not argue
greatly about dogma. Almost every conceivable error about unity, about
personality, about time and quantity and genus and species, about
begetting and beginning and limitation and similarity and every kink
in the difficult mind of man, has been thrust forward in some form of
dogma. Beside the errors of thought are the errors of emotion. Fear and
feebleness go straight to the Heresies that God is Magic or that God
is Providence; restless egotism at leisure and unchallenged by urgent
elementary realities breeds the Heresies of Mysticism, anger and hate
call for God's Judgments, and the stormy emotions of sex gave mankind
the Phallic God. Those who find themselves possessed by the new spirit
in religion, realise very speedily the necessity of clearing the mind
of all these exaggerations, transferences, and overflows of feeling. The
search for divine truth is like gold washing; nothing is of any value
until most has been swept away.



2. HERESIES OF SPECULATION


One sort of heresies stands apart from the rest. It is infinitely the
most various sort. It includes all those heresies which result from
wrong-headed mental elaboration, as distinguished from those which are
the result of hasty and imperfect apprehension, the heresies of the
clever rather than the heresies of the obtuse. The former are of endless
variety and complexity; the latter are in comparison natural, simple
confusions. The former are the errors of the study, the latter the
superstitions that spring by the wayside, or are brought down to us in
our social structure out of a barbaric past.

To the heresies of thought and speculation belong the elaborate
doctrine of the Trinity, dogmas about God's absolute qualities, such odd
deductions as the accepted Christian teachings about the virginity of
Mary and Joseph, and the like. All these things are parts of orthodox
Christianity. Yet none of them did Christ, even by the Christian
account, expound or recommend. He treated them as negligible. It was
left for the Alexandrians, for Alexander, for little, red-haired,
busy, wire-pulling Athanasius to find out exactly what their Master was
driving at, three centuries after their Master was dead. . . .

Men still sit at little desks remote from God or life, and rack their
inadequate brains to meet fancied difficulties and state unnecessary
perfections. They seek God by logic, ignoring the marginal error
that creeps into every syllogism. Their conceit blinds them to the
limitations upon their thinking. They weave spider-like webs of muddle
and disputation across the path by which men come to God. It would not
matter very much if it were not that simpler souls are caught in these
webs. Every great religious system in the world is choked by such webs;
each system has its own. Of all the blood-stained tangled heresies which
make up doctrinal Christianity and imprison the mind of the western
world to-day, not one seems to have been known to the nominal founder
of Christianity. Jesus Christ never certainly claimed to be the Messiah;
never spoke clearly of the Trinity; was vague upon the scheme of
salvation and the significance of his martyrdom. We are asked to suppose
that he left his apostles without instructions, that were necessary to
their eternal happiness, that he could give them the Lord's Prayer but
leave them to guess at the all-important Creed,* and that the Church
staggered along blindly, putting its foot in and out of damnation,
until the "experts" of Nicaea, that "garland of priests," marshalled by
Constantine's officials, came to its rescue. . . . From the conversion
of Paul onward, the heresies of the intellect multiplied about Christ's
memory and hid him from the sight of men. We are no longer clear about
the doctrine he taught nor about the things he said and did. . . .

     * Even the "Apostles' Creed" is not traceable earlier than
     the fourth century.  It is manifestly an old, patched
     formulary. Rutinius explains that it was not written down
     for a long time, but transmitted orally, kept secret, and
     used as a sort of password among the elect.

We are all so weary of this theology of the Christians, we are all at
heart so sceptical about their Triune God, that it is needless here to
spend any time or space upon the twenty thousand different formulae in
which the orthodox have attempted to believe in something of the sort.
There are several useful encyclopaedias of sects and heresies, compact,
but still bulky, to which the curious may go. There are ten thousand
different expositions of orthodoxy. No one who really seeks God thinks
of the Trinity, either the Trinity of the Trinitarian or the Trinity of
the Sabellian or the Trinity of the Arian, any more than one thinks of
those theories made stone, those gods with three heads and seven hands,
who sit on lotus leaves and flourish lingams and what not, in the
temples of India. Let us leave, therefore, these morbid elaborations of
the human intelligence to drift to limbo, and come rather to the natural
heresies that spring from fundamental weaknesses of the human character,
and which are common to all religions. Against these it is necessary to
keep constant watch. They return very insidiously.



3. GOD IS NOT MAGIC


One of the most universal of these natural misconceptions of God is to
consider him as something magic serving the ends of men.

It is not easy for us to grasp at first the full meaning of giving our
souls to God. The missionary and teacher of any creed is all too apt to
hawk God for what he will fetch; he is greedy for the poor triumph of
acquiescence; and so it comes about that many people who have been led
to believe themselves religious, are in reality still keeping back their
own souls and trying to use God for their own purposes. God is nothing
more for them as yet than a magnificent Fetish. They did not really want
him, but they have heard that he is potent stuff; their unripe souls
think to make use of him. They call upon his name, they do certain
things that are supposed to be peculiarly influential with him, such
as saying prayers and repeating gross praises of him, or reading in
a blind, industrious way that strange miscellany of Jewish and early
Christian literature, the Bible, and suchlike mental mortification,
or making the Sabbath dull and uncomfortable. In return for these
fetishistic propitiations God is supposed to interfere with the normal
course of causation in their favour. He becomes a celestial log-roller.
He remedies unfavourable accidents, cures petty ailments, contrives
unexpected gifts of medicine, money, or the like, he averts
bankruptcies, arranges profitable transactions, and does a thousand
such services for his little clique of faithful people. The pious are
represented as being constantly delighted by these little surprises,
these bouquets and chocolate boxes from the divinity. Or contrawise
he contrives spiteful turns for those who fail in their religious
attentions. He murders Sabbath-breaking children, or disorganises the
careful business schemes of the ungodly. He is represented as going
Sabbath-breakering on Sunday morning as a Staffordshire worker
goes ratting. Ordinary everyday Christianity is saturated with this
fetishistic conception of God. It may be disowned in THE HIBBERT
JOURNAL, but it is unblushingly advocated in the parish magazine. It is
an idea taken over by Christianity with the rest of the qualities of
the Hebrew God. It is natural enough in minds so self-centred that their
recognition of weakness and need brings with it no real self-surrender,
but it is entirely inconsistent with the modern conception of the true
God.

There has dropped upon the table as I write a modest periodical called
THE NORTHERN BRITISH ISRAEL REVIEW, illustrated with portraits of
various clergymen of the Church of England, and of ladies and gentlemen
who belong to the little school of thought which this magazine
represents; it is, I should judge, a sub-sect entirely within the
Established Church of England, that is to say within the Anglican
communion of the Trinitarian Christians. It contains among other papers
a very entertaining summary by a gentleman entitled--I cite the unusual
title-page of the periodical--"Landseer Mackenzie, Esq.," of the views
of Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Obadiah upon the Kaiser William. They are
distinctly hostile views. Mr. Landseer Mackenzie discourses not only
upon these anticipatory condemnations but also upon the relations of the
weather to this war. He is convinced quite simply and honestly that God
has been persistently rigging the weather against the Germans. He points
out that the absence of mist on the North Sea was of great help to the
British in the autumn of 1914, and declares that it was the wet state of
the country that really held up the Germans in Flanders in the winter
of 1914-15. He ignores the part played by the weather in delaying the
relief of Kut-el-Amara, and he has not thought of the difficult question
why the Deity, having once decided upon intervention, did not, instead
of this comparatively trivial meteorological assistance, adopt the
more effective course of, for example, exploding or spoiling the German
stores of ammunition by some simple atomic miracle, or misdirecting
their gunfire by a sudden local modification of the laws of refraction
or gravitation.

Since these views of God come from Anglican vicarages I can only
conclude that this kind of belief is quite orthodox and permissible in
the established church, and that I am charging orthodox Christianity
here with nothing that has ever been officially repudiated. I find
indeed the essential assumptions of Mr. Landseer Mackenzie repeated in
endless official Christian utterances on the part of German and British
and Russian divines. The Bishop of Chelmsford, for example, has recently
ascribed our difficulties in the war to our impatience with long
sermons--among other similar causes. Such Christians are manifestly
convinced that God can be invoked by ritual--for example by special
days of national prayer or an increased observance of Sunday--or made
malignant by neglect or levity. It is almost fundamental in their
idea of him. The ordinary Mohammedan seems as confident of this magic
pettiness of God, and the belief of China in the magic propitiations and
resentments of "Heaven" is at least equally strong.

But the true God as those of the new religion know him is no such God
of luck and intervention. He is not to serve men's ends or the ends of
nations or associations of men; he is careless of our ceremonies
and invocations. He does not lose his temper with our follies and
weaknesses. It is for us to serve Him. He captains us, he does not
coddle us. He has his own ends for which he needs us. . . .



4. GOD IS NOT PROVIDENCE


Closely related to this heresy that God is magic, is the heresy that
calls him Providence, that declares the apparent adequacy of cause and
effect to be a sham, and that all the time, incalculably, he is pulling
about the order of events for our personal advantages.

The idea of Providence was very gaily travested by Daudet in "Tartarin
in the Alps." You will remember how Tartarin's friend assured him that
all Switzerland was one great Trust, intent upon attracting tourists and
far too wise and kind to permit them to venture into real danger,
that all the precipices were netted invisibly, and all the loose rocks
guarded against falling, that avalanches were prearranged spectacles and
the crevasses at their worst slippery ways down into kindly catchment
bags. If the mountaineer tried to get into real danger he was turned
back by specious excuses. Inspired by this persuasion Tartarin behaved
with incredible daring. . . . That is exactly the Providence theory of
the whole world. There can be no doubt that it does enable many a timid
soul to get through life with a certain recklessness. And provided there
is no slip into a crevasse, the Providence theory works well. It would
work altogether well if there were no crevasses.

Tartarin was reckless because of his faith in Providence, and escaped.
But what would have happened to him if he had fallen into a crevasse?

There exists a very touching and remarkable book by Sir Francis
Younghusband called "Within." [Williams and Norgate, 1912.] It is the
confession of a man who lived with a complete confidence in Providence
until he was already well advanced in years. He went through battles and
campaigns, he filled positions of great honour and responsibility, he
saw much of the life of men, without altogether losing his faith. The
loss of a child, an Indian famine, could shake it but not overthrow it.
Then coming back one day from some races in France, he was knocked down
by an automobile and hurt very cruelly. He suffered terribly in body and
mind. His sufferings caused much suffering to others. He did his utmost
to see the hand of a loving Providence in his and their disaster and
the torment it inflicted, and being a man of sterling honesty and a fine
essential simplicity of mind, he confessed at last that he could not do
so. His confidence in the benevolent intervention of God was altogether
destroyed. His book tells of this shattering, and how labouriously
he reconstructed his religion upon less confident lines. It is a book
typical of an age and of a very English sort of mind, a book well worth
reading.

That he came to a full sense of the true God cannot be asserted, but how
near he came to God, let one quotation witness.


"The existence of an outside Providence," he writes, "who created us,
who watches over us, and who guides our lives like a Merciful Father,
we have found impossible longer to believe in. But of the existence of a
Holy Spirit radiating upward through all animate beings, and finding its
fullest expression, in man in love, and in the flowers in beauty, we
can be as certain as of anything in the world. This fiery spiritual
impulsion at the centre and the source of things, ever burning in us,
is the supremely important factor in our existence. It does not always
attain to light. In many directions it fails; the conditions are too
hard and it is utterly blocked. In others it only partially succeeds.
But in a few it bursts forth into radiant light. There are few who
in some heavenly moment of their lives have not been conscious of its
presence. We may not be able to give it outward expression, but we know
that it is there." . . .


God does not guide our feet. He is no sedulous governess restraining
and correcting the wayward steps of men. If you would fly into the air,
there is no God to bank your aeroplane correctly for you or keep an
ill-tended engine going; if you would cross a glacier, no God nor angel
guides your steps amidst the slippery places. He will not even mind your
innocent children for you if you leave them before an unguarded fire.
Cherish no delusions; for yourself and others you challenge danger and
chance on your own strength; no talisman, no God, can help you or those
you care for. Nothing of such things will God do; it is an idle dream.
But God will be with you nevertheless. In the reeling aeroplane or the
dark ice-cave God will be your courage. Though you suffer or are killed,
it is not an end. He will be with you as you face death; he will die
with you as he has died already countless myriads of brave deaths. He
will come so close to you that at the last you will not know whether it
is you or he who dies, and the present death will be swallowed up in his
victory.


5. THE HERESY OF QUIETISM


God comes to us within and takes us for his own. He releases us from
ourselves; he incorporates us with his own undying experience and
adventure; he receives us and gives himself. He is a stimulant; he
makes us live immortally and more abundantly. I have compared him to the
sensation of a dear, strong friend who comes and stands quietly beside
one, shoulder to shoulder.

The finding of God is the beginning of service. It is not an escape from
life and action; it is the release of life and action from the prison of
the mortal self. Not to realise that, is the heresy of Quietism, of many
mystics. Commonly such people are people of some wealth, able to command
services for all their everyday needs. They make religion a method of
indolence. They turn their backs on the toil and stresses of existence
and give themselves up to a delicious reverie in which they flirt with
the divinity. They will recount their privileges and ecstasies, and how
ingeniously and wonderfully God has tried and proved them. But indeed
the true God was not the lover of Madame Guyon. The true God is not a
spiritual troubadour wooing the hearts of men and women to no purpose.
The true God goes through the world like fifes and drums and flags,
calling for recruits along the street. We must go out to him. We must
accept his discipline and fight his battle. The peace of God comes not
by thinking about it but by forgetting oneself in him.



6. GOD DOES NOT PUNISH


Man is a social animal, and there is in him a great faculty for moral
indignation. Many of the early Gods were mainly Gods of Fear. They were
more often "wrath" than not. Such was the temperament of the Semitic
deity who, as the Hebrew Jehovah, proliferated, perhaps under the
influence of the Alexandrian Serapeum, into the Christian Trinity and
who became also the Moslem God.* The natural hatred of unregenerate men
against everything that is unlike themselves, against strange people
and cheerful people, against unfamiliar usages and things they do
not understand, embodied itself in this conception of a malignant and
partisan Deity, perpetually "upset" by the little things people did,
and contriving murder and vengeance. Now this God would be drowning
everybody in the world, now he would be burning Sodom and Gomorrah,
now he would be inciting his congenial Israelites to the most terrific
pogroms. This divine "frightfulness" is of course the natural
human dislike and distrust for queer practices or for too sunny a
carelessness, a dislike reinforced by the latent fierceness of the ape
in us, liberating the latent fierceness of the ape in us, giving it
an excuse and pressing permission upon it, handing the thing hated and
feared over to its secular arm. . . .

     * It is not so generally understood as it should be among
     English and American readers that a very large proportion of
     early Christians before the creeds established and
     regularised the doctrine of the Trinity, denied absolutely
     that Jehovah was God; they regarded Christ as a rebel
     against Jehovah and a rescuer of humanity from him, just as
     Prometheus was a rebel against Jove. These beliefs survived
     for a thousand years throughout Christendom: they were held
     by a great multitude of persecuted sects, from the
     Albigenses and Cathars to the eastern Paulicians.  The
     catholic church found it necessary to prohibit the
     circulation of the Old Testament among laymen very largely
     on account of the polemics of the Cathars against the Hebrew
     God.  But in this book, be it noted, the word Christian,
     when it is not otherwise defined, is used to indicate only
     the Trinitarians who accept the official creeds.

It is a human paradox that the desire for seemliness, the instinct
for restraints and fair disciplines, and the impulse to cherish sweet
familiar things, that these things of the True God should so readily
liberate cruelty and tyranny. It is like a woman going with a light to
tend and protect her sleeping child, and setting the house on fire. None
the less, right down to to-day, the heresy of God the Revengeful, God
the Persecutor and Avenger, haunts religion. It is only in quite recent
years that the growing gentleness of everyday life has begun to make men
a little ashamed of a Deity less tolerant and gentle than themselves.
The recent literature of the Anglicans abounds in the evidence of this
trouble.

Bishop Colenso of Natal was prosecuted and condemned in 1863 for denying
the irascibility of his God and teaching "the Kaffirs of Natal" the
dangerous heresy that God is all mercy. "We cannot allow it to be said,"
the Dean of Cape Town insisted, "that God was not angry and was not
appeased by punishment." He was angry "on account of Sin, which is a
great evil and a great insult to His Majesty." The case of the Rev.
Charles Voysey, which occurred in 1870, was a second assertion of the
Church's insistence upon the fierceness of her God. This case is not to
be found in the ordinary church histories nor is it even mentioned in
the latest edition of the ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA; nevertheless it
appears to have been a very illuminating case. It is doubtful if the
church would prosecute or condemn either Bishop Colenso or Mr. Voysey
to-day.



7. GOD AND THE NURSERY-MAID


Closely related to the Heresy of God the Avenger, is that kind of
miniature God the Avenger, to whom the nursery-maid and the overtaxed
parent are so apt to appeal. You stab your children with such a God and
he poisons all their lives. For many of us the word "God" first came
into our lives to denote a wanton, irrational restraint, as Bogey,
as the All-Seeing and quite ungenerous Eye. God Bogey is a great
convenience to the nursery-maid who wants to leave Fear to mind her
charges and enforce her disciplines, while she goes off upon her own
aims. But indeed, the teaching of God Bogey is an outrage upon the soul
of a child scarcely less dreadful than an indecent assault. The reason
rebels and is crushed under this horrible and pursuing suggestion. Many
minds never rise again from their injury. They remain for the rest of
life spiritually crippled and debased, haunted by a fear, stained with a
persuasion of relentless cruelty in the ultimate cause of all things.

I, who write, was so set against God, thus rendered. He and his Hell
were the nightmare of my childhood; I hated him while I still believed
in him, and who could help but hate? I thought of him as a fantastic
monster, perpetually spying, perpetually listening, perpetually waiting
to condemn and to "strike me dead"; his flames as ready as a grill-room
fire. He was over me and about my feebleness and silliness and
forgetfulness as the sky and sea would be about a child drowning in
mid-Atlantic. When I was still only a child of thirteen, by the grace of
the true God in me, I flung this Lie out of my mind, and for many years,
until I came to see that God himself had done this thing for me, the
name of God meant nothing to me but the hideous scar in my heart where a
fearful demon had been.

I see about me to-day many dreadful moral and mental cripples with this
bogey God of the nursery-maid, with his black, insane revenges, still
living like a horrible parasite in their hearts in the place where God
should be. They are afraid, afraid, afraid; they dare not be kindly to
formal sinners, they dare not abandon a hundred foolish observances;
they dare not look at the causes of things. They are afraid of sunshine,
of nakedness, of health, of adventure, of science, lest that old
watching spider take offence. The voice of the true God whispers in
their hearts, echoes in speech and writing, but they avert themselves,
fear-driven. For the true God has no lash of fear. And how the
foul-minded bigot, with his ill-shaven face, his greasy skin, his thick,
gesticulating hands, his bellowings and threatenings, loves to reap this
harvest of fear the ignorant cunning of the nursery girl has sown
for him! How he loves the importance of denunciation, and, himself
a malignant cripple, to rally the company of these crippled souls to
persecute and destroy the happy children of God! . . .

Christian priestcraft turns a dreadful face to children. There is a real
wickedness of the priest that is different from other wickedness, and
that affects a reasonable mind just as cruelty and strange perversions
of instinct affect it. Let a former Archbishop of Canterbury speak
for me. This that follows is the account given by Archbishop Tait in a
debate in the Upper House of Convocation (July 3rd, 1877) of one of the
publications of a certain SOCIETY OF THE HOLY CROSS:


"I take this book, as its contents show, to be meant for the instruction
of very young children. I find, in one of the pages of it, the statement
that between the ages of six and six and a half years would be the
proper time for the inculcation of the teaching which is to be found in
the book. Now, six to six and a half is certainly a very tender age, and
to these children I find these statements addressed in the book:

"'It is to the priest, and to the priest only, that the child must
acknowledge his sins, if he desires that God should forgive him.'

"I hope and trust the person, the three clergymen, or however many there
were, did not exactly realise what they were writing; that they did not
mean to say that a child was not to confess its sins to God direct; that
it was not to confess its sins, at the age of six, to its mother, or to
its father, but was only to have recourse to the priest. But the
words, to say the least of them, are rash. Then comes the very obvious
question:

"'Do you know why? It is because God, when he was on earth, gave to
his priests, and to them alone, the Divine Power of forgiving men their
sins. It was to priests alone that Jesus said: "Receive ye the Holy
Ghost." . . . Those who will not confess will not be cured. Sin is a
terrible sickness, and casts souls into hell.'

"That is addressed to a child six years of age.

"'I have known,' the book continues, 'poor children who concealed their
sins in confession for years; they were very unhappy, were tormented
with remorse, and if they had died in that state they would certainly
have gone to the everlasting fires of hell.'" . . .


Now here is something against nature, something that I have seen time
after time in the faces and bearing of priests and heard in their
preaching. It is a distinct lust. Much nobility and devotion there are
among priests, saintly lives and kindly lives, lives of real worship,
lives no man may better; this that I write is not of all, perhaps not
of many priests. But there has been in all ages that have known
sacerdotalism this terrible type of the priest; priestcraft and priestly
power release an aggressive and narrow disposition to a recklessness of
suffering and a hatred of liberty that surely exceeds the badness of any
other sort of men.



8. THE CHILDREN'S GOD


Children do not naturally love God. They have no great capacity for
an idea so subtle and mature as the idea of God. While they are still
children in a home and cared for, life is too kind and easy for them to
feel any great need of God. All things are still something God-like. . . .

The true God, our modern minds insist upon believing, can have no
appetite for unnatural praise and adoration. He does not clamour for
the attention of children. He is not like one of those senile uncles who
dream of glory in the nursery, who love to hear it said, "The children
adore him." If children are loved and trained to truth, justice, and
mutual forbearance, they will be ready for the true God as their needs
bring them within his scope. They should be left to their innocence, and
to their trust in the innocence of the world, as long as they can be.
They should be told only of God as a Great Friend whom some day they
will need more and understand and know better. That is as much as most
children need. The phrases of religion put too early into their mouths
may become a cant, something worse than blasphemy.

Yet children are sometimes very near to God. Creative passion stirs in
their play. At times they display a divine simplicity. But it does not
follow that therefore they should be afflicted with theological
formulae or inducted into ceremonies and rites that they may dislike
or misinterpret. If by any accident, by the death of a friend or a
distressing story, the thought of death afflicts a child, then he may
begin to hear of God, who takes those that serve him out of their slain
bodies into his shining immortality. Or if by some menial treachery,
through some prowling priest, the whisper of Old Bogey reaches our
children, then we may set their minds at ease by the assurance of his
limitless charity. . . .

With adolescence comes the desire for God and to know more of God, and
that is the most suitable time for religious talk and teaching.



9. GOD IS NOT SEXUAL


In the last two or three hundred years there has been a very
considerable disentanglement of the idea of God from the complex of
sexual thought and feeling. But in the early days of religion the two
things were inseparably bound together; the fury of the Hebrew prophets,
for example, is continually proclaiming the extraordinary "wrath" of
their God at this or that little dirtiness or irregularity or breach of
the sexual tabus. The ceremony of circumcision is clearly indicative
of the original nature of the Semitic deity who developed into the
Trinitarian God. So far as Christianity dropped this rite, so far
Christianity disavowed the old associations. But to this day the
representative Christian churches still make marriage into a mystical
sacrament, and, with some exceptions, the Roman communion exacts
the sacrifice of celibacy from its priesthood, regardless of the
mischievousness and maliciousness that so often ensue. Nearly every
Christian church inflicts as much discredit and injustice as it can
contrive upon the illegitimate child. They do not treat illegitimate
children as unfortunate children, but as children with a mystical and
an incurable taint of SIN. Kindly easy-going Christians may resent this
statement because it does not tally with their own attitudes, but let
them consult their orthodox authorities.

One must distinguish clearly here between what is held to be sacred or
sinful in itself and what is held to be one's duty or a nation's duty
because it is in itself the wisest, cleanest, clearest, best thing to
do. By the latter tests and reasonable arguments most or all of our
institutions regulating the relations of the sexes may be justifiable.
But my case is not whether they can be justified by these tests but
that it is not by these tests that they are judged even to-day, by the
professors of the chief religions of the world. It is the temper and not
the conclusions of the religious bodies that I would criticise. These
sexual questions are guarded by a holy irascibility, and the most
violent efforts are made--with a sense of complete righteousness--to
prohibit their discussion. That fury about sexual things is only to be
explained on the hypothesis that the Christian God remains a sex God in
the minds of great numbers of his exponents. His disentanglement from
that plexus is incomplete. Sexual things are still to the orthodox
Christian, sacred things.

Now the God whom those of the new faith are finding is only mediately
concerned with the relations of men and women. He is no more sexual
essentially than he is essentially dietetic or hygienic. The God of
Leviticus was all these things. He is represented as prescribing the
most petty and intimate of observances--many of which are now habitually
disregarded by the Christians who profess him. . . . It is part of the
evolution of the idea of God that we have now so largely disentangled
our conception of him from the dietary and regimen and meticulous sexual
rules that were once inseparably bound up with his majesty. Christ
himself was one of the chief forces in this disentanglement, there is
the clearest evidence in several instances of his disregard of the
rule and his insistence that his disciples should seek for the spirit
underlying and often masked by the rule. His Church, being made of baser
matter, has followed him as reluctantly as possible and no further
than it was obliged. But it has followed him far enough to admit his
principle that in all these matters there is no need for superstitious
fear, that the interpretation of the divine purpose is left to the
unembarrassed intelligence of men. The church has followed him far
enough to make the harsh threatenings of priests and ecclesiastics
against what they are pleased to consider impurity or sexual impiety,
a profound inconsistency. One seems to hear their distant protests when
one reads of Christ and the Magdalen, or of Christ eating with publicans
and sinners. The clergy of our own days play the part of the
New Testament Pharisees with the utmost exactness and complete
unconsciousness. One cannot imagine a modern ecclesiastic conversing
with a Magdalen in terms of ordinary civility, unless she was in a very
high social position indeed, or blending with disreputable characters
without a dramatic sense of condescension and much explanatory by-play.
Those who profess modern religion do but follow in these matters a
course entirely compatible with what has survived of the authentic
teachings of Christ, when they declare that God is not sexual, and that
religious passion and insult and persecution upon the score of sexual
things are a barbaric inheritance.

But lest anyone should fling off here with some hasty assumption that
those who profess the religion of the true God are sexually anarchistic,
let stress be laid at once upon the opening sentence of the preceding
paragraph, and let me a little anticipate a section which follows.
We would free men and women from exact and superstitious rules and
observances, not to make them less the instruments of God but more
wholly his. The claim of modern religion is that one should give oneself
unreservedly to God, that there is no other salvation. The believer owes
all his being and every moment of his life to God, to keep mind and body
as clean, fine, wholesome, active and completely at God's service as
he can. There is no scope for indulgence or dissipation in such
a consecrated life. It is a matter between the individual and his
conscience or his doctor or his social understanding what exactly he may
do or not do, what he may eat or drink or so forth, upon any occasion.
Nothing can exonerate him from doing his utmost to determine and perform
the right act. Nothing can excuse his failure to do so. But what is here
being insisted upon is that none of these things has immediately to do
with God or religious emotion, except only the general will to do right
in God's service. The detailed interpretation of that "right" is for the
dispassionate consideration of the human intelligence.

All this is set down here as distinctly as possible. Because of
the emotional reservoirs of sex, sexual dogmas are among the most
obstinately recurrent of all heresies, and sexual excitement is always
tending to leak back into religious feeling. Amongst the sex-tormented
priesthood of the Roman communion in particular, ignorant of the
extreme practices of the Essenes and of the Orphic cult and suchlike
predecessors of Christianity, there seems to be an extraordinary belief
that chastity was not invented until Christianity came, and that the
religious life is largely the propitiation of God by feats of sexual
abstinence. But a superstitious abstinence that scars and embitters
the mind, distorts the imagination, makes the body gross and keeps it
unclean, is just as offensive to God as any positive depravity.



CHAPTER THE THIRD

THE LIKENESS OF GOD


1. GOD IS COURAGE

Now having set down what those who profess the new religion regard as
the chief misconceptions of God, having put these systems of ideas aside
from our explanations, the path is cleared for the statement of what God
is. Since language springs entirely from material, spatial things, there
is always an element of metaphor in theological statement. So that I
have not called this chapter the Nature of God, but the Likeness of God.

And firstly, GOD IS COURAGE.



2. GOD IS A PERSON


And next GOD IS A PERSON.

Upon this point those who are beginning to profess modern religion are
very insistent. It is, they declare, the central article, the axis, of
their religion. God is a person who can be known as one knows a friend,
who can be served and who receives service, who partakes of our nature;
who is, like us, a being in conflict with the unknown and the limitless
and the forces of death; who values much that we value and is against
much that we are pitted against. He is our king to whom we must be
loyal; he is our captain, and to know him is to have a direction in our
lives. He feels us and knows us; he is helped and gladdened by us. He
hopes and attempts. . . . God is no abstraction nor trick of words, no
Infinite. He is as real as a bayonet thrust or an embrace.

Now this is where those who have left the old creeds and come asking
about the new realisations find their chief difficulty. They say, Show
us this person; let us hear him. (If they listen to the silences within,
presently they will hear him.) But when one argues, one finds oneself
suddenly in the net of those ancient controversies between species
and individual, between the one and the many, which arise out of the
necessarily imperfect methods of the human mind. Upon these matters
there has been much pregnant writing during the last half century. Such
ideas as this writer has to offer are to be found in a previous little
book of his, "First and Last Things," in which, writing as one without
authority or specialisation in logic and philosophy, as an ordinary man
vividly interested, for others in a like case, he was at some pains to
elucidate the imperfections of this instrument of ours, this mind, by
which we must seek and explain and reach up to God. Suffice it here to
say that theological discussion may very easily become like the vision
of a man with cataract, a mere projection of inherent imperfections. If
we do not use our phraseology with a certain courage, and take that
of those who are trying to convey their ideas to us with a certain
politeness and charity, there is no end possible to any discussion in
so subtle and intimate a matter as theology but assertions, denials, and
wranglings. And about this word "person" it is necessary to be as clear
and explicit as possible, though perfect clearness, a definition of
mathematical sharpness, is by the very nature of the case impossible.

Now when we speak of a person or an individual we think typically of a
man, and we forget that he was once an embryo and will presently decay;
we forget that he came of two people and may beget many, that he has
forgotten much and will forget more, that he can be confused, divided
against himself, delirious, drunken, drugged, or asleep. On the
contrary we are, in our hasty way of thinking of him, apt to suppose him
continuous, definite, acting consistently and never forgetting. But only
abstract and theoretical persons are like that. We couple with him the
idea of a body. Indeed, in the common use of the word "person" there is
more thought of body than of mind. We speak of a lover possessing the
person of his mistress. We speak of offences against the person as
opposed to insults, libels, or offences against property. And the
gods of primitive men and the earlier civilisations were quite of that
quality of person. They were thought of as living in very splendid
bodies and as acting consistently. If they were invisible in the
ordinary world it was because they were aloof or because their "persons"
were too splendid for weak human eyes. Moses was permitted a mitigated
view of the person of the Hebrew God on Mount Horeb; and Semele, who
insisted upon seeing Zeus in the glories that were sacred to Juno,
was utterly consumed. The early Islamic conception of God, like the
conception of most honest, simple Christians to-day, was clearly, in
spite of the theologians, of a very exalted anthropomorphic personality
away somewhere in Heaven. The personal appearance of the Christian God
is described in The Revelation, and however much that description may be
explained away by commentators as symbolical, it is certainly taken by
most straightforward believers as a statement of concrete reality.
Now if we are going to insist upon this primary meaning of person and
individual, then certainly God as he is now conceived is not a person
and not an individual. The true God will never promenade an Eden or a
Heaven, nor sit upon a throne.

But current Christianity, modern developments of Islam, much Indian
theological thought--that, for instance, which has found such delicate
and attractive expression in the devotional poetry of Rabindranath
Tagore--has long since abandoned this anthropomorphic insistence upon
a body. From the earliest ages man's mind has found little or no
difficulty in the idea of something essential to the personality, a soul
or a spirit or both, existing apart from the body and continuing after
the destruction of the body, and being still a person and an individual.
From this it is a small step to the thought of a person existing
independently of any existing or pre-existing body. That is the idea
of theological Christianity, as distinguished from the Christianity
of simple faith. The Triune Persons--omnipresent, omniscient, and
omnipotent--exist for all time, superior to and independent of matter.
They are supremely disembodied. One became incarnate--as a wind eddy
might take up a whirl of dust. . . . Those who profess modern
religion conceive that this is an excessive abstraction of the idea
of spirituality, a disembodiment of the idea of personality beyond the
limits of the conceivable; nevertheless they accept the conception that
a person, a spiritual individual, may be without an ordinary mortal
body. . . . They declare that God is without any specific body, that he
is immaterial, that he can affect the material universe--and that means
that he can only reach our sight, our hearing, our touch--through the
bodies of those who believe in him and serve him.

His nature is of the nature of thought and will. Not only has he, in his
essence, nothing to do with matter, but nothing to do with space. He is
not of matter nor of space. He comes into them. Since the period when
all the great theologies that prevail to-day were developed, there have
been great changes in the ideas of men towards the dimensions of time
and space. We owe to Kant the release from the rule of these ideas as
essential ideas. Our modern psychology is alive to the possibility of
Being that has no extension in space at all, even as our speculative
geometry can entertain the possibility of dimensions--fourth, fifth, Nth
dimensions--outside the three-dimensional universe of our experience.
And God being non-spatial is not thereby banished to an infinite
remoteness, but brought nearer to us; he is everywhere immediately at
hand, even as a fourth dimension would be everywhere immediately at
hand. He is a Being of the minds and in the minds of men. He is in
immediate contact with all who apprehend him. . . .

But modern religion declares that though he does not exist in matter or
space, he exists in time just as a current of thought may do; that
he changes and becomes more even as a man's purpose gathers itself
together; that somewhere in the dawning of mankind he had a beginning,
an awakening, and that as mankind grows he grows. With our eyes he looks
out upon the universe he invades; with our hands, he lays hands upon
it. All our truth, all our intentions and achievements, he gathers to
himself. He is the undying human memory, the increasing human will.

But this, you may object, is no more than saying that God is the
collective mind and purpose of the human race. You may declare that this
is no God, but merely the sum of mankind. But those who believe in the
new ideas very steadfastly deny that. God is, they say, not an aggregate
but a synthesis. He is not merely the best of all of us, but a Being in
himself, composed of that but more than that, as a temple is more than a
gathering of stones, or a regiment is more than an accumulation of men.
They point out that a man is made up of a great multitude of cells, each
equivalent to a unicellular organism. Not one of those cells is he, nor
is he simply just the addition of all of them. He is more than all of
them. You can take away these and these and these, and he still remains.
And he can detach part of himself and treat it as if it were not
himself, just as a man may beat his breast or, as Cranmer the martyr
did, thrust his hand into the flames. A man is none the less himself
because his hair is cut or his appendix removed or his leg amputated.

And take another image. . . . Who bears affection for this or that
spadeful of mud in my garden? Who cares a throb of the heart for all the
tons of chalk in Kent or all the lumps of limestone in Yorkshire? But
men love England, which is made up of such things.

And so we think of God as a synthetic reality, though he has neither
body nor material parts. And so too we may obey him and listen to
him, though we think but lightly of the men whose hands or voices he
sometimes uses. And we may think of him as having moods and aspects--as
a man has--and a consistency we call his character.

These are theorisings about God. These are statements to convey this
modern idea of God. This, we say, is the nature of the person whose will
and thoughts we serve. No one, however, who understands the religious
life seeks conversion by argument. First one must feel the need of God,
then one must form or receive an acceptable idea of God. That much is no
more than turning one's face to the east to see the coming of the sun.
One may still doubt if that direction is the east or whether the sun
will rise. The real coming of God is not that. It is a change, an
irradiation of the mind. Everything is there as it was before, only now
it is aflame. Suddenly the light fills one's eyes, and one knows that
God has risen and that doubt has fled for ever.


3. GOD IS YOUTH


The third thing to be told of the true God is that GOD IS YOUTH.

God, we hold, began and is always beginning. He looks forever into the
future.

Most of the old religions derive from a patriarchal phase. God is in
those systems the Ancient of Days. I know of no Christian attempt to
represent or symbolise God the Father which is not a bearded, aged man.
White hair, beard, bearing, wrinkles, a hundred such symptoms of senile
decay are there. These marks of senility do not astonish our modern
minds in the picture of God, only because tradition and usage have
blinded our eyes to the absurdity of a time-worn immortal. Jove too and
Wotan are figures far past the prime of their vigour. These are gods
after the ancient habit of the human mind, that turned perpetually
backward for causes and reasons and saw all things to come as no more
than the working out of Fate,--

     "Of Man's first disobedience and the fruit
     Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
     Brought death into the world and all our woe."

But the God of this new age, we repeat, looks not to our past but our
future, and if a figure may represent him it must be the figure of
a beautiful youth, already brave and wise, but hardly come to his
strength. He should stand lightly on his feet in the morning time, eager
to go forward, as though he had but newly arisen to a day that was
still but a promise; he should bear a sword, that clean, discriminating
weapon, his eyes should be as bright as swords; his lips should fall
apart with eagerness for the great adventure before him, and he should
be in very fresh and golden harness, reflecting the rising sun. Death
should still hang like mists and cloud banks and shadows in the valleys
of the wide landscape about him. There should be dew upon the threads of
gossamer and little leaves and blades of the turf at his feet. . . .



4. WHEN WE SAY GOD IS LOVE


One of the sayings about God that have grown at the same time most trite
and most sacred, is that God is Love. This is a saying that deserves
careful examination. Love is a word very loosely used; there are people
who will say they love new potatoes; there are a multitude of loves
of different colours and values. There is the love of a mother for her
child, there is the love of brothers, there is the love of youth and
maiden, and the love of husband and wife, there is illicit love and the
love one bears one's home or one's country, there are dog-lovers and the
loves of the Olympians, and love which is a passion of jealousy. Love
is frequently a mere blend of appetite and preference; it may be
almost pure greed; it may have scarcely any devotion nor be a whit
self-forgetful nor generous. It is possible so to phrase things that the
furtive craving of a man for another man's wife may be made out to be
a light from God. Yet about all the better sorts of love, the sorts of
love that people will call "true love," there is something of that same
exaltation out of the narrow self that is the essential quality of the
knowledge of God.

Only while the exaltation of the love passion comes and goes, the
exaltation of religious passion comes to remain. Lovers are the windows
by which we may look out of the prison of self, but God is the open door
by which we freely go. And God never dies, nor disappoints, nor betrays.

The love of a woman and a man has usually, and particularly in its
earlier phases of excitement, far too much desire, far too much
possessiveness and exclusiveness, far too much distrust or forced trust,
and far too great a kindred with jealousy to be like the love of God.
The former is a dramatic relationship that drifts to a climax, and then
again seeks presently a climax, and that may be satiated or fatigued.
But the latter is far more like the love of comrades, or like the
love of a man and a woman who have loved and been through much trouble
together, who have hurt one another and forgiven, and come to a complete
and generous fellowship. There is a strange and beautiful love that men
tell of that will spring up on battlefields between sorely wounded men,
and often they are men who have fought together, so that they will do
almost incredibly brave and tender things for one another, though but
recently they have been trying to kill each other. There is often a pure
exaltation of feeling between those who stand side by side manfully in
any great stress. These are the forms of love that perhaps come nearest
to what we mean when we speak of the love of God.

That is man's love of God, but there is also something else; there is
the love God bears for man in the individual believer. Now this is not
an indulgent, instinctive, and sacrificing love like the love of a woman
for her baby. It is the love of the captain for his men; God must love
his followers as a great captain loves his men, who are so foolish, so
helpless in themselves, so confiding, and yet whose faith alone makes
him possible. It is an austere love. The spirit of God will not hesitate
to send us to torment and bodily death. . . .

And God waits for us, for all of us who have the quality to reach
him. He has need of us as we of him. He desires us and desires to make
himself known to us. When at last the individual breaks through the
limiting darknesses to him, the irradiation of that moment, the smile
and soul clasp, is in God as well as in man. He has won us from his
enemy. We come staggering through into the golden light of his kingdom,
to fight for his kingdom henceforth, until at last we are altogether
taken up into his being.



CHAPTER THE FOURTH

THE RELIGION OF ATHEISTS



1. THE SCIENTIFIC ATHEIST


It is a curious thing that while most organised religions seem to drape
about and conceal and smother the statement of the true God, the
honest Atheist, with his passionate impulse to strip the truth bare, is
constantly and unwittingly reproducing the divine likeness. It will be
interesting here to call a witness or so to the extreme instability of
absolute negation.

Here, for example, is a deliverance from Professor Metchnikoff, who was
a very typical antagonist of all religion. He died only the other day.
He was a very great physiologist indeed; he was a man almost of the rank
and quality of Pasteur or Charles Darwin. A decade or more ago he wrote
a book called "The Nature of Man," in which he set out very plainly a
number of illuminating facts about life. They are facts so illuminating
that presently, in our discussion of sin, they will be referred to
again. But it is not Professor Metchnikoff's intention to provide
material for a religious discussion. He sets out his facts in order to
overthrow theology as he conceives it. The remarkable thing about his
book, the thing upon which I would now lay stress, is that he betrays no
inkling of the fact that he has no longer the right to conceive theology
as he conceives it. The development of his science has destroyed that
right.

He does not realise how profoundly modern biology has affected our ideas
of individuality and species, and how the import of theology is modified
through these changes. When he comes from his own world of modern
biology to religion and philosophy he goes back in time. He attacks
religion as he understood it when first he fell out with it fifty years
or more ago.

Let us state as compactly as possible the nature of these changes that
biological science has wrought almost imperceptibly in the general
scheme and method of our thinking.

The influence of biology upon thought in general consists essentially
in diminishing the importance of the individual and developing the
realisation of the species, as if it were a kind of super-individual, a
modifying and immortal super-individual, maintaining itself against the
outer universe by the birth and death of its constituent individuals.
Natural History, which began by putting individuals into species as if
the latter were mere classificatory divisions, has come to see that
the species has its adventures, its history and drama, far exceeding
in interest and importance the individual adventure. "The Origin of
Species" was for countless minds the discovery of a new romance in life.

The contrast of the individual life and this specific life may be
stated plainly and compactly as follows. A little while ago we current
individuals, we who are alive now, were each of us distributed between
two parents, then between four grandparents, and so on backward, we are
temporarily assembled, as it were, out of an ancestral diffusion; we
stand our trial, and presently our individuality is dispersed and
mixed again with other individualities in an uncertain multitude of
descendants. But the species is not like this; it goes on steadily from
newness to newness, remaining still a unity. The drama of the individual
life is a mere episode, beneficial or abandoned, in this continuing
adventure of the species. And Metchnikoff finds most of the trouble of
life and the distresses of life in the fact that the species is still
very painfully adjusting itself to the fluctuating conditions under
which it lives. The conflict of life is a continual pursuit of
adjustment, and the "ills of life," of the individual life that is,
are due to its "disharmonies." Man, acutely aware of himself as an
individual adventure and unawakened to himself as a species, finds life
jangling and distressful, finds death frustration. He fails and falls as
a person in what may be the success and triumph of his kind. He does
not apprehend the struggle or the nature of victory, but only his own
gravitation to death and personal extinction.

Now Professor Metchnikoff is anti-religious, and he is anti-religious
because to him as to so many Europeans religion is confused with
priest-craft and dogmas, is associated with disagreeable early
impressions of irrational repression and misguidance. How completely he
misconceives the quality of religion, how completely he sees it as an
individual's affair, his own words may witness:


"Religion is still occupied with the problem of death. The solutions
which as yet it has offered cannot be regarded as satisfactory. A future
life has no single argument to support it, and the non-existence of life
after death is in consonance with the whole range of human knowledge. On
the other hand, resignation as preached by Buddha will fail to satisfy
humanity, which has a longing for life, and is overcome by the thought
of the inevitability of death."


Now here it is clear that by death he means the individual death, and by
a future life the prolongation of individuality. But Buddhism does
not in truth appear ever to have been concerned with that, and modern
religious developments are certainly not under that preoccupation with
the narrower self. Buddhism indeed so far from "preaching resignation"
to death, seeks as its greater good a death so complete as to be
absolute release from the individual's burthen of KARMA. Buddhism seeks
an ESCAPE FROM INDIVIDUAL IMMORTALITY. The deeper one pursues religious
thought the more nearly it approximates to a search for escape from the
self-centred life and over-individuation, and the more it diverges from
Professor Metchnikoff's assertion of its aims. Salvation is indeed to
lose one's self. But Professor Metchnikoff having roundly denied
that this is so, is then left free to take the very essentials of the
religious life as they are here conceived and present them as if
they were the antithesis of the religious life. His book, when it is
analysed, resolves itself into just that research for an escape from the
painful accidents and chagrins of individuation, which is the ultimate
of religion.

At times, indeed, he seems almost wilfully blind to the true solution
round and about which his writing goes. He suggests as his most hopeful
satisfaction for the cravings of the human heart, such a scientific
prolongation of life that the instinct for self-preservation will be at
last extinct. If that is not the very "resignation" he imputes to the
Buddhist I do not know what it is. He believes that an individual which
has lived fully and completely may at last welcome death with the same
instinctive readiness as, in the days of its strength, it shows for the
embraces of its mate. We are to be glutted by living to six score and
ten. We are to rise from the table at last as gladly as we sat down. We
shall go to death as unresistingly as tired children go to bed. Men
are to have a life far beyond the range of what is now considered their
prime, and their last period (won by scientific self-control) will be a
period of ripe wisdom (from seventy to eighty to a hundred and twenty or
thereabouts) and public service!

(But why, one asks, public service? Why not book-collecting or the
simple pleasure of reminiscence so dear to aged egotists? Metchnikoff
never faces that question. And again, what of the man who is challenged
to die for right at the age of thirty? What does the prolongation
of life do for him? And where are the consolations for accidental
misfortune, for the tormenting disease or the lost limb?)

But in his peroration Professor Metchnikoff lapses into pure
religiosity. The prolongation of life gives place to sheer
self-sacrifice as the fundamental "remedy." And indeed what other remedy
has ever been conceived for the general evil of life?


"On the other hand," he writes, "the knowledge that the goal of human
life can be attained only by the development of a high degree of
solidarity amongst men will restrain actual egotism. The mere fact that
the enjoyment of life according to the precepts of Solomon (Ecelesiastes
ix. 7-10)* is opposed to the goal of human life, will lessen luxury and
the evil that comes from luxury. Conviction that science alone is able
to redress the disharmonies of the human constitution will lead directly
to the improvement of education and to the solidarity of mankind.

     * Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine
     with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.  Let
     thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
     ointment.  Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all
     the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee
     under the sun, all the days of thy vanity for that is thy
     portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest
     under the sun.  Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it
     with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor
     knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.

"In progress towards the goal, nature will have to be consulted
continuously. Already, in the case of the ephemerids, nature has
produced a complete cycle of normal life ending in natural death. In
the problem of his own fate, man must not be content with the gifts of
nature; he must direct them by his own efforts. Just as he has been able
to modify the nature of animals and plants, man must attempt to modify
his own constitution, so as to readjust its disharmonies. . . .

"To modify the human constitution, it will be necessary first, to frame
the ideal, and thereafter to set to work with all the resources of
science.

"If there can be formed an ideal able to unite men in a kind of religion
of the future, this ideal must be founded on scientific principles. And
if it be true, as has been asserted so often, that man can live by faith
alone, the faith must be in the power of science."


Now this, after all the flat repudiations that have preceded it of
"religion" and "philosophy" as remedies for human ills, is nothing less
than the fundamental proposition of the religious life translated into
terms of materialistic science, the proposition that damnation is really
over-individuation and that salvation is escape from self into the
larger being of life. . . .

What can this "religion of the future" be but that devotion to the
racial adventure under the captaincy of God which we have already found,
like gold in the bottom of the vessel, when we have washed away the
confusions and impurities of dogmatic religion? By an inquiry setting
out from a purely religious starting-point we have already reached
conclusions identical with this ultimate refuge of an extreme
materialist.

This altar to the Future of his, we can claim as an altar to our God--an
altar rather indistinctly inscribed.



2. SACRIFICE IMPLIES GOD


Almost all Agnostic and Atheistical writings that show any fineness
and generosity of spirit, have this tendency to become as it were the
statement of an anonymous God. Everything is said that a religious
writer would say--except that God is not named. Religious metaphors
abound. It is as if they accepted the living body of religion but denied
the bones that held it together--as they might deny the bones of a
friend. It is true, they would admit, the body moves in a way that
implies bones in its every movement, but--WE HAVE NEVER SEEN THOSE
BONES.

The disputes in theory--I do not say the difference in reality--between
the modern believer and the atheist or agnostic--becomes at times almost
as impalpable as that subtle discussion dear to students of physics,
whether the scientific "ether" is real or a formula. Every material
phenomenon is consonant with and helps to define this ether, which
permeates and sustains and is all things, which nevertheless is
perceptible to no sense, which is reached only by an intellectual
process. Most minds are disposed to treat this ether as a reality. But
the acutely critical mind insists that what is only so attainable by
inference is not real; it is no more than "a formula that satisfies all
phenomena."

But if it comes to that, am I anything more than the formula that
satisfies all my forms of consciousness?

Intellectually there is hardly anything more than a certain will to
believe, to divide the religious man who knows God to be utterly real,
from the man who says that God is merely a formula to satisfy moral and
spiritual phenomena. The former has encountered him, the other has as
yet felt only unassigned impulses. One says God's will is so; the other
that Right is so. One says God moves me to do this or that; the other
the Good Will in me which I share with you and all well-disposed men,
moves me to do this or that. But the former makes an exterior reference
and escapes a risk of self-righteousness.

I have recently been reading a book by Mr. Joseph McCabe called "The
Tyranny of Shams," in which he displays very typically this curious
tendency to a sort of religion with God "blacked out." His is an
extremely interesting case. He is a writer who was formerly a Roman
Catholic priest, and in his reaction from Catholicism he displays a
resolution even sterner than Professor Metchnikoff's, to deny that
anything religious or divine can exist, that there can be any aim
in life except happiness, or any guide but "science." But--and here
immediately he turns east again--he is careful not to say "individual
happiness." And he says "Pleasure is, as Epicureans insisted, only
a part of a large ideal of happiness." So he lets the happiness of
devotion and sacrifice creep in. So he opens indefinite possibilities of
getting away from any merely materialistic rule of life. And he writes:


"In every civilised nation the mass of the people are inert and
indifferent. Some even make a pretence of justifying their inertness.
Why, they ask, should we stir at all? Is there such a thing as a duty to
improve the earth? What is the meaning or purpose of life? Or has it a
purpose?

"One generally finds that this kind of reasoning is merely a piece of
controversial athletics or a thin excuse for idleness. People tell you
that the conflict of science and religion--it would be better to say,
the conflict of modern culture and ancient traditions--has robbed life
of its plain significance. The men who, like Tolstoi, seriously urge
this point fail to appreciate the modern outlook on life. Certainly
modern culture--science, history, philosophy, and art--finds no purpose
in life: that is to say, no purpose eternally fixed and to be discovered
by man. A great chemist said a few years ago that he could imagine 'a
series of lucky accidents'--the chance blowing by the wind of certain
chemicals into pools on the primitive earth--accounting for the first
appearance of life; and one might not unjustly sum up the influences
which have lifted those early germs to the level of conscious beings as
a similar series of lucky accidents.

"But it is sheer affectation to say that this demoralises us. If there
is no purpose impressed on the universe, or prefixed to the development
of humanity, it follows only that humanity may choose its own purpose
and set up its own goal; and the most elementary sense of order will
teach us that this choice must be social, not merely individual. In
whatever measure ill-controlled individuals may yield to personal
impulses or attractions, the aim of the race must be a collective aim. I
do not mean an austere demand of self-sacrifice from the individual,
but an adjustment--as genial and generous as possible--of individual
variations for common good. Otherwise life becomes discordant and
futile, and the pain and waste react on each individual. So we raise
again, in the twentieth century, the old question of 'the greatest
good,' which men discussed in the Stoa Poikile and the suburban groves
of Athens, in the cool atria of patrician mansions on the Palatine and
the Pincian, in the Museum at Alexandria, and the schools which Omar
Khayyam frequented, in the straw-strewn schools of the Middle Ages and
the opulent chambers of Cosimo dei Medici."


And again:


"The old dream of a co-operative effort to improve life, to bring
happiness to as many minds of mortals as we can reach, shines above
all the mists of the day. Through the ruins of creeds and philosophies,
which have for ages disdained it, we are retracing our steps toward that
height--just as the Athenians did two thousand years ago. It rests on
no metaphysic, no sacred legend, no disputable tradition--nothing that
scepticism can corrode or advancing knowledge undermine. Its foundations
are the fundamental and unchanging impulses of our nature."


And again:


"The revolt which burns in so much of the abler literature of our time
is an unselfish revolt, or non-selfish revolt: it is an outcome of
that larger spirit which conceives the self to be a part of the general
social organism, and it is therefore neither egoistic nor altruistic.
It finds a sanction in the new intelligence, and an inspiration in the
finer sentiments of our generation, but the glow which chiefly illumines
it is the glow of the great vision of a happier earth. It speaks of
the claims of truth and justice, and assails untruth and injustice,
for these are elemental principles of social life; but it appeals
more confidently to the warmer sympathy which is linking the scattered
children of the race, and it urges all to co-operate in the restriction
of suffering and the creation of happiness. The advance guard of the
race, the men and women in whom mental alertness is associated with fine
feeling, cry that they have reached Pisgah's slope and in increasing
numbers men and women are pressing on to see if it be really the
Promised Land."


"Pisgah--the Promised Land!" Mr. McCabe in that passage sounds as if he
were half-way to "Oh! Beulah Land!" and the tambourine.

That "larger spirit," we maintain, is God; those "impulses" are the
power of God, and Mr. McCabe serves a Master he denies. He has but to
realise fully that God is not necessarily the Triune God of the Catholic
Church, and banish his intense suspicion that he may yet be lured
back to that altar he abandoned, he has but to look up from that
preoccupation, and immediately he will begin to realise the presence of
Divinity.



3. GOD IS AN EXTERNAL REALITY


It may be argued that if atheists and agnostics when they set themselves
to express the good will that is in them, do shape out God, that
if their conception of right living falls in so completely with the
conception of God's service as to be broadly identical, then indeed God,
like the ether of scientific speculation, is no more than a theory, no
more than an imaginative externalisation of man's inherent good will.
Why trouble about God then? Is not the declaration of a good disposition
a sufficient evidence of salvation? What is the difference between such
benevolent unbelievers as Professor Metchnikoff or Mr. McCabe and those
who have found God?

The difference is this, that the benevolent atheist stands alone upon
his own good will, without a reference, without a standard, trusting
to his own impulse to goodness, relying upon his own moral strength. A
certain immodesty, a certain self-righteousness, hangs like a precipice
above him; incalculable temptations open like gulfs beneath his feet. He
has not really given himself or got away from himself. He has no one to
whom he can give himself. He is still a masterless man. His exaltation
is self-centred, is priggishness, his fall is unrestrained by any
exterior obligation. His devotion is only the good will in himself, a
disposition; it is a mood that may change. At any moment it may change.
He may have pledged himself to his own pride and honour, but who will
hold him to his bargain? He has no source of strength beyond his own
amiable sentiments, his conscience speaks with an unsupported voice, and
no one watches while he sleeps. He cannot pray; he can but ejaculate. He
has no real and living link with other men of good will.

And those whose acquiescence in the idea of God is merely intellectual
are in no better case than those who deny God altogether. They may have
all the forms of truth and not divinity. The religion of the atheist
with a God-shaped blank at its heart and the persuasion of the
unconverted theologian, are both like lamps unlit. The lit lamp has no
difference in form from the lamp unlit. But the lit lamp is alive and
the lamp unlit is asleep or dead.

The difference between the unconverted and the unbeliever and the
servant of the true God is this; it is that the latter has experienced
a complete turning away from self. This only difference is all the
difference in the world. It is the realisation that this goodness that
I thought was within me and of myself and upon which I rather prided
myself, is without me and above myself, and infinitely greater and
stronger than I. It is the immortal and I am mortal. It is invincible
and steadfast in its purpose, and I am weak and insecure. It is no
longer that I, out of my inherent and remarkable goodness, out of
the excellence of my quality and the benevolence of my heart, give a
considerable amount of time and attention to the happiness and welfare
of others--because I choose to do so. On the contrary I have come under
a divine imperative, I am obeying an irresistible call, I am a humble
and willing servant of the righteousness of God. That altruism which
Professor Metchnikoff and Mr. McCabe would have us regard as the goal
and refuge of a broad and free intelligence, is really the first simple
commandment in the religious life.



4. ANOTHER RELIGIOUS MATERIALIST


Now here is a passage from a book, "Evolution and the War," by Professor
Metchnikoff's translator, Dr. Chalmers Mitchell, which comes even closer
to our conception of God as an immortal being arising out of man, and
external to the individual man. He has been discussing that well-known
passage of Kant's: "Two things fill my mind with ever-renewed wonder and
awe the more often and deeper I dwell on them--the starry vault above
me, and the moral law within me."

From that discussion, Dr. Chalmers Mitchell presently comes to this most
definite and interesting statement:


"Writing as a hard-shell Darwinian evolutionist, a lover of the scalpel
and microscope, and of patient, empirical observation, as one who
dislikes all forms of supernaturalism, and who does not shrink from the
implications even of the phrase that thought is a secretion of the brain
as bile is a secretion of the liver, I assert as a biological fact that
the moral law is as real and as external to man as the starry vault. It
has no secure seat in any single man or in any single nation. It is the
work of the blood and tears of long generations of men. It is not
in man, inborn or innate, but is enshrined in his traditions, in his
customs, in his literature and his religion. Its creation and sustenance
are the crowning glory of man, and his consciousness of it puts him in
a high place above the animal world. Men live and die; nations rise and
fall, but the struggle of individual lives and of individual nations
must be measured not by their immediate needs, but as they tend to the
debasement or perfection of man's great achievement."


This is the same reality. This is the same Link and Captain that this
book asserts. It seems to me a secondary matter whether we call Him
"Man's Great Achievement" or "The Son of Man" or the "God of Mankind" or
"God." So far as the practical and moral ends of life are concerned, it
does not matter how we explain or refuse to explain His presence in our
lives.

There is but one possible gap left between the position of Dr. Chalmers
Mitchell and the position of this book. In this book it is asserted that
GOD RESPONDS, that he GIVES courage and the power of self-suppression to
our weakness.



5. A NOTE ON A LECTURE BY PROFESSOR GILBERT MURRAY


Let me now quote and discuss a very beautiful passage from a lecture
upon Stoicism by Professor Gilbert Murray, which also displays the same
characteristic of an involuntary shaping out of God in the forms of
denial. It is a passage remarkable for its conscientious and resolute
Agnosticism. And it is remarkable too for its blindness to the
possibility of separating quite completely the idea of the Infinite
Being from the idea of God. It is another striking instance of that
obsession of modern minds by merely Christian theology of which I have
already complained. Professor Murray has quoted Mr. Bevan's phrase for
God, "the Friend behind phenomena," and he does not seem to realise that
that phrase carries with it no obligation whatever to believe that this
Friend is in control of the phenomena. He assumes that he is supposed to
be in control as if it were a matter of course:


"We do seem to find," Professor Murray writes, "not only in all
religions, but in practically all philosophies, some belief that man is
not quite alone in the universe, but is met in his endeavours towards
the good by some external help or sympathy. We find it everywhere in the
unsophisticated man. We find it in the unguarded self-revelations of the
most severe and conscientious Atheists. Now, the Stoics, like many other
schools of thought, drew an argument from this consensus of all mankind.
It was not an absolute proof of the existence of the Gods or Providence,
but it was a strong indication. The existence of a common instinctive
belief in the mind of man gives at least a presumption that there must
be a good cause for that belief.

"This is a reasonable position. There must be some such cause. But it
does not follow that the only valid cause is the truth of the content of
the belief. I cannot help suspecting that this is precisely one of those
points on which Stoicism, in company with almost all philosophy up to
the present time, has gone astray through not sufficiently realising its
dependence on the human mind as a natural biological product. For it is
very important in this matter to realise that the so-called belief is
not really an intellectual judgment so much as a craving of the whole
nature.

"It is only of very late years that psychologists have begun to realise
the enormous dominion of those forces in man of which he is normally
unconscious. We cannot escape as easily as these brave men dreamed from
the grip of the blind powers beneath the threshold. Indeed, as I see
philosophy after philosophy falling into this unproven belief in the
Friend behind phenomena, as I find that I myself cannot, except for a
moment and by an effort, refrain from making the same assumption, it
seems to me that perhaps here too we are under the spell of a very old
ineradicable instinct. We are gregarious animals; our ancestors have
been such for countless ages. We cannot help looking out on the world as
gregarious animals do; we see it in terms of humanity and of fellowship.
Students of animals under domestication have shown us how the habits
of a gregarious creature, taken away from his kind, are shaped in
a thousand details by reference to the lost pack which is no longer
there--the pack which a dog tries to smell his way back to all the time
he is out walking, the pack he calls to for help when danger threatens.
It is a strange and touching thing, this eternal hunger of the
gregarious animal for the herd of friends who are not there. And it may
be, it may very possibly be, that, in the matter of this Friend behind
phenomena our own yearning and our own almost ineradicable instinctive
conviction, since they are certainly not founded on either reason or
observation, are in origin the groping of a lonely-souled gregarious
animal to find its herd or its herd-leader in the great spaces between
the stars.

"At any rate, it is a belief very difficult to get rid of."


There the passage and the lecture end.

I would urge that here again is an inadvertent witness to the reality of
God.

Professor Murray writes of gregarious animals as though there existed
solitary animals that are not gregarious, pure individualists,
"atheists" so to speak, and as though this appeal to a life beyond one's
own was not the universal disposition of living things. His classical
training disposes him to a realistic exaggeration of individual
difference. But nearly every animal, and certainly every mentally
considerable animal, begins under parental care, in a nest or a litter,
mates to breed, and is associated for much of its life. Even the great
carnivores do not go alone except when they are old and have done with
the most of life. Every pack, every herd, begins at some point in a
couple, it is the equivalent of the tiger's litter if that were to
remain undispersed. And it is within the memory of men still living
that in many districts the African lion has with a change of game and
conditions lapsed from a "solitary" to a gregarious, that is to say a
prolonged family habit of life.

Man too, if in his ape-like phase he resembled the other higher apes,
is an animal becoming more gregarious and not less. He has passed
within the historical period from a tribal gregariousness to a nearly
cosmopolitan tolerance. And he has his tribe about him. He is not, as
Professor Murray seems to suggest, a solitary LOST gregarious beast. Why
should his desire for God be regarded as the overflow of an unsatisfied
gregarious instinct, when he has home, town, society, companionship,
trade union, state, INCREASINGLY at hand to glut it? Why should
gregariousness drive a man to God rather than to the third-class
carriage and the public-house? Why should gregariousness drive men out
of crowded Egyptian cities into the cells of the Thebaid? Schopenhauer
in a memorable passage (about the hedgehogs who assembled for warmth) is
flatly opposed to Professor Murray, and seems far more plausible when
he declares that the nature of man is insufficiently gregarious. The
parallel with the dog is not a valid one.

Does not the truth lie rather in the supposition that it is not the
Friend that is the instinctive delusion but the isolation? Is not the
real deception, our belief that we are completely individualised, and
is it not possible that this that Professor Murray calls "instinct"
is really not a vestige but a new thing arising out of our increasing
understanding, an intellectual penetration to that greater being of the
species, that vine, of which we are the branches? Why should not the
soul of the species, many faceted indeed, be nevertheless a soul like
our own?

Here, as in the case of Professor Metchnikoff, and in many other cases
of atheism, it seems to me that nothing but an inadequate understanding
of individuation bars the way to at least the intellectual recognition
of the true God.



6. RELIGION AS ETHICS


And while I am dealing with rationalists, let me note certain recent
interesting utterances of Sir Harry Johnston's. You will note that while
in this book we use the word "God" to indicate the God of the Heart,
Sir Harry uses "God" for that idea of God-of-the-Universe, which we have
spoken of as the Infinite Being. This use of the word "God" is of late
theological origin; the original identity of the words "good" and "god"
and all the stories of the gods are against him. But Sir Harry takes up
God only to define him away into incomprehensible necessity. Thus:


"We know absolutely nothing concerning the Force we call God; and,
assuming such an intelligent ruling force to be in existence, permeating
this universe of millions of stars and (no doubt) tens of millions of
planets, we do not know under what conditions and limitations It works.
We are quite entitled to assume that the end of such an influence is
intended to be order out of chaos, happiness and perfection out
of incompleteness and misery; and we are entitled to identify the
reactionary forces of brute Nature with the anthropomorphic Devil of
primitive religions, the power of darkness resisting the power of light.
But in these conjectures we must surely come to the conclusion that
the theoretical potency we call 'God' makes endless experiments, and
scrap-heaps the failures. Think of the Dinosaurs and the expenditure of
creative energy that went to their differentiation and their well-nigh
incredible physical development. . . .

"To such a Divine Force as we postulate, the whole development and
perfecting of life on this planet, the whole production of man, may
seem little more than to any one of us would be the chipping out, the
cutting, the carving, and the polishing of a gem; and we should feel as
little remorse or pity for the scattered dust and fragments as must the
Creative Force of the immeasurably vast universe feel for the DISJECTA
MEMBRA of perfected life on this planet. . . ."


But thence he goes on to a curiously imperfect treatment of the God
of man as if he consisted in nothing more than some vague sort of
humanitarianism. Sir Harry's ideas are much less thoroughly thought out
than those of any other of these sceptical writers I have quoted. On
that account they are perhaps more typical. He speaks as though Christ
were simply an eminent but ill-reported and abominably served teacher of
ethics--and yet of the only right ideal and ethics. He speaks as though
religions were nothing more than ethical movements, and as though
Christianity were merely someone remarking with a bright impulsiveness
that everything was simply horrid, and so, "Let us instal loving
kindness as a cardinal axiom." He ignores altogether the fundamental
essential of religion, which is THE DEVELOPMENT AND SYNTHESIS OF THE
DIVERGENT AND CONFLICTING MOTIVES OF THE UNCONVERTED LIFE, AND THE
IDENTIFICATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL LIFE WITH THE IMMORTAL PURPOSE OF GOD.
He presents a conception of religion relieved of its "nonsense" as the
cheerful self-determination of a number of bright little individuals
(much stirred but by no means overcome by Cosmic Pity) to the Service
of Man. As he seems to present it, it is as outward a thing, it goes as
little into the intimacy of their lives, as though they had after proper
consideration agreed to send a subscription to a Red Cross Ambulance or
take part in a public demonstration against the Armenian Massacres, or
do any other rather nice-spirited exterior thing. This is what he says:


"I hope that the religion of the future will devote itself wholly to the
Service of Man. It can do so without departing from the Christian
ideal and Christian ethics. It need only drop all that is silly and
disputable, and 'mattering not neither here nor there,' of Christian
theology--a theology virtually absent from the direct teaching of
Christ--and all of Judaistic literature or prescriptions not made
immortal in their application by unassailable truth and by the
confirmation of science. An excellent remedy for the nonsense which
still clings about religion may be found in two books: Cotter Monson's
'Service of Man,' which was published as long ago as 1887, and has since
been re-issued by the Rationalist Press Association in its well-known
sixpenny series, and J. Allanson Picton's 'Man and the Bible.'
Similarly, those who wish to acquire a sane view of the relations
between man and God would do well to read Winwood Reade's 'Martyrdom of
Man.'"


Sir Harry in fact clears the ground for God very ably, and then makes a
well-meaning gesture in the vacant space. There is no help nor strength
in his gesture unless God is there. Without God, the "Service of Man"
is no better than a hobby or a sentimentality or an hypocrisy in the
undisciplined prison of the mortal life.



CHAPTER THE FIFTH

THE INVISIBLE KING


1. MODERN RELIGION A POLITICAL RELIGION


The conception of a young and energetic God, an Invisible Prince growing
in strength and wisdom, who calls men and women to his service and who
gives salvation from self and mortality only through self-abandonment to
his service, necessarily involves a demand for a complete revision and
fresh orientation of the life of the convert.

God faces the blackness of the Unknown and the blind joys and confusions
and cruelties of Life, as one who leads mankind through a dark jungle
to a great conquest. He brings mankind not rest but a sword. It is plain
that he can admit no divided control of the world he claims. He concedes
nothing to Caesar. In our philosophy there are no human things that
are God's and others that are Caesar's. Those of the new thought cannot
render unto God the things that are God's, and to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's. Whatever claim Caesar may make to rule men's lives and
direct their destinies outside the will of God, is a usurpation. No king
nor Caesar has any right to tax or to service or to tolerance, except
he claim as one who holds for and under God. And he must make good his
claim. The steps of the altar of the God of Youth are no safe place for
the sacrilegious figure of a king. Who claims "divine right" plays with
the lightning.

The new conceptions do not tolerate either kings or aristocracies or
democracies. Its implicit command to all its adherents is to make plain
the way to the world theocracy. Its rule of life is the discovery and
service of the will of God, which dwells in the hearts of men, and the
performance of that will, not only in the private life of the believer
but in the acts and order of the state and nation of which he is a part.
I give myself to God not only because I am so and so but because I am
mankind. I become in a measure responsible for every evil in the world
of men. I become a knight in God's service. I become my brother's
keeper. I become a responsible minister of my King. I take sides against
injustice, disorder, and against all those temporal kings, emperors,
princes, landlords, and owners, who set themselves up against God's rule
and worship. Kings, owners, and all who claim rule and decisions in the
world's affairs, must either show themselves clearly the fellow-servants
of the believer or become the objects of his steadfast antagonism.



2. THE WILL OF GOD


It is here that those who explain this modern religiosity will seem most
arbitrary to the inquirer. For they relate of God, as men will relate of
a close friend, his dispositions, his apparent intentions, the aims
of his kingship. And just as they advance no proof whatever of the
existence of God but their realisation of him, so with regard to these
qualities and dispositions they have little argument but profound
conviction. What they say is this; that if you do not feel God then
there is no persuading you of him; we cannot win over the incredulous.
And what they say of his qualities is this; that if you feel God then
you will know, you will realise more and more clearly, that thus and
thus and no other is his method and intention.

It comes as no great shock to those who have grasped the full
implications of the statement that God is Finite, to hear it asserted
that the first purpose of God is the attainment of clear knowledge, of
knowledge as a means to more knowledge, and of knowledge as a means to
power. For that he must use human eyes and hands and brains.

And as God gathers power he uses it to an end that he is only beginning
to apprehend, and that he will apprehend more fully as time goes on. But
it is possible to define the broad outlines of the attainment he seeks.
It is the conquest of death.

It is the conquest of death; first the overcoming of death in the
individual by the incorporation of the motives of his life into an
undying purpose, and then the defeat of that death that seems to
threaten our species upon a cooling planet beneath a cooling sun. God
fights against death in every form, against the great death of the
race, against the petty death of indolence, insufficiency, baseness,
misconception, and perversion. He it is and no other who can deliver us
"from the body of this death." This is the battle that grows plainer;
this is the purpose to which he calls us out of the animal's round of
eating, drinking, lusting, quarrelling and laughing and weeping, fearing
and failing, and presently of wearying and dying, which is the
whole life that living without God can give us. And from these great
propositions there follow many very definite maxims and rules of life
for those who serve God. These we will immediately consider.



3. THE CRUCIFIX


But first let me write a few words here about those who hold a kind
of intermediate faith between the worship of the God of Youth and the
vaguer sort of Christianity. There are a number of people closely in
touch with those who have found the new religion who, biased probably
by a dread of too complete a break with Christianity, have adopted a
theogony which is very reminiscent of Gnosticism and of the Paulician,
Catharist, and kindred sects to which allusion has already been made.
He, who is called in this book God, they would call God-the-Son or
Christ, or the Logos; and what is here called the Darkness or the Veiled
Being, they would call God-the-Father. And what we speak of here as
Life, they would call, with a certain disregard of the poor brutes that
perish, Man. And they would assert, what we of the new belief, pleading
our profound ignorance, would neither assert nor deny, that that
Darkness, out of which came Life and God, since it produced them must be
ultimately sympathetic and of like nature with them. And that ultimately
Man, being redeemed and led by Christ and saved from death by him, would
be reconciled with God the Father.* And this great adventurer out of the
hearts of man that we here call God, they would present as the same with
that teacher from Galilee who was crucified at Jerusalem.

     * This probably was the conception of Spinoza.  Christ for
     him is the wisdom of God manifested in all things, and
     chiefly in the mind of man.  Through him we reach the
     blessedness of an intuitive knowledge of God.  Salvation is
     an escape from the "inadequate" ideas of the mortal human
     personality to the "adequate" and timeless ideas of God.

Now we of the modern way would offer the following criticisms upon this
apparent compromise between our faith and the current religion. Firstly,
we do not presume to theorise about the nature of the veiled being nor
about that being's relations to God and to Life. We do not recognise any
consistent sympathetic possibilities between these outer beings and our
God. Our God is, we feel, like Prometheus, a rebel. He is unfilial. And
the accepted figure of Jesus, instinct with meek submission, is not in
the tone of our worship. It is not by suffering that God conquers death,
but by fighting. Incidentally our God dies a million deaths, but the
thing that matters is not the deaths but the immortality. It may be he
cannot escape in this person or that person being nailed to a cross
or chained to be torn by vultures on a rock. These may be necessary
sufferings, like hunger and thirst in a campaign; they do not in
themselves bring victory. They may be necessary, but they are not
glorious. The symbol of the crucifixion, the drooping, pain-drenched
figure of Christ, the sorrowful cry to his Father, "My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?" these things jar with our spirit. We little men
may well fail and repent, but it is our faith that our God does not fail
us nor himself. We cannot accept the Christian's crucifix, or pray to
a pitiful God. We cannot accept the Resurrection as though it were an
after-thought to a bitterly felt death. Our crucifix, if you must have
a crucifix, would show God with a hand or a foot already torn away from
its nail, and with eyes not downcast but resolute against the sky; a
face without pain, pain lost and forgotten in the surpassing glory of
the struggle and the inflexible will to live and prevail. . . .

But we do not care how long the thorns are drawn, nor how terrible the
wounds, so long as he does not droop. God is courage. God is courage
beyond any conceivable suffering.

But when all this has been said, it is well to add that it concerns the
figure of Christ only in so far as that professes to be the figure of
God, and the crucifix only so far as that stands for divine action. The
figure of Christ crucified, so soon as we think of it as being no
more than the tragic memorial of Jesus, of the man who proclaimed the
loving-kindness of God and the supremacy of God's kingdom over
the individual life, and who, in the extreme agony of his pain and
exhaustion, cried out that he was deserted, becomes something altogether
distinct from a theological symbol. Immediately that we cease to
worship, we can begin to love and pity. Here was a being of extreme
gentleness and delicacy and of great courage, of the utmost tolerance
and the subtlest sympathy, a saint of non-resistance. . . .

We of the new faith repudiate the teaching of non-resistance. We are
the militant followers of and participators in a militant God. We can
appreciate and admire the greatness of Christ, this gentle being upon
whose nobility the theologians trade. But submission is the remotest
quality of all from our God, and a moribund figure is the completest
inversion of his likeness as we know him. A Christianity which shows,
for its daily symbol, Christ risen and trampling victoriously upon a
broken cross, would be far more in the spirit of our worship.*

     * It is curious, after writing the above, to find in a
     letter written by Foss Westcott, Bishop of Durham, to that
     pertinacious correspondent, the late Lady Victoria Welby,
     almost exactly the same sentiments I have here expressed.
     "If I could fill the Crucifix with life as you do," he says,
     "I would gladly look on it, but the fallen Head and the
     closed Eye exclude from my thought the idea of glorified
     humanity.  The Christ to whom we are led is One who 'hath
     been crucified,' who hath passed the trial victoriously and
     borne the fruits to heaven.  I dare not then rest on this
     side of the glory."

I find, too, a still more remarkable expression of the modern spirit
in a tract, "The Call of the Kingdom," by that very able and subtle,
Anglican theologian, the Rev. W. Temple, who declares that under the
vitalising stresses of the war we are winning "faith in Christ as an
heroic leader. We have thought of Him so much as meek and gentle that
there is no ground in our picture of Him, for the vision which His
disciple had of Him: 'His head and His hair were white, as white wool,
white as snow; and His eyes were as a flame of fire: and His feet like
unto burnished brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace; and His
voice was as the voice of many waters. And He had in His right hand
seven stars; and out of His mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword; and
His countenance was as the sun shineth in its strength.'"

These are both exceptional utterances, interesting as showing how
clearly parallel are the tendencies within and without Christianity.



4. THE PRIMARY DUTIES


Now it follows very directly from the conception of God as a finite
intelligence of boundless courage and limitless possibilities of growth
and victory, who has pitted himself against death, who stands close to
our inmost beings ready to receive us and use us, to rescue us from the
chagrins of egotism and take us into his immortal adventure, that we
who have realised him and given ourselves joyfully to him, must needs be
equally ready and willing to give our energies to the task we share
with him, to do our utmost to increase knowledge, to increase order and
clearness, to fight against indolence, waste, disorder, cruelty, vice,
and every form of his and our enemy, death, first and chiefest in
ourselves but also in all mankind, and to bring about the establishment
of his real and visible kingdom throughout the world.

And that idea of God as the Invisible King of the whole world means not
merely that God is to be made and declared the head of the world, but
that the kingdom of God is to be present throughout the whole fabric
of the world, that the Kingdom of God is to be in the teaching at the
village school, in the planning of the railway siding of the market
town, in the mixing of the mortar at the building of the workman's
house. It means that ultimately no effigy of intrusive king or emperor
is to disfigure our coins and stamps any more; God himself and no
delegate is to be represented wherever men buy or sell, on our letters
and our receipts, a perpetual witness, a perpetual reminder. There is no
act altogether without significance, no power so humble that it may not
be used for or against God, no life but can orient itself to him. To
realise God in one's heart is to be filled with the desire to serve him,
and the way of his service is neither to pull up one's life by the
roots nor to continue it in all its essentials unchanged, but to turn it
about, to turn everything that there is in it round into his way.

The outward duty of those who serve God must vary greatly with the
abilities they possess and the positions in which they find themselves,
but for all there are certain fundamental duties; a constant attempt
to be utterly truthful with oneself, a constant sedulousness to
keep oneself fit and bright for God's service, and to increase one's
knowledge and powers, and a hidden persistent watchfulness of one's
baser motives, a watch against fear and indolence, against vanity,
against greed and lust, against envy, malice, and uncharitableness. To
have found God truly does in itself make God's service one's essential
motive, but these evils lurk in the shadows, in the lassitudes and
unwary moments. No one escapes them altogether, there is no need for
tragic moods on account of imperfections. We can no more serve God
without blunders and set-backs than we can win battles without losing
men. But the less of such loss the better. The servant of God must keep
his mind as wide and sound and his motives as clean as he can, just as
an operating surgeon must keep his nerves and muscles as fit and his
hands as clean as he can. Neither may righteously evade exercise and
regular washing--of mind as of hands. An incessant watchfulness of
one's self and one's thoughts and the soundness of one's thoughts;
cleanliness, clearness, a wariness against indolence and prejudice,
careful truth, habitual frankness, fitness and steadfast work; these are
the daily fundamental duties that every one who truly comes to God will,
as a matter of course, set before himself.



5. THE INCREASING KINGDOM


Now of the more intimate and personal life of the believer it will be
more convenient to write a little later. Let us for the present pursue
the idea of this world-kingdom of God, to whose establishment he calls
us. This kingdom is to be a peaceful and co-ordinated activity of all
mankind upon certain divine ends. These, we conceive, are first,
the maintenance of the racial life; secondly, the exploration of the
external being of nature as it is and as it has been, that is to
say history and science; thirdly, that exploration of inherent human
possibility which is art; fourthly, that clarification of thought and
knowledge which is philosophy; and finally, the progressive enlargement
and development of the racial life under these lights, so that God may
work through a continually better body of humanity and through better
and better equipped minds, that he and our race may increase for ever,
working unendingly upon the development of the powers of life and the
mastery of the blind forces of matter throughout the deeps of space. He
sets out with us, we are persuaded, to conquer ourselves and our world
and the stars. And beyond the stars our eyes can as yet see nothing, our
imaginations reach and fail. Beyond the limits of our understanding is
the veiled Being of Fate, whose face is hidden from us. . . .

It may be that minds will presently appear among us of such a quality
that the face of that Unknown will not be altogether hidden. . . .

But the business of such ordinary lives as ours is the setting up of
this earthly kingdom of God. That is the form into which our lives must
fall and our consciences adapt themselves.

Belief in God as the Invisible King brings with it almost necessarily a
conception of this coming kingdom of God on earth. Each believer as he
grasps this natural and immediate consequence of the faith that has come
into his life will form at the same time a Utopian conception of this
world changed in the direction of God's purpose. The vision will follow
the realisation of God's true nature and purpose as a necessary
second step. And he will begin to develop the latent citizen of this
world-state in himself. He will fall in with the idea of the world-wide
sanities of this new order being drawn over the warring outlines of the
present, and of men falling out of relationship with the old order and
into relationship with the new. Many men and women are already working
to-day at tasks that belong essentially to God's kingdom, tasks that
would be of the same essential nature if the world were now a theocracy;
for example, they are doing or sustaining scientific research or
education or creative art; they are making roads to bring men together,
they are doctors working for the world's health, they are building
homes, they are constructing machinery to save and increase the powers
of men. . . .

Such men and women need only to change their orientation as men will
change about at a work-table when the light that was coming in a little
while ago from the southern windows, begins presently to come in chiefly
from the west, to become open and confessed servants of God. This work
that they were doing for ambition, or the love of men or the love of
knowledge or what seemed the inherent impulse to the work itself, or for
money or honour or country or king, they will realise they are doing for
God and by the power of God. Self-transformation into a citizen of God's
kingdom and a new realisation of all earthly politics as no more than
the struggle to define and achieve the kingdom of God in the earth,
follow on, without any need for a fresh spiritual impulse, from the
moment when God and the believer meet and clasp one another.

This transfiguration of the world into a theocracy may seem a merely
fantastic idea to anyone who comes to it freshly without such general
theological preparation as the preceding pages have made. But to anyone
who has been at the pains to clear his mind even a little from the
obsession of existing but transitory things, it ceases to be a mere
suggestion and becomes more and more manifestly the real future of
mankind. From the phase of "so things should be," the mind will pass
very rapidly to the realisation that "so things will be." Towards this
the directive wills among men have been drifting more and more steadily
and perceptibly and with fewer eddyings and retardations, for many
centuries. The purpose of mankind will not be always thus confused and
fragmentary. This dissemination of will-power is a phase. The age of the
warring tribes and kingdoms and empires that began a hundred centuries
or so ago, draws to its close. The kingdom of God on earth is not a
metaphor, not a mere spiritual state, not a dream, not an uncertain
project; it is the thing before us, it is the close and inevitable
destiny of mankind.

In a few score years the faith of the true God will be spreading about
the world. The few halting confessions of God that one hears here and
there to-day, like that little twittering of birds which comes before
the dawn, will have swollen to a choral unanimity. In but a few
centuries the whole world will be openly, confessedly, preparing for
the kingdom. In but a few centuries God will have led us out of the dark
forest of these present wars and confusions into the open brotherhood of
his rule.



6. WHAT IS MY PLACE IN THE KINGDOM?


This conception of the general life of mankind as a transformation at
thousands of points of the confused, egotistical, proprietary, partisan,
nationalist, life-wasting chaos of human life to-day into the coherent
development of the world kingdom of God, provides the form into which
everyone who comes to the knowledge of God will naturally seek to fit
his every thought and activity. The material greeds, the avarice,
fear, rivalries, and ignoble ambitions of a disordered world will be
challenged and examined under one general question: "What am I in the
kingdom of God?"

It has already been suggested that there is a great and growing number
of occupations that belong already to God's kingdom, research, teaching,
creative art, creative administration, cultivation, construction,
maintenance, and the honest satisfaction of honest practical human
needs. For such people conversion to the intimacy of God means at most
a change in the spirit of their work, a refreshed energy, a clearer
understanding, a new zeal, a completer disregard of gains and praises
and promotion. Pay, honours, and the like cease to be the inducement of
effort. Service, and service alone, is the criterion that the quickened
conscience will recognise.

Most of such people will find themselves in positions in which service
is mingled with activities of a baser sort, in which service is a little
warped and deflected by old traditions and usage, by mercenary and
commercial considerations, by some inherent or special degradation of
purpose. The spirit of God will not let the believer rest until his life
is readjusted and as far as possible freed from the waste of these base
diversions. For example a scientific investigator, lit and inspired by
great inquiries, may be hampered by the conditions of his professorship
or research fellowship, which exact an appearance of "practical"
results. Or he may be obliged to lecture or conduct classes. He may
be able to give but half his possible gift to the work of his real
aptitude, and that at a sacrifice of money and reputation among
short-sighted but influential contemporaries. Well, if he is by nature
an investigator he will know that the research is what God needs of him.
He cannot continue it at all if he leaves his position, and so he must
needs waste something of his gift to save the rest. But should a poorer
or a humbler post offer him better opportunity, there lies his work for
God. There one has a very common and simple type of the problems that
will arise in the lives of men when they are lit by sudden realisation
of the immediacy of God.

Akin to that case is the perplexity of any successful physician between
the increase of knowledge and the public welfare on the one hand, and
the lucrative possibilities of his practice among wealthy people on the
other. He belongs to a profession that is crippled by a mediaeval code,
a profession which was blind to the common interest of the Public Health
and regarded its members merely as skilled practitioners employed to
"cure" individual ailments. Very slowly and tortuously do the methods of
the profession adapt themselves to the modern conception of an army of
devoted men working as a whole under God for the health of mankind as
a whole, broadening out from the frowsy den of the "leech," with its
crocodile and bottles and hieroglyphic prescriptions, to a skilled and
illuminating co-operation with those who deal with the food and housing
and economic life of the community.

And again quite parallel with these personal problems is the trouble of
the artist between the market and vulgar fame on the one hand and his
divine impulse on the other.

The presence of God will be a continual light and help in every decision
that must be made by men and women in these more or less vitiated, but
still fundamentally useful and righteous, positions.

The trouble becomes more marked and more difficult in the case of a man
who is a manufacturer or a trader, the financier of business enterprise
or the proprietor of great estates. The world is in need of manufactures
and that goods should be distributed; land must be administered and
new economic possibilities developed. The drift of things is in the
direction of state ownership and control, but in a great number of
cases the state is not ripe for such undertakings, it commands neither
sufficient integrity nor sufficient ability, and the proprietor of
factory, store, credit or land, must continue in possession, holding as
a trustee for God and, so far as lies in his power, preparing for his
supersession by some more public administration. Modern religion admits
of no facile flights from responsibility. It permits no headlong resort
to the wilderness and sterile virtue. It counts the recluse who fasts
among scorpions in a cave as no better than a deserter in hiding. It
unhesitatingly forbids any rich young man to sell all that he has and
give to the poor. Himself and all that he has must be alike dedicated to
God.

The plain duty that will be understood by the proprietor of land and of
every sort of general need and service, so soon as he becomes aware of
God, is so to administer his possessions as to achieve the maximum of
possible efficiency, the most generous output, and the least private
profit. He may set aside a salary for his maintenance; the rest he must
deal with like a zealous public official. And if he perceives that the
affair could be better administered by other hands than his own, then it
is his business to get it into those hands with the smallest delay and
the least profit to himself. . . .

The rights and wrongs of human equity are very different from right and
wrong in the sight of God. In the sight of God no landlord has a
RIGHT to his rent, no usurer has a RIGHT to his interest. A man is not
justified in drawing the profits from an advantageous agreement nor free
to spend the profits of a speculation as he will. God takes no heed of
savings nor of abstinence. He recognises no right to the "rewards of
abstinence," no right to any rewards. Those profits and comforts and
consolations are the inducements that dangle before the eyes of the
spiritually blind. Wealth is an embarrassment to the religious, for God
calls them to account for it. The servant of God has no business with
wealth or power except to use them immediately in the service of God.
Finding these things in his hands he is bound to administer them in the
service of God.

The tendency of modern religion goes far beyond the alleged communism
of the early Christians, and far beyond the tithes of the scribes and
Pharisees. God takes all. He takes you, blood and bones and house and
acres, he takes skill and influence and expectations. For all the rest
of your life you are nothing but God's agent. If you are not prepared
for so complete a surrender, then you are infinitely remote from God.
You must go your way. Here you are merely a curious interloper. Perhaps
you have been desiring God as an experience, or coveting him as
a possession. You have not begun to understand. This that we are
discussing in this book is as yet nothing for you.



7. ADJUSTING LIFE


This picturing of a human world more to the mind of God than this
present world and the discovery and realisation of one's own place and
work in and for that kingdom of God, is the natural next phase in the
development of the believer. He will set about revising and adjusting
his scheme of life, his ways of living, his habits and his relationships
in the light of his new convictions.

Most men and women who come to God will have already a certain
righteousness in their lives; these things happen like a thunderclap
only in strange exceptional cases, and the same movements of the mind
that have brought them to God will already have brought their lives into
a certain rightness of direction and conduct. Yet occasionally there
will be someone to whom the self-examination that follows conversion
will reveal an entirely wrong and evil way of living. It may be that the
light has come to some rich idler doing nothing but follow a pleasurable
routine. Or to someone following some highly profitable and amusing,
but socially useless or socially mischievous occupation. One may be an
advocate at the disposal of any man's purpose, or an actor or actress
ready to fall in with any theatrical enterprise. Or a woman may
find herself a prostitute or a pet wife, a mere kept instrument of
indulgence. These are lives of prey, these are lives of futility; the
light of God will not tolerate such lives. Here religion can bring
nothing but a severance from the old way of life altogether, a break and
a struggle towards use and service and dignity.

But even here it does not follow that because a life has been wrong
the new life that begins must be far as the poles asunder from the old.
Every sort of experience that has ever come to a human being is in the
self that he brings to God, and there is no reason why a knowledge
of evil ways should not determine the path of duty. No one can better
devise protections against vices than those who have practised them;
none know temptations better than those who have fallen. If a man has
followed an evil trade, it becomes him to use his knowledge of the
tricks of that trade to help end it. He knows the charities it may claim
and the remedies it needs. . . .

A very interesting case to discuss in relation to this question of
adjustment is that of the barrister. A practising barrister under
contemporary conditions does indeed give most typically the opportunity
for examining the relation of an ordinary self-respecting worldly life,
to life under the dispensation of God discovered. A barrister is
usually a man of some energy and ambition, his honour is moulded by
the traditions of an ancient and antiquated profession, instinctively
self-preserving and yet with a real desire for consistency and respect.
As a profession it has been greedy and defensively conservative, but it
has never been shameless nor has it ever broken faith with its own large
and selfish, but quite definite, propositions. It has never for instance
had the shamelessness of such a traditionless and undisciplined class
as the early factory organisers. It has never had the dull incoherent
wickedness of the sort of men who exploit drunkenness and the turf. It
offends within limits. Barristers can be, and are, disbarred. But it is
now a profession extraordinarily out of date; its code of honour derives
from a time of cruder and lower conceptions of human relationship. It
apprehends the State as a mere "ring" kept about private disputations;
it has not begun to move towards the modern conception of the collective
enterprise as the determining criterion of human conduct. It sees its
business as a mere play upon the rules of a game between man and man, or
between men and men. They haggle, they dispute, they inflict and suffer
wrongs, they evade dues, and are liable or entitled to penalties and
compensations. The primary business of the law is held to be decision in
these wrangles, and as wrangling is subject to artistic elaboration, the
business of the barrister is the business of a professional wrangler; he
is a bravo in wig and gown who fights the duels of ordinary men because
they are incapable, very largely on account of the complexities of legal
procedure, of fighting for themselves. His business is never to explore
any fundamental right in the matter. His business is to say all that can
be said for his client, and to conceal or minimise whatever can be said
against his client. The successful promoted advocate, who in Britain
and the United States of America is the judge, and whose habits and
interests all incline him to disregard the realities of the case in
favour of the points in the forensic game, then adjudicates upon the
contest. . . .

Now this condition of things is clearly incompatible with the modern
conception of the world as becoming a divine kingdom. When the world is
openly and confessedly the kingdom of God, the law court will exist only
to adjust the differing views of men as to the manner of their service
to God; the only right of action one man will have against another will
be that he has been prevented or hampered or distressed by the other in
serving God. The idea of the law court will have changed entirely from a
place of dispute, exaction and vengeance, to a place of adjustment. The
individual or some state organisation will plead ON BEHALF OF THE COMMON
GOOD either against some state official or state regulation, or against
the actions or inaction of another individual. This is the only sort of
legal proceedings compatible with the broad beliefs of the new faith.
. . . Every religion that becomes ascendant, in so far as it is not
otherworldly, must necessarily set its stamp upon the methods and
administration of the law. That this was not the case with Christianity
is one of the many contributory aspects that lead one to the conviction
that it was not Christianity that took possession of the Roman empire,
but an imperial adventurer who took possession of an all too complaisant
Christianity.

Reverting now from these generalisations to the problem of the religious
from which they arose, it will have become evident that the essential
work of anyone who is conversant with the existing practice and
literature of the law and whose natural abilities are forensic, will lie
in the direction of reconstructing the theory and practice of the law
in harmony with modern conceptions, of making that theory and practice
clear and plain to ordinary men, of reforming the abuses of the
profession by working for the separation of bar and judiciary, for the
amalgamation of the solicitors and the barristers, and the like needed
reforms. These are matters that will probably only be properly set right
by a quickening of conscience among lawyers themselves. Of no class of
men is the help and service so necessary to the practical establishment
of God's kingdom, as of men learned and experienced in the law. And
there is no reason why for the present an advocate should not continue
to plead in the courts, provided he does his utmost only to handle cases
in which he believes he can serve the right. Few righteous cases are
ill-served by a frank disposition on the part of lawyer and client
to put everything before the court. Thereby of course there arises a
difficult case of conscience. What if a lawyer, believing his client to
be in the right, discovers him to be in the wrong? He cannot throw up
the case unless he has been scandalously deceived, because so he would
betray the confidence his client has put in him to "see him through." He
has a right to "give himself away," but not to "give away" his client
in this fashion. If he has a chance of a private consultation I think he
ought to do his best to make his client admit the truth of the case and
give in, but failing this he has no right to be virtuous on behalf of
another. No man may play God to another; he may remonstrate, but that
is the limit of his right. He must respect a confidence, even if it is
purely implicit and involuntary. I admit that here the barrister is in a
cleft stick, and that he must see the business through according to the
confidence his client has put in him--and afterwards be as sorry as he
may be if an injustice ensues. And also I would suggest a lawyer
may with a fairly good conscience defend a guilty man as if he were
innocent, to save him from unjustly heavy penalties. . . .

This comparatively full discussion of the barrister's problem has been
embarked upon because it does bring in, in a very typical fashion,
just those uncertainties and imperfections that abound in real life.
Religious conviction gives us a general direction, but it stands aside
from many of these entangled struggles in the jungle of conscience.
Practice is often easier than a rule. In practice a lawyer will know
far more accurately than a hypothetical case can indicate, how far he is
bound to see his client through, and how far he may play the keeper of
his client's conscience. And nearly every day there happens instances
where the most subtle casuistry will fail and the finger of conscience
point unhesitatingly. One may have worried long in the preparation and
preliminaries of the issue, one may bring the case at last into the
final court of conscience in an apparently hopeless tangle. Then
suddenly comes decision.

The procedure of that silent, lit, and empty court in which a man states
his case to God, is very simple and perfect. The excuses and the special
pleading shrivel and vanish. In a little while the case lies bare and
plain.



8. THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE


The question of oaths of allegiance, acts of acquiescence in existing
governments, and the like, is one that arises at once with the
acceptance of God as the supreme and real King of the Earth. At the
worst Caesar is a usurper, a satrap claiming to be sovereign; at the
best he is provisional. Modern casuistry makes no great trouble for the
believing public official. The chief business of any believer is to do
the work for which he is best fitted, and since all state affairs are
to become the affairs of God's kingdom it is of primary importance that
they should come into the hands of God's servants. It is scarcely less
necessary to a believing man with administrative gifts that he should be
in the public administration, than that he should breathe and eat. And
whatever oath or the like to usurper church or usurper king has been
set up to bar access to service, is an oath imposed under duress. If it
cannot be avoided it must be taken rather than that a man should become
unserviceable. All such oaths are unfair and foolish things. They
exclude no scoundrels; they are appeals to superstition. Whenever an
opportunity occurs for the abolition of an oath, the servant of God will
seize it, but where the oath is unavoidable he will take it.

The service of God is not to achieve a delicate consistency of
statement; it is to do as much as one can of God's work.



9. THE PRIEST AND THE CREED


It may be doubted if this line of reasoning regarding the official and
his oath can be extended to excuse the priest or pledged minister of
religion who finds that faith in the true God has ousted his formal
beliefs.

This has been a frequent and subtle moral problem in the intellectual
life of the last hundred years. It has been increasingly difficult for
any class of reading, talking, and discussing people such as are the
bulk of the priesthoods of the Christian churches to escape hearing and
reading the accumulated criticism of the Trinitarian theology and of the
popularly accepted story of man's fall and salvation. Some have no doubt
defeated this universal and insidious critical attack entirely, and
honestly established themselves in a right-down acceptance of the
articles and disciplines to which they have subscribed and of the
creeds they profess and repeat. Some have recanted and abandoned their
positions in the priesthood. But a great number have neither resisted
the bacillus of criticism nor left the churches to which they are
attached. They have adopted compromises, they have qualified their
creeds with modifying footnotes of essential repudiation; they
have decided that plain statements are metaphors and have undercut,
transposed, and inverted the most vital points of the vulgarly accepted
beliefs. One may find within the Anglican communion, Arians, Unitarians,
Atheists, disbelievers in immortality, attenuators of miracles; there
is scarcely a doubt or a cavil that has not found a lodgment within the
ample charity of the English Establishment. I have been interested to
hear one distinguished Canon deplore that "they" did not identify the
Logos with the third instead of the second Person of the Trinity, and
another distinguished Catholic apologist declare his indifference to
the "historical Jesus." Within most of the Christian communions one may
believe anything or nothing, provided only that one does not call too
public an attention to one's eccentricity. The late Rev. Charles Voysey,
for example, preached plainly in his church at Healaugh against the
divinity of Christ, unhindered. It was only when he published his
sermons under the provocative title of "The Sling and the Stone," and
caused an outcry beyond the limits of his congregation, that he was
indicted and deprived.

Now the reasons why these men do not leave the ministry or priesthood in
which they find themselves are often very plausible. It is probable that
in very few cases is the retention of stipend or incumbency a conscious
dishonesty. At the worst it is mitigated by thought for wife or child.
It has only been during very exceptional phases of religious development
and controversy that beliefs have been really sharp. A creed, like a
coin, it may be argued, loses little in practical value because it is
worn, or bears the image of a vanished king. The religious life is a
reality that has clothed itself in many garments, and the concern of
the priest or minister is with the religious life and not with the poor
symbols that may indeed pretend to express, but do as a matter of fact
no more than indicate, its direction. It is quite possible to maintain
that the church and not the creed is the real and valuable instrument of
religion, that the religious life is sustained not by its propositions
but by its routines. Anyone who seeks the intimate discussion of
spiritual things with professional divines, will find this is the
substance of the case for the ecclesiastical sceptic. His church, he
will admit, mumbles its statement of truth, but where else is truth?
What better formulae are to be found for ineffable things? And
meanwhile--he does good.

That may be a valid defence before a man finds God. But we who profess
the worship and fellowship of the living God deny that religion is a
matter of ineffable things. The way of God is plain and simple and easy
to understand.

Therewith the whole position of the conforming sceptic is changed. If
a professional religious has any justification at all for his
professionalism it is surely that he proclaims the nearness and
greatness of God. And these creeds and articles and orthodoxies are not
proclamations but curtains, they are a darkening and confusion of what
should be crystal clear. What compensatory good can a priest pretend
to do when his primary business is the truth and his method a lie? The
oaths and incidental conformities of men who wish to serve God in the
state are on a different footing altogether from the falsehood and
mischief of one who knows the true God and yet recites to a trustful
congregation, foists upon a trustful congregation, a misleading and
ill-phrased Levantine creed.

Such is the line of thought which will impose the renunciation of his
temporalities and a complete cessation of services upon every ordained
priest and minister as his first act of faith. Once that he has truly
realised God, it becomes impossible for him ever to repeat his creed
again. His course seems plain and clear. It becomes him to stand up
before the flock he has led in error, and to proclaim the being and
nature of the one true God. He must be explicit to the utmost of his
powers. Then he may await his expulsion. It may be doubted whether it is
sufficient for him to go away silently, making false excuses or none at
all for his retreat. He has to atone for the implicit acquiescences of
his conforming years.



10. THE UNIVERSALISM OF GOD


Are any sorts of people shut off as if by inherent necessity from God?

This is, so to speak, one of the standing questions of theology; it
reappears with slight changes of form at every period of religious
interest, it is for example the chief issue between the Arminian and the
Calvinist. From its very opening proposition modern religion sweeps past
and far ahead of the old Arminian teachings of Wesleyans and Methodists,
in its insistence upon the entirely finite nature of God. Arminians seem
merely to have insisted that God has conditioned himself, and by his
own free act left men free to accept or reject salvation. To the realist
type of mind--here as always I use "realist" in its proper sense as
the opposite of nominalist--to the old-fashioned, over-exact and
over-accentuating type of mind, such ways of thinking seem vague
and unsatisfying. Just as it distresses the more downright kind of
intelligence with a feeling of disloyalty to admit that God is not
Almighty, so it troubles the same sort of intelligence to hear that
there is no clear line to be drawn between the saved and the lost.
Realists like an exclusive flavour in their faith. Moreover, it is a
natural weakness of humanity to be forced into extreme positions by
argument. It is probable, as I have already suggested, that the absolute
attributes of God were forced upon Christianity under the stresses
of propaganda, and it is probable that the theory of a super-human
obstinancy beyond salvation arose out of the irritations natural to
theological debate. It is but a step from the realisation that there are
people absolutely unable or absolutely unwilling to see God as we see
him, to the conviction that they are therefore shut off from God by an
invincible soul blindness.

It is very easy to believe that other people are essentially damned.

Beyond the little world of our sympathies and comprehension there are
those who seem inaccessible to God by any means within our experience.
They are people answering to the "hard-hearted," to the "stiff-necked
generation" of the Hebrew prophets. They betray and even confess
to standards that seem hopelessly base to us. They show themselves
incapable of any disinterested enthusiasm for beauty or truth or
goodness. They are altogether remote from intelligent sacrifice. To
every test they betray vileness of texture; they are mean, cold, wicked.
There are people who seem to cheat with a private self-approval, who are
ever ready to do harsh and cruel things, whose use for social feeling
is the malignant boycott, and for prosperity, monopolisation and
humiliating display; who seize upon religion and turn it into
persecution, and upon beauty to torment it on the altars of some joyless
vice. We cannot do with such souls; we have no use for them, and it is
very easy indeed to step from that persuasion to the belief that God has
no use for them.

And besides these base people there are the stupid people and the people
with minds so poor in texture that they cannot even grasp the few broad
and simple ideas that seem necessary to the salvation we experience, who
lapse helplessly into fetishistic and fearful conceptions of God,
and are apparently quite incapable of distinguishing between what is
practically and what is spiritually good.

It is an easy thing to conclude that the only way to God is our way to
God, that he is the privilege of a finer and better sort to which we
of course belong; that he is no more the God of the card-sharper or the
pickpocket or the "smart" woman or the loan-monger or the village
oaf than he is of the swine in the sty. But are we justified in
thus limiting God to the measure of our moral and intellectual
understandings? Because some people seem to me steadfastly and
consistently base or hopelessly and incurably dull and confused, does
it follow that there are not phases, albeit I have never chanced to see
them, of exaltation in the one case and illumination in the other? And
may I not be a little restricting my perception of Good? While I have
been ready enough to pronounce this or that person as being, so far as
I was concerned, thoroughly damnable or utterly dull, I find a curious
reluctance to admit the general proposition which is necessary for
these instances. It is possible that the difference between Arminian and
Calvinist is a difference of essential intellectual temperament rather
than of theoretical conviction. I am temperamentally Arminian as I am
temperamentally Nominalist. I feel that it must be in the nature of God
to attempt all souls. There must be accessibilities I can only suspect,
and accessibilities of which I know nothing.

Yet here is a consideration pointing rather the other way. If you think,
as you must think, that you yourself can be lost to God and damned, then
I cannot see how you can avoid thinking that other people can be damned.
But that is not to believe that there are people damned at the outset by
their moral and intellectual insufficiency; that is not to make out that
there is a class of essential and incurable spiritual defectives. The
religious life preceded clear religious understanding and extends far
beyond its range.

In my own case I perceive that in spite of the value I attach to true
belief, the reality of religion is not an intellectual thing. The
essential religious fact is in another than the mental sphere. I am
passionately anxious to have the idea of God clear in my own mind, and
to make my beliefs plain and clear to other people, and particularly
to other people who may seem to be feeling with me; I do perceive that
error is evil if only because a faith based on confused conceptions
and partial understandings may suffer irreparable injury through the
collapse of its substratum of ideas. I doubt if faith can be complete
and enduring if it is not secured by the definite knowledge of the true
God. Yet I have also to admit that I find the form of my own religious
emotion paralleled by people with whom I have no intellectual sympathy
and no agreement in phrase or formula at all.

There is for example this practical identity of religious feeling and
this discrepancy of interpretation between such an inquirer as myself
and a convert of the Salvation Army. Here, clothing itself in phrases
and images of barbaric sacrifice, of slaughtered lambs and fountains of
precious blood, a most repulsive and incomprehensible idiom to me, and
expressing itself by shouts, clangour, trumpeting, gesticulations, and
rhythmic pacings that stun and dismay my nerves, I find, the same object
sought, release from self, and the same end, the end of identification
with the immortal, successfully if perhaps rather insecurely achieved.
I see God indubitably present in these excitements, and I see
personalities I could easily have misjudged as too base or too dense for
spiritual understandings, lit by the manifest reflection of divinity.
One may be led into the absurdest underestimates of religious
possibilities if one estimates people only coldly and in the light of
everyday life. There is a sub-intellectual religious life which, very
conceivably, when its utmost range can be examined, excludes nothing
human from religious cooperation, which will use any words to its tune,
which takes its phrasing ready-made from the world about it, as it takes
the street for its temple, and yet which may be at its inner point in
the directest contact with God. Religion may suffer from aphasia and
still be religion; it may utter misleading or nonsensical words and yet
intend and convey the truth. The methods of the Salvation Army are older
than doctrinal Christianity, and may long survive it. Men and women may
still chant of Beulah Land and cry out in the ecstasy of salvation; the
tambourine, that modern revival of the thrilling Alexandrine sistrum,
may still stir dull nerves to a first apprehension of powers and a call
beyond the immediate material compulsion of life, when the creeds of
Christianity are as dead as the lore of the Druids.

The emancipation of mankind from obsolete theories and formularies may
be accompanied by great tides of moral and emotional release among types
and strata that by the standards of a trained and explicit intellectual,
may seem spiritually hopeless. It is not necessary to imagine the whole
world critical and lucid in order to imagine the whole world unified in
religious sentiment, comprehending the same phrases and coming together
regardless of class and race and quality, in the worship and service
of the true God. The coming kingship of God if it is to be more than
hieratic tyranny must have this universality of appeal. As the head
grows clear the body will turn in the right direction. To the mass of
men modern religion says, "This is the God it has always been in your
nature to apprehend."



11. GOD AND THE LOVE AND STATUS OF WOMEN


Now that we are discussing the general question of individual conduct,
it will be convenient to take up again and restate in that relationship,
propositions already made very plainly in the second and third chapters.
Here there are several excellent reasons for a certain amount of
deliberate repetition. . . .

All the mystical relations of chastity, virginity, and the like with
religion, those questions of physical status that play so large a part
in most contemporary religions, have disappeared from modern faith. Let
us be as clear as possible upon this. God is concerned by the health and
fitness and vigour of his servants; we owe him our best and utmost; but
he has no special concern and no special preferences or commandments
regarding sexual things.

Christ, it is manifest, was of the modern faith in these matters, he
welcomed the Magdalen, neither would he condemn the woman taken in
adultery. Manifestly corruption and disease were not to stand between
him and those who sought God in him. But the Christianity of the creeds,
in this as in so many respects, does not rise to the level of its
founder, and it is as necessary to repeat to-day as though the name
of Christ had not been ascendant for nineteen centuries, that sex is
a secondary thing to religion, and sexual status of no account in
the presence of God. It follows quite logically that God does not
discriminate between man and woman in any essential things. We leave our
individuality behind us when we come into the presence of God. Sex is
not disavowed but forgotten. Just as one's last meal is forgotten--which
also is a difference between the religious moment of modern faith and
certain Christian sacraments. You are a believer and God is at hand
to you; heed not your state; reach out to him and he is there. In the
moment of religion you are human; it matters not what else you are,
male or female, clean or unclean, Hebrew or Gentile, bond or free. It
is AFTER the moment of religion that we become concerned about our state
and the manner in which we use ourselves.

We have to follow our reason as our sole guide in our individual
treatment of all such things as food and health and sex. God is the
king of the whole world, he is the owner of our souls and bodies and all
things. He is not particularly concerned about any aspect, because he is
concerned about every aspect. We have to make the best use of ourselves
for his kingdom; that is our rule of life. That rule means neither
painful nor frantic abstinences nor any forced way of living. Purity,
cleanliness, health, none of these things are for themselves, they are
for use; none are magic, all are means. The sword must be sharp and
clean. That does not mean that we are perpetually to sharpen and clean
it--which would weaken and waste the blade. The sword must neither be
drawn constantly nor always rusting in its sheath. Those who have had
the wits and soul to come to God, will have the wits and soul to find
out and know what is waste, what is vanity, what is the happiness that
begets strength of body and spirit, what is error, where vice begins,
and to avoid and repent and recoil from all those things that degrade.
These are matters not of the rule of life but of the application
of life. They must neither be neglected nor made disproportionally
important.

To the believer, relationship with God is the supreme relationship. It
is difficult to imagine how the association of lovers and friends can
be very fine and close and good unless the two who love are each also
linked to God, so that through their moods and fluctuations and
the changes of years they can be held steadfast by his undying
steadfastness. But it has been felt by many deep-feeling people that
there is so much kindred between the love and trust of husband and wife
and the feeling we have for God, that it is reasonable to consider the
former also as a sacred thing. They do so value that close love of mated
man and woman, they are so intent upon its permanence and completeness
and to lift the dear relationship out of the ruck of casual and
transitory things, that they want to bring it, as it were, into the very
presence and assent of God. There are many who dream and desire that
they are as deeply and completely mated as this, many more who would
fain be so, and some who are. And from this comes the earnest desire to
make marriage sacramental and the attempt to impose upon all the world
the outward appearance, the restrictions, the pretence at least of such
a sacramental union.

There may be such a quasi-sacramental union in many cases, but only
after years can one be sure of it; it is not to be brought about by
vows and promises but by an essential kindred and cleaving of body and
spirit; and it concerns only the two who can dare to say they have it,
and God. And the divine thing in marriage, the thing that is most like
the love of God, is, even then, not the relationship of the man and
woman as man and woman but the comradeship and trust and mutual help
and pity that joins them. No doubt that from the mutual necessities of
bodily love and the common adventure, the necessary honesties and helps
of a joint life, there springs the stoutest, nearest, most enduring and
best of human companionship; perhaps only upon that root can the best of
mortal comradeship be got; but it does not follow that the mere ordinary
coming together and pairing off of men and women is in itself divine or
sacramental or anything of the sort. Being in love is a condition that
may have its moments of sublime exaltation, but it is for the most part
an experience far down the scale below divine experience; it is often
love only in so far as it shares the name with better things; it is
greed, it is admiration, it is desire, it is the itch for excitement,
it is the instinct for competition, it is lust, it is curiosity, it is
adventure, it is jealousy, it is hate. On a hundred scores 'lovers'
meet and part. Thereby some few find true love and the spirit of God in
themselves or others.

Lovers may love God in one another; I do not deny it. That is no reason
why the imitation and outward form of this great happiness should be
made an obligation upon all men and women who are attracted by one
another, nor why it should be woven into the essentials of religion.
For women much more than for men is this confusion dangerous, lest a
personal love should shape and dominate their lives instead of God. "He
for God only; she for God in him," phrases the idea of Milton and of
ancient Islam; it is the formula of sexual infatuation, a formula quite
easily inverted, as the end of Goethe's Faust ("The woman soul leadeth
us upward and on") may witness. The whole drift of modern religious
feeling is against this exaggeration of sexual feeling, these moods of
sexual slavishness, in spiritual things. Between the healthy love
of ordinary mortal lovers in love and the love of God, there is
an essential contrast and opposition in this, that preference,
exclusiveness, and jealousy seem to be in the very nature of the former
and are absolutely incompatible with the latter. The former is the
intensest realisation of which our individualities are capable; the
latter is the way of escape from the limitations of individuality. It
may be true that a few men and more women do achieve the completest
unselfishness and self-abandonment in earthly love. So the poets and
romancers tell us. If so, it is that by an imaginative perversion they
have given to some attractive person a worship that should be reserved
for God and a devotion that is normally evoked only by little children
in their mother's heart. It is not the way between most of the men and
women one meets in this world.

But between God and the believer there is no other way, there is nothing
else, but self-surrender and the ending of self.



CHAPTER THE SIXTH

MODERN IDEAS OF SIN AND DAMNATION



1. THE BIOLOGICAL EQUIVALENT OF SIN


If the reader who is unfamiliar with scientific things will obtain and
read Metchnikoff's "Nature of Man," he will find there an interesting
summary of the biological facts that bear upon and destroy the delusion
that there is such a thing as individual perfection, that there is even
ideal perfection for humanity. With an abundance of convincing
instances Professor Metchnikoff demonstrates that life is a system of
"disharmonies," capable of no perfect way, that there is no "perfect"
dieting, no "perfect" sexual life, no "perfect" happiness, no "perfect"
conduct. He releases one from the arbitrary but all too easy assumption
that there is even an ideal "perfection" in organic life. He sweeps out
of the mind with all the confidence and conviction of a physiological
specialist, any idea that there is a perfect man or a conceivable
perfect man. It is in the nature of every man to fall short at every
point from perfection. From the biological point of view we are as
individuals a series of involuntary "tries" on the part of an imperfect
species towards an unknown end.

Our spiritual nature follows our bodily as a glove follows a hand.
We are disharmonious beings and salvation no more makes an end to the
defects of our souls than it makes an end to the decay of our teeth or
to those vestigial structures of our body that endanger our physical
welfare. Salvation leaves us still disharmonious, and adds not an inch
to our spiritual and moral stature.



2. WHAT IS DAMNATION?


Let us now take up the question of what is Sin? and what we mean by the
term "damnation," in the light of this view of human reality. Most of
the great world religions are as clear as Professor Metchnikoff that
life in the world is a tangle of disharmonies, and in most cases they
supply a more or less myth-like explanation, they declare that evil is
one side of the conflict between Ahriman and Ormazd, or that it is the
punishment of an act of disobedience, of the fall of man and world alike
from a state of harmony. Their case, like his, is that THIS world is
damned.

We do not find the belief that superposed upon the miseries of this
world there are the still bitterer miseries of punishments after death,
so nearly universal. The endless punishments of hell appear to be
an exploit of theory; they have a superadded appearance even in the
Christian system; the same common tendency to superlatives and absolutes
that makes men ashamed to admit that God is finite, makes them seek to
enhance the merits of their Saviour by the device of everlasting fire.
Conquest over the sorrow of life and the fear of death do not seem to
them sufficient for Christ's glory.

Now the turning round of the modern mind from a conception of the
universe as something derived deductively from the past to a conception
of it as something gathering itself adventurously towards the future,
involves a release from the supposed necessity to tell a story and
explain why. Instead comes the inquiry, "To what end?" We can say
without mental discomfort, these disharmonies are here, this damnation
is here--inexplicably. We can, without any distressful inquiry into
ultimate origins, bring our minds to the conception of a spontaneous and
developing God arising out of those stresses in our hearts and in the
universe, and arising to overcome them. Salvation for the individual
is escape from the individual distress at disharmony and the individual
defeat by death, into the Kingdom of God. And damnation can be nothing
more and nothing less than the failure or inability or disinclination to
make that escape.

Something of that idea of damnation as a lack of the will for salvation
has crept at a number of points into contemporary religious thought. It
was the fine fancy of Swedenborg that the damned go to their own hells
of their own accord. It underlies a queer poem, "Simpson," by that
interesting essayist upon modern Christianity, Mr. Clutton Brock, which
I have recently read. Simpson dies and goes to hell--it is rather like
the Cromwell Road--and approves of it very highly, and then and then
only is he completely damned. Not to realise that one can be damned is
certainly to be damned; such is Mr. Brock's idea. It is his definition
of damnation. Satisfaction with existing things is damnation. It is
surrender to limitation; it is acquiescence in "disharmony"; it is
making peace with that enemy against whom God fights for ever.

(But whether there are indeed Simpsons who acquiesce always and for ever
remains for me, as I have already confessed in the previous chapter,
a quite open question. My Arminian temperament turns me from the
Calvinistic conclusion of Mr. Brock's satire.)



3. SIN IS NOT DAMNATION


Now the question of sin will hardly concern those damned and lost by
nature, if such there be. Sin is not the same thing as damnation, as
we have just defined damnation. Damnation is a state, but sin is an
incident. One is an essential and the other an incidental separation
from God. It is possible to sin without being damned; and to be
damned is to be in a state when sin scarcely matters, like ink upon a
blackamoor. You cannot have questions of more or less among absolute
things.

It is the amazing and distressful discovery of every believer so soon as
the first exaltation of belief is past, that one does not remain always
in touch with God. At first it seems incredible that one should ever
have any motive again that is not also God's motive. Then one
finds oneself caught unawares by a base impulse. We discover
that discontinuousness of our apparently homogeneous selves, the
unincorporated and warring elements that seemed at first altogether
absent from the synthesis of conversion. We are tripped up by
forgetfulness, by distraction, by old habits, by tricks of appearance.
There come dull patches of existence; those mysterious obliterations of
one's finer sense that are due at times to the little minor poisons one
eats or drinks, to phases of fatigue, ill-health and bodily disorder, or
one is betrayed by some unanticipated storm of emotion, brewed deep in
the animal being and released by any trifling accident, such as personal
jealousy or lust, or one is relaxed by contentment into vanity.
All these rebel forces of our ill-coordinated selves, all these
"disharmonies," of the inner being, snatch us away from our devotion to
God's service, carry us off to follies, offences, unkindness, waste, and
leave us compromised, involved, and regretful, perplexed by a hundred
difficulties we have put in our own way back to God.

This is the personal problem of Sin. Here prayer avails; here God can
help us. From God comes the strength to repent and make such reparation
as we can, to begin the battle again further back and lower down. From
God comes the power to anticipate the struggle with one's rebel self,
and to resist and prevail over it.



4. THE SINS OF THE INSANE


An extreme case is very serviceable in such a discussion as this.

It happens that the author carries on a correspondence with several
lunatics in asylums. There is a considerable freedom of notepaper
in these institutions; the outgoing letters are no doubt censored or
selected in some way, but a proportion at any rate are allowed to go out
to their addresses. As a journalist who signs his articles and as the
author of various books of fiction, as a frequent NAME, that is, to any
one much forced back upon reading, the writer is particularly accessible
to this type of correspondent. The letters come, some manifesting
a hopeless disorder that permits of no reply, but some being the
expression of minds overlaid not at all offensively by a web of fantasy,
and some (and these are the more touching ones and the ones that most
concern us now) as sanely conceived and expressed as any letters could
be. They are written by people living lives very like the lives of us
who are called "sane," except that they lift to a higher excitement and
fall to a lower depression, and that these extremer phases of mania or
melancholia slip the leash of mental consistency altogether and take
abnormal forms. They tap deep founts of impulse, such as we of the safer
ways of mediocrity do but glimpse under the influence of drugs, or in
dreams and rare moments of controllable extravagance. Then the insane
become "glorious," or they become murderous, or they become suicidal.
All these letter-writers in confinement have convinced their
fellow-creatures by some extravagance that they are a danger to
themselves or others.

The letters that come from such types written during their sane
intervals, are entirely sane. Some, who are probably unaware--I think
they should know--of the offences or possibilities that justify their
incarceration, write with a certain resentment at their position; others
are entirely acquiescent, but one or two complain of the neglect of
friends and relations. But all are as manifestly capable of religion and
of the religious life as any other intelligent persons during the
lucid interludes that make up nine-tenths perhaps of their lives. . . .
Suppose now one of these cases, and suppose that the infirmity takes
the form of some cruel, disgusting, or destructive disposition that may
become at times overwhelming, and you have our universal trouble with
sinful tendency, as it were magnified for examination. It is clear that
the mania which defines his position must be the primary if not the
cardinal business in the life of a lunatic, but his problem with that
is different not in kind but merely in degree from the problem of
lusts, vanities, and weaknesses in what we call normal lives. It is an
unconquered tract, a great rebel province in his being, which refuses to
serve God and tries to prevent him serving God, and succeeds at times in
wresting his capital out of his control. But his relationship to that
is the same relationship as ours to the backward and insubordinate
parishes, criminal slums, and disorderly houses in our own private
texture.

It is clear that the believer who is a lunatic is, as it were, only the
better part of himself. He serves God with this unconquered disposition
in him, like a man who, whatever else he is and does, is obliged to be
the keeper of an untrustworthy and wicked animal. His beast gets loose.
His only resort is to warn those about him when he feels that jangling
or excitement of the nerves which precedes its escapes, to limit its
range, to place weapons beyond its reach. And there are plenty of human
beings very much in his case, whose beasts have never got loose or have
got caught back before their essential insanity was apparent. And there
are those uncertifiable lunatics we call men and women of "impulse"
and "strong passions." If perhaps they have more self-control than the
really mad, yet it happens oftener with them that the whole intelligent
being falls under the dominion of evil. The passion scarcely less than
the obsession may darken the whole moral sky. Repentance and atonement;
nothing less will avail them after the storm has passed, and the
sedulous preparation of defences and palliatives against the return of
the storm.

This discussion of the lunatic's case gives us indeed, usefully coarse
and large, the lines for the treatment of every human weakness by the
servants of God. A "weakness," just like the lunatic's mania, becomes a
particular charge under God, a special duty for the person it affects.
He has to minimise it, to isolate it, to keep it out of mischief. If he
can he must adopt preventive measures. . . .

These passions and weaknesses that get control of us hamper our
usefulness to God, they are an incessant anxiety and distress to us,
they wound our self-respect and make us incomprehensible to many who
would trust us, they discredit the faith we profess. If they break
through and break through again it is natural and proper that men and
women should cease to believe in our faith, cease to work with us or to
meet us frankly. . . . Our sins do everything evil to us and through us
except separate us from God.

Yet let there be no mistake about one thing. Here prayer is a power.
Here God can indeed work miracles. A man with the light of God in his
heart can defeat vicious habits, rise again combative and undaunted
after a hundred falls, escape from the grip of lusts and revenges, make
head against despair, thrust back the very onset of madness. He is still
the same man he was before he came to God, still with his libidinous,
vindictive, boastful, or indolent vein; but now his will to prevail
over those qualities can refer to an exterior standard and an external
interest, he can draw upon a strength, almost boundless, beyond his own.



5. BELIEVE, AND YOU ARE SAVED


But be a sin great or small, it cannot damn a man once he has found God.
You may kill and hang for it, you may rob or rape; the moment you truly
repent and set yourself to such atonement and reparation as is possible
there remains no barrier between you and God. Directly you cease to hide
or deny or escape, and turn manfully towards the consequences and the
setting of things right, you take hold again of the hand of God. Though
you sin seventy times seven times, God will still forgive the poor rest
of you. Nothing but utter blindness of the spirit can shut a man off
from God.

There is nothing one can suffer, no situation so unfortunate, that it
can shut off one who has the thought of God, from God. If you but lift
up your head for a moment out of a stormy chaos of madness and cry to
him, God is there, God will not fail you. A convicted criminal, frankly
penitent, and neither obdurate nor abject, whatever the evil of his
yesterdays, may still die well and bravely on the gallows to the glory
of God. He may step straight from that death into the immortal being of
God.

This persuasion is the very essence of the religion of the true God.
There is no sin, no state that, being regretted and repented of, can
stand between God and man.



CHAPTER THE SEVENTH

THE IDEA OF A CHURCH



1. THE WORLD DAWN


As yet those who may be counted as belonging definitely to the new
religion are few and scattered and unconfessed, their realisations
are still uncertain and incomplete. But that is no augury for the
continuance of this state of affairs even for the next few decades.
There are many signs that the revival is coming very swiftly, it may be
coming as swiftly as the morning comes after a tropical night. It may
seem at present as though nothing very much were happening, except for
the fact that the old familiar constellations of theology have become
a little pallid and lost something of their multitude of points. But
nothing fades of itself. The deep stillness of the late night is broken
by a stirring, and the morning star of creedless faith, the last and
brightest of the stars, the star that owes its light to the coming sun
is in the sky.

There is a stirring and a movement. There is a stir, like the stir
before a breeze. Men are beginning to speak of religion without the
bluster of the Christian formulae; they have begun to speak of God
without any reference to Omnipresence, Omniscience, Omnipotence. The
Deists and Theists of an older generation, be it noted, never did that.
Their "Supreme Being" repudiated nothing. He was merely the whittled
stump of the Trinity. It is in the last few decades that the western
mind has slipped loose from this absolutist conception of God that has
dominated the intelligence of Christendom at least, for many centuries.
Almost unconsciously the new thought is taking a course that will lead
it far away from the moorings of Omnipotence. It is like a ship that
has slipped its anchors and drifts, still sleeping, under the pale and
vanishing stars, out to the open sea. . . .



2. CONVERGENT RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS


In quite a little while the whole world may be alive with this renascent
faith.

For emancipation from the Trinitarian formularies and from a belief in
an infinite God means not merely a great revivification of minds trained
under the decadence of orthodox Christianity, minds which have hitherto
been hopelessly embarrassed by the choice between pseudo-Christian
religion or denial, but also it opens the way towards the completest
understanding and sympathy and participation with the kindred movements
for release and for an intensification of the religious life, that are
going on outside the sphere of the Christian tradition and influence
altogether. Allusion has already been made to the sympathetic devotional
poetry of Rabindranath Tagore; he stands for a movement in Brahminism
parallel with and assimilable to the worship of the true God of mankind.

It is too often supposed that the religious tendency of the East is
entirely towards other-worldness, to a treatment of this life as an evil
entanglement and of death as a release and a blessing. It is too easily
assumed that Eastern teaching is wholly concerned with renunciation, not
merely of self but of being, with the escape from all effort of any sort
into an exalted vacuity. This is indeed neither the spirit of China nor
of Islam nor of the every-day life of any people in the world. It is not
the spirit of the Sikh nor of these newer developments of Hindu thought.
It has never been the spirit of Japan. To-day less than ever does Asia
seem disposed to give up life and the effort of life. Just as readily as
Europeans, do the Asiatics reach out their arms to that fuller life we
can live, that greater intensity of existence, to which we can attain
by escaping from ourselves. All mankind is seeking God. There is not
a nation nor a city in the globe where men are not being urged at this
moment by the spirit of God in them towards the discovery of God. This
is not an age of despair but an age of hope in Asia as in all the world
besides.

Islam is undergoing a process of revision closely parallel to that
which ransacks Christianity. Tradition and mediaeval doctrines are being
thrust aside in a similar way. There is much probing into the spirit and
intention of the Founder. The time is almost ripe for a heart-searching
Dialogue of the Dead, "How we settled our religions for ever and ever,"
between, let us say, Eusebius of Caesarea and one of Nizam-al-Mulk's
tame theologians. They would be drawn together by the same tribulations;
they would be in the closest sympathy against the temerity of the
moderns; they would have a common courtliness. The Quran is but little
read by Europeans; it is ignorantly supposed to contain many things that
it does not contain; there is much confusion in people's minds between
its text and the ancient Semitic traditions and usages retained by its
followers; in places it may seem formless and barbaric; but what it has
chiefly to tell of is the leadership of one individualised militant God
who claims the rule of the whole world, who favours neither rank nor
race, who would lead men to righteousness. It is much more free from
sacramentalism, from vestiges of the ancient blood sacrifice, and its
associated sacerdotalism, than Christianity. The religion that
will presently sway mankind can be reached more easily from that
starting-point than from the confused mysteries of Trinitarian theology.
Islam was never saddled with a creed. With the very name "Islam"
(submission to God) there is no quarrel for those who hold the new
faith. . . .

All the world over there is this stirring in the dry bones of the old
beliefs. There is scarcely a religion that has not its Bahaism, its
Modernists, its Brahmo Somaj, its "religion without theology," its
attempts to escape from old forms and hampering associations to that
living and world-wide spiritual reality upon which the human mind almost
instinctively insists. . . .

It is the same God we all seek; he becomes more and more plainly the
same God.

So that all this religious stir, which seems so multifold and incidental
and disconnected and confused and entirely ineffective to-day, may
be and most probably will be, in quite a few years a great flood
of religious unanimity pouring over and changing all human affairs,
sweeping away the old priesthoods and tabernacles and symbols and
shrines, the last crumb of the Orphic victim and the last rag of the
Serapeum, and turning all men about into one direction, as the ships and
houseboats swing round together in some great river with the uprush of
the tide. . . .



3. CAN THERE BE A TRUE CHURCH?


Among those who are beginning to realise the differences and identities
of the revived religion that has returned to them, certain questions
of organisation and assembly are being discussed. Every new religious
development is haunted by the precedents of the religion it replaces,
and it was only to be expected that among those who have recovered their
faith there should be a search for apostles and disciples, an attempt to
determine sources and to form original congregations, especially among
people with European traditions.

These dispositions mark a relapse from understanding. They are
imitative. This time there has been no revelation here or there; there
is no claim to a revelation but simply that God has become visible. Men
have thought and sought until insensibly the fog of obsolete theology
has cleared away. There seems no need therefore for special teachers
or a special propaganda, or any ritual or observances that will seem
to insist upon differences. The Christian precedent of a church
is particularly misleading. The church with its sacraments and its
sacerdotalism is the disease of Christianity. Save for a few doubtful
interpolations there is no evidence that Christ tolerated either blood
sacrifices or the mysteries of priesthood. All these antique grossnesses
were superadded after his martyrdom. He preached not a cult but a
gospel; he sent out not medicine men but apostles.

No doubt all who believe owe an apostolic service to God. They become
naturally apostolic. As men perceive and realise God, each will be
disposed in his own fashion to call his neighbour's attention to what
he sees. The necessary elements of religion could be written on a
post card; this book, small as it is, bulks large not by what it tells
positively but because it deals with misconceptions. We may (little
doubt have I that we do) need special propagandas and organisations to
discuss errors and keep back the jungle of false ideas, to maintain free
speech and restrain the enterprise of the persecutor, but we do not want
a church to keep our faith for us. We want our faith spread, but for
that there is no need for orthodoxies and controlling organisations of
statement. It is for each man to follow his own impulse, and to speak to
his like in his own fashion.

Whatever religious congregations men may form henceforth in the name
of the true God must be for their own sakes and not to take charge of
religion.

The history of Christianity, with its encrustation and suffocation
in dogmas and usages, its dire persecutions of the faithful by the
unfaithful, its desiccation and its unlovely decay, its invasion by
robes and rites and all the tricks and vices of the Pharisees whom
Christ detested and denounced, is full of warning against the dangers of
a church. Organisation is an excellent thing for the material needs
of men, for the draining of towns, the marshalling of traffic, the
collecting of eggs, and the carrying of letters, the distribution
of bread, the notification of measles, for hygiene and economics and
suchlike affairs. The better we organise such things, the freer and
better equipped we leave men's minds for nobler purposes, for those
adventures and experiments towards God's purpose which are the reality
of life. But all organisations must be watched, for whatever is
organised can be "captured" and misused. Repentance, moreover, is the
beginning and essential of the religious life, and organisations (acting
through their secretaries and officials) never repent. God deals
only with the individual for the individual's surrender. He takes no
cognisance of committees.

Those who are most alive to the realities of living religion are most
mistrustful of this congregating tendency. To gather together is to
purchase a benefit at the price of a greater loss, to strengthen one's
sense of brotherhood by excluding the majority of mankind. Before you
know where you are you will have exchanged the spirit of God for ESPRIT
DE CORPS. You will have reinvented the SYMBOL; you will have begun to
keep anniversaries and establish sacramental ceremonies. The disposition
to form cliques and exclude and conspire against unlike people is all
too strong in humanity, to permit of its formal encouragement. Even such
organisation as is implied by a creed is to be avoided, for all living
faith coagulates as you phrase it. In this book I have not given so
much as a definite name to the faith of the true God. Organisation for
worship and collective exaltation also, it may be urged, is of little
manifest good. You cannot appoint beforehand a time and place for God to
irradiate your soul.

All these are very valid objections to the church-forming disposition.



4. ORGANISATIONS UNDER GOD


Yet still this leaves many dissatisfied. They want to shout out about
God. They want to share this great thing with all mankind.

Why should they not shout and share?

Let them express all that they desire to express in their own fashion
by themselves or grouped with their friends as they will. Let them shout
chorally if they are so disposed. Let them work in a gang if so they
can work the better. But let them guard themselves against the idea
that they can have God particularly or exclusively with them in any such
undertaking. Or that so they can express God rather than themselves.

That I think states the attitude of the modern spirit towards the idea
of a church. Mankind passes for ever out of the idolatry of altars,
away from the obscene rites of circumcision and symbolical cannibalism,
beyond the sway of the ceremonial priest. But if the modern spirit holds
that religion cannot be organised or any intermediary thrust between God
and man, that does not preclude infinite possibilities of organisation
and collective action UNDER God and within the compass of religion.
There is no reason why religious men should not band themselves the
better to attain specific ends. To borrow a term from British politics,
there is no objection to AD HOC organisations. The objection lies not
against subsidiary organisations for service but against organisations
that may claim to be comprehensive.

For example there is no reason why one should not--and in many cases
there are good reasons why one should--organise or join associations
for the criticism of religious ideas, an employment that may pass very
readily into propaganda.

Many people feel the need of prayer to resist the evil in themselves and
to keep them in mind of divine emotion. And many want not merely prayer
but formal prayer and the support of others, praying in unison. The
writer does not understand this desire or need for collective prayer
very well, but there are people who appear to do so and there is no
reason why they should not assemble for that purpose. And there is
no doubt that divine poetry, divine maxims, religious thought
finely expressed, may be heard, rehearsed, collected, published, and
distributed by associations. The desire for expression implies a sort
of assembly, a hearer at least as well as a speaker. And expression has
many forms. People with a strong artistic impulse will necessarily want
to express themselves by art when religion touches them, and many arts,
architecture and the drama for example, are collective undertakings. I
do not see why there should not be, under God, associations for building
cathedrals and suchlike great still places urgent with beauty, into
which men and women may go to rest from the clamour of the day's
confusions; I do not see why men should not make great shrines and
pictures expressing their sense of divine things, and why they should
not combine in such enterprises rather than work to fill heterogeneous
and chaotic art galleries. A wave of religious revival and religious
clarification, such as I foresee, will most certainly bring with it a
great revival of art, religious art, music, songs, and writings of
all sorts, drama, the making of shrines, praying places, temples and
retreats, the creation of pictures and sculptures. It is not necessary
to have priestcraft and an organised church for such ends. Such
enrichments of feeling and thought are part of the service of God.

And again, under God, there may be associations and fraternities
for research in pure science; associations for the teaching and
simplification of languages; associations for promoting and watching
education; associations for the discussion of political problems and
the determination of right policies. In all these ways men may multiply
their use by union. Only when associations seek to control things
of belief, to dictate formulae, restrict religious activities or the
freedom of religious thought and teaching, when they tend to subdivide
those who believe and to set up jealousies or exclusions, do they become
antagonistic to the spirit of modern religion.



5. THE STATE IS GOD'S INSTRUMENT


Because religion cannot be organised, because God is everywhere and
immediately accessible to every human being, it does not follow
that religion cannot organise every other human affair. It is indeed
essential to the idea that God is the Invisible King of this round
world and all mankind, that we should see in every government, great
and small, from the council of the world-state that is presently coming,
down to the village assembly, the instrument of God's practical control.
Religion which is free, speaking freely through whom it will, subject to
a perpetual unlimited criticism, will be the life and driving power of
the whole organised world. So that if you prefer not to say that there
will be no church, if you choose rather to declare that the world-state
is God's church, you may have it so if you will. Provided that you
leave conscience and speech and writing and teaching about divine things
absolutely free, and that you try to set no nets about God.

The world is God's and he takes it. But he himself remains freedom, and
we find our freedom in him.



THE ENVOY


So I end this compact statement of the renascent religion which I
believe to be crystallising out of the intellectual, social, and
spiritual confusions of this time. It is an account rendered. It is a
statement and record; not a theory. There is nothing in all this that
has been invented or constructed by the writer; I have been but scribe
to the spirit of my generation; I have at most assembled and put
together things and thoughts that I have come upon, have transferred the
statements of "science" into religious terminology, rejected obsolescent
definitions, and re-coordinated propositions that had drifted into
opposition. Thus, I see, ideas are developing, and thus have I written
them down. It is a secondary matter that I am convinced that this trend
of intelligent opinion is a discovery of truth. The reader is told of my
own belief merely to avoid an affectation of impartiality and aloofness.

The theogony here set forth is ancient; one can trace it appearing and
disappearing and recurring in the mutilated records of many different
schools of speculation; the conception of God as finite is one that has
been discussed very illuminatingly in recent years in the work of one I
am happy to write of as my friend and master, that very great American,
the late William James. It was an idea that became increasingly
important to him towards the end of his life. And it is the most
releasing idea in the system.

Only in the most general terms can I trace the other origins of these
present views. I do not think modern religion owes much to what is
called Deism or Theism. The rather abstract and futile Deism of the
eighteenth century, of "votre Etre supreme" who bored the friends of
Robespierre, was a sterile thing, it has little relation to these modern
developments, it conceived of God as an infinite Being of no particular
character whereas God is a finite being of a very especial character. On
the other hand men and women who have set themselves, with unavoidable
theological preconceptions, it is true, to speculate upon the actual
teachings and quality of Christ, have produced interpretations that
have interwoven insensibly with thoughts more apparently new. There is a
curious modernity about very many of Christ's recorded sayings. Revived
religion has also, no doubt, been the receiver of many religious
bankruptcies, of Positivism for example, which failed through its bleak
abstraction and an unspiritual texture. Religion, thus restated, must,
I think, presently incorporate great sections of thought that are still
attached to formal Christianity. The time is at hand when many of the
organised Christian churches will be forced to define their positions,
either in terms that will identify them with this renascence, or that
will lead to the release of their more liberal adherents. Its probable
obligations to Eastern thought are less readily estimated by a European
writer.

Modern religion has no revelation and no founder; it is the privilege
and possession of no coterie of disciples or exponents; it is appearing
simultaneously round and about the world exactly as a crystallising
substance appears here and there in a super-saturated solution. It is
a process of truth, guided by the divinity in men. It needs no other
guidance, and no protection. It needs nothing but freedom, free speech,
and honest statement. Out of the most mixed and impure solutions a
growing crystal is infallibly able to select its substance. The diamond
arises bright, definite, and pure out of a dark matrix of structureless
confusion.

This metaphor of crystallisation is perhaps the best symbol of the
advent and growth of the new understanding. It has no church, no
authorities, no teachers, no orthodoxy. It does not even thrust and
struggle among the other things; simply it grows clear. There will be
no putting an end to it. It arrives inevitably, and it will continue
to separate itself out from confusing ideas. It becomes, as it were the
Koh-i-noor; it is a Mountain of Light, growing and increasing. It is an
all-pervading lucidity, a brightness and clearness. It has no head to
smite, no body you can destroy; it overleaps all barriers; it breaks
out in despite of every enclosure. It will compel all things to orient
themselves to it.

It comes as the dawn comes, through whatever clouds and mists may be
here or whatever smoke and curtains may be there. It comes as the day
comes to the ships that put to sea.

It is the Kingdom of God at hand.


THE END

========================================
