========================================

FISHERMAN'S LUCK AND SOME OTHER UNCERTAIN THINGS

by Henry van Dyke


     "Now I conclude that not only in Physicke, but likewise in
     sundry more certaine arts, fortune hath great share in
     them."

     M. DE MONTAIGNE: Divers Events.


DEDICATION TO MY LADY GRAYGOWN


Here is the basket; I bring it home to you. There are no great fish in
it. But perhaps there may be one or two little ones which will be to
your taste. And there are a few shining pebbles from the bed of the
brook, and ferns from the cool, green woods, and wild flowers from the
places that you remember. I would fain console you, if I could, for the
hardship of having married an angler: a man who relapses into his mania
with the return of every spring, and never sees a little river without
wishing to fish in it. But after all, we have had good times together as
we have followed the stream of life towards the sea. And we have passed
through the dark days without losing heart, because we were comrades.
So let this book tell you one thing that is certain. In all the life of
your fisherman the best piece of luck is just YOU.



CONTENTS

   I.  Fisherman's Luck

  II.  The Thrilling Moment

 III.  Talkability

  IV.  A Wild Strawberry

   V.  Lovers and Landscape

  VI.  A Fatal Success

 VII.  Fishing in Books

VIII. A Norwegian Honeymoon

  IX.  Who Owns the Mountains?

   X.  A Lazy, Idle Brook

  XI.  The Open Fire

 XII.  A Slumber Song




FISHERMAN'S LUCK


Has it ever fallen in your way to notice the quality of the greetings
that belong to certain occupations?

There is something about these salutations in kind which is singularly
taking and grateful to the ear. They are as much better than an ordinary
"good day" or a flat "how are you?" as a folk-song of Scotland or the
Tyrol is better than the futile love-ditty of the drawing-room. They
have a spicy and rememberable flavour. They speak to the imagination and
point the way to treasure-trove.

There is a touch of dignity in them, too, for all they are so free and
easy--the dignity of independence, the native spirit of one who takes
for granted that his mode of living has a right to make its own forms of
speech. I admire a man who does not hesitate to salute the world in the
dialect of his calling.

How salty and stimulating, for example, is the sailorman's hail of "Ship
ahoy!" It is like a breeze laden with briny odours and a pleasant dash
of spray. The miners in some parts of Germany have a good greeting for
their dusky trade. They cry to one who is going down the shaft, "Gluck
auf!" All the perils of an underground adventure and all the joys
of seeing the sun again are compressed into a word. Even the trivial
salutation which the telephone has lately created and claimed for its
peculiar use--"Hello, hello"--seems to me to have a kind of fitness
and fascination. It is like a thoroughbred bulldog, ugly enough to be
attractive. There is a lively, concentrated, electric air about it. It
makes courtesy wait upon dispatch, and reminds us that we live in an age
when it is necessary to be wide awake.

I have often wished that every human employment might evolve its own
appropriate greeting. Some of them would be queer, no doubt; but
at least they would be an improvement on the wearisome iteration of
"Good-evening" and "Good-morning," and the monotonous inquiry, "How
do you do?"--a question so meaningless that it seldom tarries for an
answer. Under the new and more natural system of etiquette, when you
passed the time of day with a man you would know his business, and the
salutations of the market-place would be full of interest.

As for my chosen pursuit of angling (which I follow with diligence when
not interrupted by less important concerns), I rejoice with every true
fisherman that it has a greeting all its own and of a most honourable
antiquity. There is no written record of its origin. But it is quite
certain that since the days after the Flood, when Deucalion


     "Did first this art invent
      Of angling, and his people taught the same,"


two honest and good-natured anglers have never met each other by the way
without crying out, "What luck?"

Here, indeed, is an epitome of the gentle art. Here is the spirit of
it embodied in a word and paying its respects to you with its native
accent. Here you see its secret charms unconsciously disclosed. The
attraction of angling for all the ages of man, from the cradle to the
grave, lies in its uncertainty. 'Tis an affair of luck.

No amount of preparation in the matter of rods and lines and hooks
and lures and nets and creels can change its essential character.
No excellence of skill in casting the delusive fly or adjusting the
tempting bait upon the hook can make the result secure. You may reduce
the chances, but you cannot eliminate them. There are a thousand points
at which fortune may intervene. The state of the weather, the height of
the water, the appetite of the fish, the presence or absence of other
anglers--all these indeterminable elements enter into the reckoning of
your success. There is no combination of stars in the firmament by which
you can forecast the piscatorial future. When you go a-fishing, you just
take your chances; you offer yourself as a candidate for anything that
may be going; you try your luck.

There are certain days that are favourites among anglers, who regard
them as propitious for the sport. I know a man who believes that the
fish always rise better on Sunday than on any other day in the week. He
complains bitterly of this supposed fact, because his religious scruples
will not allow him to take advantage of it. He confesses that he has
sometimes thought seriously of joining the Seventh-Day Baptists.

Among the Pennsylvania Dutch, in the Alleghany Mountains, I have found
a curious tradition that Ascension Day is the luckiest in the year
for fishing. On that morning the district school is apt to be thinly
attended, and you must be on the stream very early if you do not wish to
find wet footprints on the stones ahead of you.

But in fact, all these superstitions about fortunate days are idle and
presumptuous. If there were such days in the calendar, a kind and firm
Providence would never permit the race of man to discover them. It
would rob life of one of its principal attractions, and make fishing
altogether too easy to be interesting.

Fisherman's luck is so notorious that it has passed into a proverb.
But the fault with that familiar saying is that it is too short and too
narrow to cover half the variations of the angler's possible experience.
For if his luck should be bad, there is no portion of his anatomy,
from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet, that may not be
thoroughly wet. But if it should be good, he may receive an unearned
blessing of abundance not only in his basket, but also in his head and
his heart, his memory and his fancy. He may come home from some obscure,
ill-named, lovely stream--some Dry Brook, or Southwest Branch of
Smith's Run--with a creel full of trout, and a mind full of grateful
recollections of flowers that seemed to bloom for his sake, and birds
that sang a new, sweet, friendly message to his tired soul. He may climb
down to "Tommy's Rock" below the cliffs at Newport (as I have done many
a day with my lady Greygown), and, all unnoticed by the idle, weary
promenaders in the path of fashion, haul in a basketful of blackfish,
and at the same time look out across the shining sapphire waters and
inherit a wondrous good fortune of dreams--


     "Have glimpses that will make him less forlorn;
      Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea,
      Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn."


But all this, you must remember, depends upon something secret and
incalculable, something that we can neither command nor predict. It is
an affair of gift, not of wages. Fish (and the other good things which
are like sauce to the catching of them) cast no shadow before. Water is
the emblem of instability. No one can tell what he shall draw out of
it until he has taken in his line. Herein are found the true charm and
profit of angling for all persons of a pure and childlike mind.

Look at those two venerable gentlemen floating in a skiff upon the
clear waters of Lake George. One of them is a successful statesman, an
ex-President of the United States, a lawyer versed in all the curious
eccentricities of the "lawless science of the law." The other is a
learned doctor of medicine, able to give a name to all diseases from
which men have imagined that they suffered, and to invent new ones
for those who are tired of vulgar maladies. But all their learning is
forgotten, their cares and controversies are laid aside, in "innocuous
desuetude." The Summer School of Sociology is assembled. The Medical
Congress is in session.

But they care not--no, not so much as the value of a single live bait.
The sun shines upon them with a fervent heat, but it irks them not.
The rain descends, and the winds blow and beat upon them, but they
are unmoved. They are securely anchored here in the lee of Sabbath-Day
Point.

What enchantment binds them to that inconsiderable spot? What magic
fixes their eyes upon the point of a fishing-rod, as if it were the
finger of destiny? It is the enchantment of uncertainty: the same
natural magic that draws the little suburban boys in the spring of the
year, with their strings and pin-hooks, around the shallow ponds where
dace and redfins hide; the same irresistible charm that fixes a row of
city gamins, like ragged and disreputable fish-crows, on the end of a
pier where blear-eyed flounders sometimes lurk in the muddy water. Let
the philosopher explain it as he will. Let the moralist reprehend it as
he chooses. There is nothing that attracts human nature more powerfully
than the sport of tempting the unknown with a fishing-line.

Those ancient anglers have set out upon an exodus from the tedious realm
of the definite, the fixed, the must-certainly-come-to-pass. They are on
a holiday in the free country of peradventure. They do not know at this
moment whether the next turn of Fortune's reel will bring up a perch or
a pickerel, a sunfish or a black bass. It may be a hideous catfish or
a squirming eel, or it may be a lake-trout, the grand prize in the Lake
George lottery. There they sit, those gray-haired lads, full of hope,
yet equally prepared for resignation; taking no thought for the morrow,
and ready to make the best of to-day; harmless and happy players at the
best of all games of chance.

"In other words," I hear some severe and sour-complexioned reader say,
"in plain language, they are a pair of old gamblers."

Yes, if it pleases you to call honest men by a bad name. But they
risk nothing that is not their own; and if they lose, they are not
impoverished. They desire nothing that belongs to other men; and if
they win, no one is robbed. If all gambling were like that, it would be
difficult to see the harm in it. Indeed, a daring moralist might even
assert, and prove by argument, that so innocent a delight in the taking
of chances is an aid to virtue.

Do you remember Martin Luther's reasoning on the subject of "excellent
large pike"? He maintains that God would never have created them so good
to the taste, if He had not meant them to be eaten. And for the same
reason I conclude that this world would never have been left so full of
uncertainties, nor human nature framed so as to find a peculiar joy and
exhilaration in meeting them bravely and cheerfully, if it had not been
divinely intended that most of our amusement and much of our education
should come from this source.

"Chance" is a disreputable word, I know. It is supposed by many pious
persons to be improper and almost blasphemous to use it. But I am not
one of those who share this verbal prejudice. I am inclined rather to
believe that it is a good word to which a bad reputation has been
given. I feel grateful to that admirable "psychologist who writes like a
novelist," Mr. William James, for his brilliant defence of it. For what
does it mean, after all, but that some things happen in a certain way
which might have happened in another way? Where is the immorality, the
irreverence, the atheism in such a supposition? Certainly God must be
competent to govern a world in which there are possibilities of various
kinds, just as well as one in which every event is inevitably determined
beforehand. St. Peter and the other fishermen-disciples on the Lake
of Galilee were perfectly free to cast their net on either side of the
ship. So far as they could see, so far as any one could see, it was a
matter of chance where they chose to cast it. But it was not until they
let it down, at the Master's word, on the right side that they had good
luck. And not the least element of their joy in the draft of fishes was
that it brought a change of fortune.

Leave the metaphysics of the question on the table for the present. As
a matter of fact, it is plain that our human nature is adapted to
conditions variable, undetermined, and hidden from our view. We are
not fitted to live in a world where a + b always equals c, and there is
nothing more to follow. The interest of life's equation arrives with the
appearance of x, the unknown quantity. A settled, unchangeable, clearly
foreseeable order of things does not suit our constitution. It tends to
melancholy and a fatty heart. Creatures of habit we are undoubtedly; but
it is one of our most fixed habits to be fond of variety. The man who
is never surprised does not know the taste of happiness, and unless the
unexpected sometimes happens to us, we are most grievously disappointed.

Much of the tediousness of highly civilized life comes from its
smoothness and regularity. To-day is like yesterday, and we think that
we can predict to-morrow. Of course we cannot really do so. The
chances are still there. But we have covered them up so deeply with
the artificialities of life that we lose sight of them. It seems as if
everything in our neat little world were arranged, and provided for,
and reasonably sure to come to pass. The best way of escape from this
TAEDIUM VITAE is through a recreation like angling, not only because it
is so evidently a matter of luck, but also because it tempts us into a
wilder, freer life. It leads almost inevitably to camping out, which is
a wholesome and sanitary imprudence.

It is curious and pleasant, to my apprehension, to observe how many
people in New England, one of whose States is called "the land of Steady
Habits," are sensible of the joy of changing them,--out of doors. These
good folk turn out from their comfortable farm-houses and their snug
suburban cottages to go a-gypsying for a fortnight among the mountains
or beside the sea. You see their white tents gleaming from the
pine-groves around the little lakes, and catch glimpses of their
bathing-clothes drying in the sun on the wiry grass that fringes the
sand-dunes. Happy fugitives from the bondage of routine! They have found
out that a long journey is not necessary to a good vacation. You may
reach the Forest of Arden in a buckboard. The Fortunate Isles are within
sailing distance in a dory. And a voyage on the river Pactolus is open
to any one who can paddle a canoe.

I was talking--or rather listening--with a barber, the other day, in
the sleepy old town of Rivermouth. He told me, in one of those easy
confidences which seem to make the razor run more smoothly, that it had
been the custom of his family, for some twenty years past, to forsake
their commodious dwelling on Anchor Street every summer, and emigrate
six miles, in a wagon to Wallis Sands, where they spent the month of
August very merrily under canvas. Here was a sensible household for
you! They did not feel bound to waste a year's income on a four weeks'
holiday. They were not of those foolish folk who run across the sea,
carefully carrying with them the same tiresome mind that worried them
at home. They got a change of air by making an alteration of life. They
escaped from the land of Egypt by stepping out into the wilderness and
going a-fishing.

The people who always live in houses, and sleep on beds, and walk on
pavements, and buy their food from butchers and bakers and grocers, are
not the most blessed inhabitants of this wide and various earth. The
circumstances of their existence are too mathematical and secure
for perfect contentment. They live at second or third hand. They are
boarders in the world. Everything is done for them by somebody else.

It is almost impossible for anything very interesting to happen to them.
They must get their excitement out of the newspapers, reading of the
hairbreadth escapes and moving accidents that befall people in real
life. What do these tame ducks really know of the adventure of living?
If the weather is bad, they are snugly housed. If it is cold, there is
a furnace in the cellar. If they are hungry, the shops are near at hand.
It is all as dull, flat, stale, and unprofitable as adding up a column
of figures. They might as well be brought up in an incubator.

But when man abides in tents, after the manner of the early patriarchs,
the face of the world is renewed. The vagaries of the clouds become
significant. You watch the sky with a lover's look, eager to know
whether it will smile or frown. When you lie at night upon your bed of
boughs and hear the rain pattering on the canvas close above your head,
you wonder whether it is a long storm or only a shower.

The rising wind shakes the tent-flaps. Are the pegs well driven down and
the cords firmly fastened? You fall asleep again and wake later, to
hear the rain drumming still more loudly on the tight cloth, and the
big breeze snoring through the forest, and the waves plunging along
the beach. A stormy day? Well, you must cut plenty of wood and keep the
camp-fire glowing, for it will be hard to start it up again, if you
let it get too low. There is little use in fishing or hunting in such a
storm. But there is plenty to do in the camp: guns to be cleaned, tackle
to be put in order, clothes to be mended, a good story of adventure to
be read, a belated letter to be written to some poor wretch in a summer
hotel, a game of hearts or cribbage to be played, or a hunting-trip to
be planned for the return of fair weather. The tent is perfectly dry. A
little trench dug around it carries off the surplus water, and luckily
it is pitched with the side to the lake, so that you get the pleasant
heat of the fire without the unendurable smoke. Cooking in the rain has
its disadvantages. But how good the supper tastes when it is served up
on a tin plate, with an empty box for a table and a roll of blankets at
the foot of the bed for a seat!

A day, two days, three days, the storm may continue, according to your
luck. I have been out in the woods for a fortnight without a drop of
rain or a sign of dust. Again, I have tented on the shore of a big lake
for a week, waiting for an obstinate tempest to pass by.

Look now, just at nightfall: is there not a little lifting and breaking
of the clouds in the west, a little shifting of the wind toward a
better quarter? You go to bed with cheerful hopes. A dozen times in the
darkness you are half awake, and listening drowsily to the sounds of the
storm. Are they waxing or waning? Is that louder pattering a new burst
of rain, or is it only the plumping of the big drops as they are shaken
from the trees? See, the dawn has come, and the gray light glimmers
through the canvas. In a little while you will know your fate.

Look! There is a patch of bright yellow radiance on the peak of the
tent. The shadow of a leaf dances over it. The sun must be shining. Good
luck! and up with you, for it is a glorious morning.

The woods are glistening as fresh and fair as if they had been
new-created overnight. The water sparkles, and tiny waves are dancing
and splashing all along the shore. Scarlet berries of the mountain-ash
hang around the lake. A pair of kingfishers dart back and forth across
the bay, in flashes of living blue. A black eagle swings silently around
his circle, far up in the cloudless sky. The air is full of pleasant
sounds, but there is no noise. The world is full of joyful life, but
there is no crowd and no confusion. There is no factory chimney to
darken the day with its smoke, no trolley-car to split the silence with
its shriek and smite the indignant ear with the clanging of its impudent
bell. No lumberman's axe has robbed the encircling forests of their
glory of great trees. No fires have swept over the hills and left behind
them the desolation of a bristly landscape. All is fresh and sweet, calm
and clear and bright.

'Twas rather a rude jest of Nature, that tempest of yesterday. But
if you have taken it in good part, you are all the more ready for her
caressing mood to-day. And now you must be off to get your dinner--not
to order it at a shop, but to look for it in the woods and waters. You
are ready to do your best with rod or gun. You will use all the skill
you have as hunter or fisherman. But what you shall find, and
whether you shall subsist on bacon and biscuit, or feast on trout and
partridges, is, after all, a matter of luck.

I profess that it appears to me not only pleasant, but also salutary, to
be in this condition. It brings us home to the plain realities of life;
it teaches us that a man ought to work before he eats; it reminds us
that, after he has done all he can, he must still rely upon a mysterious
bounty for his daily bread. It says to us, in homely and familiar words,
that life was meant to be uncertain, that no man can tell what a day
will bring forth, and that it is the part of wisdom to be prepared for
disappointments and grateful for all kinds of small mercies.

There is a story in that fragrant book, THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF ST.
FRANCIS, which I wish to transcribe here, without tying a moral to it,
lest any one should accuse me of preaching.


"Hence [says the quaint old chronicler], having assigned to his
companions the other parts of the world, St. Francis, taking Brother
Maximus as his comrade, set forth toward the province of France. And
coming one day to a certain town, and being very hungry, they begged
their bread as they went, according to the rule of their order, for the
love of God. And St. Francis went through one quarter of the town, and
Brother Maximus through another. But forasmuch as St. Francis was a man
mean and low of stature, and hence was reputed a vile beggar by such as
knew him not, he only received a few scanty crusts and mouthfuls of dry
bread. But to Brother Maximus, who was large and well favoured, were
given good pieces and big, and an abundance of bread, yea, whole loaves.
Having thus begged, they met together without the town to eat, at a
place where there was a clear spring and a fair large stone, upon which
each spread forth the gifts that he had received. And St. Francis,
seeing that the pieces of bread begged by Brother Maximus were bigger
and better than his own, rejoiced greatly, saying, 'Oh, Brother Maximus,
we are not worthy of so great a treasure.' As he repeated these words
many times, Brother Maximus made answer: 'Father, how can you talk of
treasures when there is such great poverty and such lack of all things
needful? Here is neither napkin nor knife, neither board nor trencher,
neither house nor table, neither man-servant nor maid-servant.' St.
Francis replied: 'And this is what I reckon a great treasure, where
naught is made ready by human industry, but all that is here is prepared
by Divine Providence, as is plainly set forth in the bread which we have
begged, in the table of fair stone, and in the spring of clear water.
And therefore I would that we should pray to God that He teach us with
all our hearts to love the treasure of holy poverty, which is so noble a
thing, and whose servant is God the Lord.'"


I know of but one fairer description of a repast in the open air; and
that is where we are told how certain poor fishermen, coming in very
weary after a night of toil (and one of them very wet after swimming
ashore), found their Master standing on the bank of the lake waiting for
them. But it seems that he must have been busy in their behalf while he
was waiting; for there was a bright fire of coals burning on the shore,
and a goodly fish broiling thereon, and bread to eat with it. And when
the Master had asked them about their fishing, he said, "Come, now, and
get your breakfast." So they sat down around the fire, and with his own
hands he served them with the bread and the fish.

Of all the banquets that have ever been given upon earth, that is the
one in which I would rather have had a share.

But it is now time that we should return to our fishing. And let
us observe with gratitude that almost all of the pleasures that are
connected with this pursuit--its accompaniments and variations, which
run along with the tune and weave an embroidery of delight around
it--have an accidental and gratuitous quality about them. They are not
to be counted upon beforehand. They are like something that is thrown
into a purchase by a generous and open-handed dealer, to make us pleased
with our bargain and inclined to come back to the same shop.

If I knew, for example, before setting out for a day on the brook,
precisely what birds I should see, and what pretty little scenes in the
drama of woodland life were to be enacted before my eyes, the expedition
would lose more than half its charm. But, in fact, it is almost entirely
a matter of luck, and that is why it never grows tiresome.

The ornithologist knows pretty well where to look for the birds, and
he goes directly to the places where he can find them, and proceeds to
study them intelligently and systematically. But the angler who idles
down the stream takes them as they come, and all his observations have a
flavour of surprise in them.

He hears a familiar song,--one that he has often heard at a distance,
but never identified,--a loud, cheery, rustic cadence sounding from
a low pine-tree close beside him. He looks up carefully through the
needles and discovers a hooded warbler, a tiny, restless creature,
dressed in green and yellow, with two white feathers in its tail, like
the ends of a sash, and a glossy little black bonnet drawn closely about
its golden head. He will never forget that song again. It will make the
woods seem homelike to him, many a time, as he hears it ringing
through the afternoon, like the call of a small country girl playing at
hide-and-seek: "See ME; here I BE."

Another day he sits down on a mossy log beside a cold, trickling spring
to eat his lunch. It has been a barren day for birds. Perhaps he has
fallen into the fault of pursuing his sport too intensely, and tramped
along the stream looking for nothing but fish. Perhaps this part of the
grove has really been deserted by its feathered inhabitants, scared
away by a prowling hawk or driven out by nest-hunters. But now, without
notice, the luck changes. A surprise-party of redstarts breaks into full
play around him. All through the dark-green shadow of the hemlocks
they flash like little candles--CANDELITAS, the Cubans call them. Their
brilliant markings of orange and black, and their fluttering, airy,
graceful movements, make them most welcome visitors. There is no bird in
the bush easier to recognize or pleasanter to watch. They run along
the branches and dart and tumble through the air in fearless chase of
invisible flies and moths. All the time they keep unfolding and furling
their rounded tails, spreading them out and waving them and closing
them suddenly, just as the Cuban girls manage their fans. In fact, the
redstarts are the tiny fantail pigeons of the forest.

There are other things about the birds, besides their musical talents
and their good looks, that the fisherman has a chance to observe on his
lucky days. He may sea something of their courage and their devotion to
their young.

I suppose a bird is the bravest creature that lives, in spite of its
natural timidity. From which we may learn that true courage is not
incompatible with nervousness, and that heroism does not mean the
absence of fear, but the conquest of it. Who does not remember the first
time that he ever came upon a hen-partridge with her brood, as he was
strolling through the woods in June? How splendidly the old bird forgets
herself in her efforts to defend and hide her young!

Smaller birds are no less daring. One evening last summer I was walking
up the Ristigouche from Camp Harmony to fish for salmon at Mowett's
Rock, where my canoe was waiting for me. As I stepped out from a thicket
on to the shingly bank of the river, a spotted sandpiper teetered along
before me, followed by three young ones. Frightened at first, the mother
flew out a few feet over the water. But the piperlings could not fly,
having no feathers; and they crept under a crooked log. I rolled the log
over very gently and took one of the cowering creatures into my hand--a
tiny, palpitating scrap of life, covered with soft gray down, and
peeping shrilly, like a Liliputian chicken. And now the mother was
transformed. Her fear was changed into fury. She was a bully, a fighter,
an Amazon in feathers. She flew at me with loud cries, dashing herself
almost into my face. I was a tyrant, a robber, a kidnapper, and she
called heaven to witness that she would never give up her offspring
without a struggle. Then she changed her tactics and appealed to my
baser passions. She fell to the ground and fluttered around me as if her
wing were broken. "Look!" she seemed to say, "I am bigger than that poor
little baby. If you must eat something, eat me! My wing is lame. I can't
fly. You can easily catch me. Let that little bird go!" And so I
did; and the whole family disappeared in the bushes as if by magic. I
wondered whether the mother was saying to herself, after the manner of
her sex, that men are stupid things, after all, and no match for the
cleverness of a female who stoops to deception in a righteous cause.

Now, that trivial experience was what I call a piece of good luck--for
me, and, in the event, for the sandpiper. But it is doubtful whether it
would be quite so fresh and pleasant in the remembrance, if it had not
also fallen to my lot to take two uncommonly good salmon on that same
evening, in a dry season.

Never believe a fisherman when he tells you that he does not care about
the fish he catches. He may say that he angles only for the pleasure of
being out-of-doors, and that he is just as well contented when he takes
nothing as when he makes a good catch. He may think so, but it is not
true. He is not telling a deliberate falsehood. He is only assuming an
unconscious pose, and indulging in a delicate bit of self-flattery. Even
if it were true, it would not be at all to his credit.

Watch him on that lucky day when he comes home with a full basket of
trout on his shoulder, or a quartette of silver salmon covered with
green branches in the bottom of the canoe. His face is broader than it
was when he went out, and there is a sparkle of triumph in his eye.
"It is naught, it is naught," he says, in modest depreciation of his
triumph. But you shall see that he lingers fondly about the place
where the fish are displayed upon the grass, and does not fail to look
carefully at the scales when they are weighed, and has an attentive ear
for the comments of admiring spectators. You shall find, moreover, that
he is not unwilling to narrate the story of the capture--how the big
fish rose short, four times, to four different flies, and finally took a
small Black Dose, and played all over the pool, and ran down a terribly
stiff rapid to the next pool below, and sulked for twenty minutes, and
had to be stirred up with stones, and made such a long fight that, when
he came in at last, the hold of the hook was almost worn through, and it
fell out of his mouth as he touched the shore. Listen to this tale as
it is told, with endless variations, by every man who has brought home
a fine fish, and you will perceive that the fisherman does care for his
luck, after all.

And why not? I am no friend to the people who receive the bounties of
Providence without visible gratitude. When the sixpence falls into your
hat, you may laugh. When the messenger of an unexpected blessing takes
you by the hand and lifts you up and bids you walk, you may leap and run
and sing for joy, even as the lame man, whom St. Peter healed, skipped
piously and rejoiced aloud as he passed through the Beautiful Gate of
the Temple. There is no virtue in solemn indifference. Joy is just as
much a duty as beneficence is. Thankfulness is the other side of mercy.

When you have good luck in anything, you ought to be glad. Indeed, if
you are not glad, you are not really lucky.

But boasting and self-glorification I would have excluded, and most
of all from the behaviour of the angler. He, more than other men, is
dependent for his success upon the favour of an unseen benefactor. Let
his skill and industry be never so great, he can do nothing unless LA
BONNE CHANCE comes to him.

I was once fishing on a fair little river, the P'tit Saguenay, with two
excellent anglers and pleasant companions, H. E. G---- and C. S. D----.
They had done all that was humanly possible to secure good sport. The
stream had been well preserved. They had boxes full of beautiful flies,
and casting-lines imported from England, and a rod for every fish in the
river. But the weather was "dour," and the water "drumly," and every day
the lumbermen sent a "drive" of ten thousand spruce logs rushing down
the flooded stream. For three days we had not seen a salmon, and on the
fourth, despairing, we went down to angle for sea-trout in the tide of
the greater Saguenay. There, in the salt water, where men say the salmon
never take the fly, H. E. G----, fishing with a small trout-rod, a poor,
short line, and an ancient red ibis of the common kind, rose and hooked
a lordly salmon of at least five-and-thirty pounds. Was not this pure
luck?

Pride is surely the most unbecoming of all vices in a fisherman. For
though intelligence and practice and patience and genius, and many
other noble things which modesty forbids him to mention, enter into his
pastime, so that it is, as Izaak Walton has firmly maintained, an art;
yet, because fortune still plays a controlling hand in the game, its net
results should never be spoken of with a haughty and vain spirit. Let
not the angler imitate Timoleon, who boasted of his luck and lost it. It
is tempting Providence to print the record of your wonderful catches in
the sporting newspapers; or at least, if it must be done, there should
stand at the head of the column some humble, thankful motto, like "NON
NOBIS, DOMINE." Even Father Izaak, when he has a fish on his line, says,
with a due sense of human limitations, "There is a trout now, and a good
one too, IF I CAN BUT HOLD HIM!"

This reminds me that we left H. E. G----, a few sentences back, playing
his unexpected salmon, on a trout-rod, in the Saguenay. Four times that
great fish leaped into the air; twice he suffered the pliant reed to
guide him toward the shore, and twice ran out again to deeper water.
Then his spirit awoke within him: he bent the rod like a willow wand,
dashed toward the middle of the river, broke the line as if it had been
pack-thread, and sailed triumphantly away to join the white porpoises
that were tumbling in the tide. "WHE-E-EW," they said, "WHE-E-EW!
PSHA-A-AW!" blowing out their breath in long, soft sighs as they rolled
about like huge snowballs in the black water. But what did H. E. G----
say? He sat him quietly down upon a rock and reeled in the remnant
of his line, uttering these remarkable and Christian words: "Those
porpoises," said he, "describe the situation rather mildly. But it was
good fun while it lasted."

Again I remembered a saying of Walton: "Well, Scholar, you must endure
worse luck sometimes, or you will never make a good angler."

Or a good man, either, I am sure. For he who knows only how to enjoy,
and not to endure, is ill-fitted to go down the stream of life through
such a world as this.

I would not have you to suppose, gentle reader, that in discoursing of
fisherman's luck I have in mind only those things which may be taken
with a hook. It is a parable of human experience. I have been thinking,
for instance, of Walton's life as well as of his angling: of the losses
and sufferings that he, the firm Royalist, endured when the Commonwealth
men came marching into London town; of the consoling days that were
granted to him, in troublous times, on the banks of the Lea and the Dove
and the New River, and the good friends that he made there, with whom
he took sweet counsel in adversity; of the little children who played
in his house for a few years, and then were called away into the silent
land where he could hear their voices no longer. I was thinking how
quietly and peaceably he lived through it all, not complaining nor
desponding, but trying to do his work well, whether he was keeping a
shop or writing hooks, and seeking to prove himself an honest man and
a cheerful companion, and never scorning to take with a thankful heart
such small comforts and recreations as came to him.

It is a plain, homely, old-fashioned meditation, reader, but not
unprofitable. When I talk to you of fisherman's luck, I do not forget
that there are deeper things behind it. I remember that what we call our
fortunes, good or ill, are but the wise dealings and distributions of a
Wisdom higher, and a Kindness greater, than our own. And I suppose that
their meaning is that we should learn, by all the uncertainties of our
life, even the smallest, how to be brave and steady and temperate and
hopeful, whatever comes, because we believe that behind it all there
lies a purpose of good, and over it all there watches a providence of
blessing.

In the school of life many branches of knowledge are taught. But the
only philosophy that amounts to anything, after all, is just the secret
of making friends with our luck.




THE THRILLING MOMENT


     "In angling, as in all other recreations into which
     excitement enters, we have to be on our guard, so that we
     can at any moment throw a weight of self-control into the
     scale against misfortune; and happily we can study to some
     purpose, both to increase our pleasure in success and to
     lessen our distress caused by what goes ill.  It is not only
     in cases of great disasters, however, that the angler needs
     self-control.  He is perpetually called upon to use it to
     withstand small exasperations."

     --SIR EDWARD GREY: Fly-Fishing.


Every moment of life, I suppose, is more or less of a turning-point.
Opportunities are swarming around us all the time, thicker than gnats
at sundown. We walk through a cloud of chances, and if we were always
conscious of them they would worry us almost to death.

But happily our sense of uncertainty is soothed and cushioned by habit,
so that we can live comfortably with it. Only now and then, by way of
special excitement, it starts up wide awake. We perceive how delicately
our fortune is poised and balanced on the pivot of a single incident. We
get a peep at the oscillating needle, and, because we have happened to
see it tremble, we call our experience a crisis.

The meditative angler is not exempt from these sensational periods.
There are times when all the uncertainty of his chosen pursuit seems
to condense itself into one big chance, and stand out before him like
a salmon on the top wave of a rapid. He sees that his luck hangs by a
single strand, and he cannot tell whether it will hold or break. This is
his thrilling moment, and he never forgets it.

Mine came to me in the autumn of 1894, on the banks of the
Unpronounceable River, in the Province of Quebec. It was the last day,
of the open season for ouananiche, and we had set our hearts on catching
some good fish to take home with us. We walked up from the mouth of
the river, four preposterously long and rough miles, to the famous
fishing-pool, "LA PLACE DE PECHE A BOIVIN." It was a noble day for
walking; the air was clear and crisp, and all the hills around us
were glowing with the crimson foliage of those little bushes which
God created to make burned lands look beautiful. The trail ended in
a precipitous gully, down which we scrambled with high hopes, and
fishing-rods unbroken, only to find that the river was in a condition
which made angling absurd if not impossible.

There must have been a cloud-burst among the mountains, for the water
was coming down in flood. The stream was bank-full, gurgling and eddying
out among the bushes, and rushing over the shoal where the fish used to
lie, in a brown torrent ten feet deep. Our last day with the land-locked
salmon seemed destined to be a failure, and we must wait eight
months before we could have another. There were three of us in the
disappointment, and we shared it according to our temperaments.

Paul virtuously resolved not to give up while there was a chance left,
and wandered down-stream to look for an eddy where he might pick up a
small fish. Ferdinand, our guide, resigned himself without a sigh to
the consolation of eating blueberries, which he always did with great
cheerfulness. But I, being more cast down than either of my comrades,
sought out a convenient seat among the rocks, and, adapting my anatomy
as well as possible to the irregularities of nature's upholstery, pulled
from my pocket AN AMATEUR ANGLER'S DAYS IN DOVE DALE, and settled down
to read myself into a Christian frame of mind.

Before beginning, my eyes roved sadly over the pool once more. It
was but a casual glance. It lasted only for an instant. But in that
fortunate fragment of time I distinctly saw the broad tail of a big
ouananiche rise and disappear in the swift water at the very head of the
pool.

Immediately the whole aspect of affairs was changed. Despondency
vanished, and the river glittered with the beams of rising hope.

Such is the absurd disposition of some anglers. They never see a fish
without believing that they can catch him; but if they see no fish, they
are inclined to think that the river is empty and the world hollow.

I said nothing to my companions. It would have been unkind to disturb
them with expectations which might never be realized. My immediate duty
was to get within casting distance of that salmon as soon as possible.

The way along the shore of the pool was difficult. The bank was very
steep, and the rocks by the river's edge were broken and glibbery.
Presently I came to a sheer wall of stone, perhaps thirty feet high,
rising directly from the deep water.

There was a tiny ledge or crevice running part of the way across the
face of this wall, and by this four-inch path I edged along, holding
my rod in one hand, and clinging affectionately with the other to such
clumps of grass and little bushes as I could find. There was one
small huckleberry plant to which I had a particular attachment. It was
fortunately a firm little bush, and as I held fast to it I remembered
Tennyson's poem which begins


     "Flower in the crannied wall,"


and reflected that if I should succeed in plucking out this flower,
"root and all," it would probably result in an even greater increase of
knowledge than the poet contemplated.

The ledge in the rock now came to an end. But below me in the pool there
was a sunken reef; and on this reef a long log had caught, with one
end sticking out of the water, within jumping distance. It was the only
chance. To go back would have been dangerous. An angler with a large
family dependent upon him for support has no right to incur unnecessary
perils.

Besides, the fish was waiting for me at the upper end of the pool!

So I jumped; landed on the end of the log; felt it settle slowly down;
ran along it like a small boy on a seesaw, and leaped off into shallow
water just as the log rolled from the ledge and lunged out into the
stream.

It went wallowing through the pool and down the rapid like a playful
hippopotamus. I watched it with interest and congratulated myself that
I was no longer embarked upon it. On that craft a voyage down the
Unpronounceable River would have been short but far from merry. The "all
ashore" bell was not rung early enough. I just got off, with not half a
second to spare.

But now all was well, for I was within reach of the fish. A little
scrambling over the rocks brought me to a point where I could easily
cast over him. He was lying in a swift, smooth, narrow channel between
two large stones. It was a snug resting-place, and no doubt he would
remain there for some time. So I took out my fly-book and prepared to
angle for him according to the approved rules of the art.

Nothing is more foolish in sport than the habit of precipitation.
And yet it is a fault to which I am singularly subject. As a boy, in
Brooklyn, I never came in sight of the Capitoline Skating Pond, after a
long ride in the horse-cars, without breaking into a run along the board
walk, buckling on my skates in a furious hurry, and flinging myself
impetuously upon the ice, as if I feared that it would melt away before
I could reach it. Now this, I confess, is a grievous defect, which
advancing years have not entirely cured; and I found it necessary to
take myself firmly, as it were, by the mental coat-collar, and
resolve not to spoil the chance of catching the only ouananiche in the
Unpronounceable River by undue haste in fishing for him.

I carefully tested a brand-new leader, and attached it to the line with
great deliberation and the proper knot. Then I gave my whole mind to the
important question of a wise selection of flies.

It is astonishing how much time and mental anxiety a man can spend on
an apparently simple question like this. When you are buying flies in a
shop it seems as if you never had half enough. You keep on picking out
a half-dozen of each new variety as fast as the enticing salesman shows
them to you. You stroll through the streets of Montreal or Quebec and
drop in at every fishing-tackle dealer's to see whether you can find a
few more good flies. Then, when you come to look over your collection at
the critical moment on the bank of a stream, it seems as if you had ten
times too many. And, spite of all, the precise fly that you need is not
there.

You select a couple that you think fairly good, lay them down beside you
in the grass, and go on looking through the book for something better.
Failing to satisfy yourself, you turn to pick up those that you have
laid out, and find that they have mysteriously vanished from the face of
the earth.

Then you struggle with naughty words and relapse into a condition of
mental palsy.

Precipitation is a fault. But deliberation, for a person of precipitate
disposition, is a vice.

The best thing to do in such a case is to adopt some abstract theory of
action without delay, and put it into practice without hesitation. Then
if you fail, you can throw the responsibility on the theory.

Now, in regard to flies there are two theories. The old, conservative
theory is, that on a bright day you should use a dark, dull fly, because
it is less conspicuous. So I followed that theory first and put on a
Great Dun and a Dark Montreal. I cast them delicately over the fish, but
he would not look at them.

Then I perverted myself to the new, radical theory which says that on a
bright day you must use a light, gay fly, because it is more in harmony
with the sky, and therefore less noticeable. Accordingly I put on a
Professor and a Parmacheene Belle; but this combination of learning and
beauty had no attraction for the ouananiche.

Then I fell back on a theory of my own, to the effect that the
ouananiche have an aversion to red, and prefer yellow and brown. So I
tried various combinations of flies in which these colours predominated.

Then I abandoned all theories and went straight through my book, trying
something from every page, and winding up with that lure which the
guides consider infallible,--"a Jock o' Scott that cost fifty cents at
Quebec." But it was all in vain. I was ready to despair.

At this psychological moment I heard behind me a voice of hope,--the
song of a grasshopper: not one of those fat-legged, green-winged
imbeciles that feebly tumble in the summer fields, but a game
grasshopper,--one of those thin-shanked, brown-winged fellows that leap
like kangaroos, and fly like birds, and sing KRI-KAREE-KAREE-KRI in
their flight.

It is not really a song, I know, but it sounds like one; and, if you had
heard that Kri-karee carolling as I chased him over the rocks, you would
have been sure that he was mocking me.

I believed that he was the predestined lure for that ouananiche; but it
was hard to persuade him to fulfill his destiny. I slapped at him
with my hat, but he was not there. I grasped at him on the bushes, and
brought away "nothing but leaves." At last he made his way to the very
edge of the water and poised himself on a stone, with his legs well
tucked in for a long leap and a bold flight to the other side of the
river. It was my final opportunity. I made a desperate grab at it and
caught the grasshopper.

My premonition proved to be correct. When that Kri-karee, invisibly
attached to my line, went floating down the stream, the ouananiche was
surprised. It was the fourteenth of September, and he had supposed the
grasshopper season was over. The unexpected temptation was too strong
for him. He rose with a rush, and in an instant I was fast to the best
land-locked salmon of the year.

But the situation was not without its embarrassments. My rod weighed
only four and a quarter ounces; the fish weighed between six and seven
pounds. The water was furious and headstrong. I had only thirty yards of
line and no landing-net.

"HOLA! FERDINAND!" I cried. "APPORTE LA NETTE, VITE! A BEAUTY! HURRY
UP!"

I thought it must be an hour while he was making his way over the hill,
through the underbrush, around the cliff. Again and again the fish ran
out my line almost to the last turn. A dozen times he leaped from the
water, shaking his silvery sides. Twice he tried to cut the leader
across a sunken ledge. But at last he was played out, and came in
quietly towards the point of the rock. At the same moment Ferdinand
appeared with the net.

Now, the use of the net is really the most difficult part of angling.
And Ferdinand is the best netsman in the Lake St. John country. He never
makes the mistake of trying to scoop a fish in motion. He does not grope
around with aimless, futile strokes as if he were feeling for something
in the dark. He does not entangle the dropper-fly in the net and tear
the tail-fly out of the fish's mouth. He does not get excited.

He quietly sinks the net in the water, and waits until he can see the
fish distinctly, lying perfectly still and within reach. Then he makes a
swift movement, like that of a mower swinging the scythe, takes the fish
into the net head-first, and lands him without a slip.

I felt sure that Ferdinand was going to do the trick in precisely this
way with my ouananiche. Just at the right instant he made one quick,
steady swing of the arms, and--the head of the net broke clean off the
handle and went floating away with the fish in it!

All seemed to be lost. But Ferdinand was equal to the occasion. He
seized a long, crooked stick that lay in a pile of driftwood on the
shore, sprang into the water up to his waist, caught the net as it
drifted past, and dragged it to land, with the ultimate ouananiche, the
prize of the season, still glittering through its meshes.

This is the story of my most thrilling moment as an angler.

But which was the moment of the deepest thrill?

Was it when the huckleberry bush saved me from a watery grave, or when
the log rolled under my feet and started down the river? Was it when the
fish rose, or when the net broke, or when the long stick captured it?

No, it was none of these. It was when the Kri-karee sat with his legs
tucked under him on the brink of the stream. That was the turning-point.
The fortunes of the day depended on the comparative quickness of the
reflex action of his neural ganglia and mine. That was the thrilling
moment.

I see it now. A crisis is really the commonest thing in the world. The
reason why life sometimes seems dull to us is because we do not perceive
the importance and the excitement of getting bait.




TALKABILITY

A PRELUDE AND THEME WITH VARIATIONS


     "He praises a meditative life, and with evident sincerity:
     but we feel that he liked nothing so well as good talk."

     --JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL: Walton.




I. PRELUDE--ON AN OLD, FOOLISH MAXIM


The inventor of the familiar maxim that "fishermen must not talk" is
lost in the mists of antiquity, and well deserves his fate. For a more
foolish rule, a conventionality more obscure and aimless in its tyranny,
was never imposed upon an innocent and honourable occupation, to
diminish its pleasure and discount its profits. Why, in the name of all
that is genial, should anglers go about their harmless sport in stealthy
silence like conspirators, or sit together in a boat, dumb, glum, and
penitential, like naughty schoolboys on the bench of disgrace? 'Tis
an Omorcan superstition; a rule without a reason; a venerable, idiotic
fashion invented to repress lively spirits and put a premium on
stupidity.

For my part, I incline rather to the opinion of the Neapolitan fishermen
who maintain that a certain amount of noise, of certain kinds, is likely
to improve the fishing, and who have a particular song, very sweet
and charming, which they sing to draw the fishes around them. It is
narrated, likewise, of the good St. Brandan, that on his notable voyage
from Ireland in search of Paradise, he chanted the service for St.
Peter's day so pleasantly that a subaqueous audience of all sorts and
sizes was attracted, insomuch that the other monks began to be afraid,
and begged the abbot that he would sing a little lower, for they were
not quite sure of the intention of the congregation. Of St. Anthony of
Padua it is said that he even succeeded in persuading the fishes, in
great multitudes, to listen to a sermon; and that when it was ended
(it must be noted that it was both short and cheerful) they bowed their
heads and moved their bodies up and down with every mark of fondness and
approval of what the holy father had spoken.

If we can believe this, surely we need not be incredulous of things
which seem to be no less, but rather more, in harmony with the course
of nature. Creatures who are sensible to the attractions of a sermon can
hardly be indifferent to the charm of other kinds of discourse. I can
easily imagine a company of grayling wishing to overhear a conversation
between I. W. and his affectionate (but somewhat prodigal) son and
servant, Charles Cotton; and surely every intelligent salmon in Scotland
might have been glad to hear Christopher North and the Ettrick
Shepherd bandy jests and swap stories. As for trout,--was there one in
Massachusetts that would not have been curious to listen to the
intimate opinions of Daniel Webster as he loafed along the banks of
the Marshpee,--or is there one in Pennsylvania to-day that might not be
drawn with interest and delight to the feet of Joseph Jefferson,
telling how he conceived and wrote RIP VAN WINKLE on the banks of a
trout-stream?

Fishermen must be silent? On the contrary, it is far more likely that
good talk may promote good fishing.

All this, however, goes upon the assumption that fish can hear, in
the proper sense of the word. And this, it must be confessed, is an
assumption not yet fully verified. Experienced anglers and students of
fishy ways are divided upon the question. It is beyond a doubt that all
fishes, except the very lowest forms, have ears. But then so have all
men; and yet we have the best authority for believing that there are
many who "having ears, hear not."

The ears of fishes, for the most part, are inclosed in their skull, and
have no outward opening. Water conveys sound, as every country boy
knows who has tried the experiment of diving to the bottom of the
swimming-hole and knocking two big stones together. But I doubt whether
any country boy, engaged in this interesting scientific experiment, has
heard the conversation of his friends on the bank who were engaged in
hiding his clothes.

There are many curious and more or less venerable stories to the effect
that fishes may be trained to assemble at the ringing of a bell or the
beating of a drum. Lucian, a writer of the second century, tells of a
certain lake wherein many sacred fishes were kept, of which the largest
had names given to them, and came when they were called. But Lucian
was not a man of especially good reputation, and there is an air of
improbability about his statement that the LARGEST fishes came. This is
not the custom of the largest fishes.

In the present century there was a tale of an eel in a garden-well, in
Scotland, which would come to be fed out of a spoon when the children
called him by his singularly inappropriate name of Rob Roy. This seems
a more likely story than Lucian's; at all events it comes from a more
orthodox atmosphere. But before giving it full credence, I should like
to know whether the children, when they called "Rob Roy!" stood where
the eel could see the spoon.

On the other side of the question, we may quote Mr. Ronalds, also a
Scotchman, and the learned author of THE FLY-FISHER'S ENTOMOLOGY, who
conducted a series of experiments which proved that even trout, the most
fugacious of fish, are not in the least disturbed by the discharge of a
gun, provided the flash is concealed. Mr. Henry P. Wells, the author of
THE AMERICAN SALMON ANGLER, says that he has "never been able to make a
sound in the air which seemed to produce the slightest effect upon trout
in the water."

So the controversy on the hearing of fishes continues, and the
conclusion remains open. Every man is at liberty to embrace that side
which pleases him best. You may think that the finny tribes are as
sensitive to sound as Fine Ear, in the German fairy-tale, who could hear
the grass grow. Or you may hold the opposite opinion, that they are


     "Deafer than the blue-eyed cat."


But whichever theory you adopt, in practice, if you are a wise
fisherman, you will steer a middle course, between one thing which must
be left undone and another thing which should be done. You will refrain
from stamping on the bank, or knocking on the side of the boat, or
dragging the anchor among the stones on the bottom; for when the water
vibrates the fish are likely to vanish. But you will indulge as freely
as you please in pleasant discourse with your comrade; for it is certain
that fishing is never hindered, and may even be helped, in one way or
another, by good talk.

I should therefore have no hesitation in advising any one to choose, for
companionship on an angling expedition, long or short, a person who has
the rare merit of being TALKABLE.




II. THEME--ON A SMALL, USEFUL VIRTUE


"Talkable" is not a new adjective. But it needs a new definition, and
the complement of a corresponding noun. I would fain set down on paper
some observations and reflections which may serve to make its meaning
clear, and render due praise to that most excellent quality in man
or woman,--especially in anglers,--the small but useful virtue of
TALKABILITY.

Robert Louis Stevenson uses the word "talkable" in one of his essays
to denote a certain distinction among the possible subjects of human
speech. There are some things, he says in effect, about which you can
really talk; and there are other things about which you cannot properly
talk at all, but only dispute, or harangue, or prose, or moralize, or
chatter.

After mature consideration I have arrived at the opinion that this
distinction among the themes of speech is an illusion. It does not
exist. All subjects, "the foolish things of the world, and the weak
things of the world, and base things of the world, yea, and things that
are not," may provide matter for good talk, if only the right people are
engaged in the enterprise. I know a man who can make a description of
the weather as entertaining as a tune on the violin; and even on the
threadbare theme of the waywardness of domestic servants, I have heard a
discreet woman play the most diverting and instructive variations.

No, the quality of talkability does not mark a distinction among things;
it denotes a difference among people. It is not an attribute unequally
distributed among material objects and abstract ideas. It is a virtue
which belongs to the mind and moral character of certain persons. It
is a reciprocal human quality; active as well as passive; a power of
bestowing and receiving.

An amiable person is one who has a capacity for loving and being loved.
An affable person is one who is ready to speak and to be spoken to,--as,
for example, Milton's "affable archangel" Raphael; though it must be
confessed that he laid the chief emphasis on the active side of his
affability. A "clubable" person (to use a word which Dr. Samuel Johnson
invented but did not put into his dictionary) is one who is fit for the
familiar give and take of club-life. A talkable person, therefore, is
one whose nature and disposition invite the easy interchange of thoughts
and feelings, one in whose company it is a pleasure to talk or to be
talked to.

Now this good quality of talkability is to be distinguished, very
strictly and inflexibly, from the bad quality which imitates it and
often brings it into discredit. I mean the vice of talkativeness. That
is a selfish, one-sided, inharmonious affair, full of discomfort, and
productive of most unchristian feelings.

You may observe the operations of this vice not only in human beings,
but also in birds. All the birds in the bush can make some kind of a
noise; and most of them like to do it; and some of them like it a great
deal and do it very much. But it is not always for edification, nor are
the most vociferous and garrulous birds commonly the most pleasing. A
parrot, for instance, in your neighbour's back yard, in the summer time,
when the windows are open, is not an aid to the development of Christian
character. I knew a man who had to stay in the city all summer, and in
the autumn was asked to describe the character and social standing of
a new family that had moved into his neighbourhood. Were they "nice
people," well-bred, intelligent, respectable? "Well," said he, "I don't
know what your standards are, and would prefer not to say anything
libellous; but I'll tell you in a word,--they are the kind of people
that keep a parrot."

Then there is the English Sparrow! What an insufferable chatterbox,
what an incurable scold, what a voluble and tiresome blackguard is this
little feathered cockney. There is not a sweet or pleasant word in all
his vocabulary.

I am convinced that he talks altogether of scandals and fights and
street-sweepings.

The kingdom of ornithology is divided into two departments,--real birds
and English sparrows. English sparrows are not real birds; they are
little beasts.

There was a church in Brooklyn which was once covered with a great and
spreading vine, in which the sparrows built innumerable nests. These
ungodly little birds kept up such a din that it was impossible to hear
the service of the sanctuary. The faithful clergy strained their voices
to the verge of ministerial sore throat, but the people had no peace in
their devotions until the vine was cut down, and the Anglican intruders
were evicted.

A talkative person is like an English sparrow,--a bird that cannot
sing, and will sing, and ought to be persuaded not to try to sing. But
a talkable person has the gift that belongs to the wood thrush and
the veery and the wren, the oriole and the white-throat and the
rose-breasted grosbeak, the mockingbird and the robin (sometimes); and
the brown thrush; yes, the brown thrush has it to perfection, if you can
catch him alone,--the gift of being interesting, charming, delightful,
in the most off-hand and various modes of utterance.

Talkability is not at all the same thing as eloquence. The eloquent man
surprises, overwhelms, and sometimes paralyzes us by the display of his
power. Great orators are seldom good talkers. Oratory in exercise is
masterful and jealous, and intolerant of all interruptions. Oratory in
preparation is silent, self-centred, uncommunicative. The painful
truth of this remark may be seen in the row of countenances along the
president's table at a public banquet about nine o'clock in the evening.
The bicycle-face seems unconstrained and merry by comparison with
the after-dinner-speech-face. The flow of table-talk is corked by the
anxious conception of post-prandial oratory.

Thackeray, in one of his ROUNDABOUT PAPERS, speaks of "the sin
of tall-talking," which, he says, "is the sin of schoolmasters,
governesses, critics, sermoners, and instructors of young or old
people." But this is not in accord with my observation. I should say it
was rather the sin of dilettanti who are ambitious of that high-stepping
accomplishment which is called "conversational ability."

This has usually, to my mind, something set and artificial about it,
although in its most perfect form the art almost succeeds in concealing
itself. But, at all events, ''conversation'' is talk in evening dress,
with perhaps a little powder and a touch of rouge. 'T is like one of
those wise virgins who are said to look their best by lamplight. And
doubtless this is an excellent thing, and not without its advantages.
But for my part, commend me to one who loses nothing by the early
morning illumination,--one who brings all her attractions with her when
she comes down to breakfast,--she is a very pleasant maid.

Talk is that form of human speech which is exempt from all duties,
foreign and domestic. It is the nearest thing in the world to thinking
and feeling aloud. It is necessarily not for publication,--solely an
evidence of good faith and mutual kindness. You tell me what you have
seen and what you are thinking about, because you take it for granted
that it will interest and entertain me; and you listen to my replies and
the recital of my adventures and opinions, because you know I like
to tell them, and because you find something in them, of one kind or
another, that you care to hear. It is a nice game, with easy, simple
rules, and endless possibilities of variation. And if we go into it
with the right spirit, and play it for love, without heavy stakes, the
chances are that if we happen to be fairly talkable people we shall have
one of the best things in the world,--a mighty good talk.

What is there in this anxious, hide-bound, tiresome existence of ours,
more restful and remunerative? Montaigne says, "The use of it is more
sweet than of any other action of life; and for that reason it is that,
if I were compelled to choose, I should sooner, I think, consent to lose
my sight than my hearing and speech." The very aimlessness with which
it proceeds, the serene disregard of all considerations of profit and
propriety with which it follows its wandering course, and brings up
anywhere or nowhere, to camp for the night, is one of its attractions.
It is like a day's fishing, not valuable chiefly for the fish you bring
home, but for the pleasant country through which it leads you, and the
state of personal well-being and health in which it leaves you, warmed,
and cheered, and content with life and friendship.

The order in which you set out upon a talk, the path which you pursue,
the rules which you observe or disregard, make but little difference
in the end. You may follow the advice of Immanuel Kant if you like, and
begin with the weather and the roads, and go on to current events, and
wind up with history, art, and philosophy. Or you may reverse the order
if you prefer, like that admirable talker Clarence King, who usually set
sail on some highly abstract paradox, such as "Civilization is a nervous
disease," and landed in a tale of adventure in Mexico or the Rocky
Mountains. Or you may follow the example of Edward Eggleston, who
started in at the middle and worked out at either end, and sometimes at
both. It makes no difference. If the thing is in you at all, you will
find good matter for talk anywhere along the route. Hear what Montaigne
says again: "In our discourse all subjects are alike to me; let there
be neither weight nor depth, 't is all one; there is yet grace and
pertinence; all there is tented with a mature and constant judgment, and
mixed with goodness, freedom, gayety, and friendship."

How close to the mark the old essayist sends his arrow! He is right
about the essential qualities of good talk. They are not merely
intellectual. They are moral. Goodness of heart, freedom of spirit,
gayety of temper, and friendliness of disposition,--these are four fine
things, and doubtless as acceptable to God as they are agreeable to men.
The talkability which springs out of these qualities has its roots in a
good soil. On such a plant one need not look for the poison berries of
malign discourse, nor for the Dead Sea apples of frivolous mockery.
But fair fruit will be there, pleasant to the sight and good for food,
brought forth abundantly according to the season.




III. VARIATIONS--ON A PLEASANT PHRASE FROM MONTAIGNE


Montaigne has given as our text, "Goodness, freedom, gayety, and
friendship,"--these are the conditions which produce talkability. And
on this fourfold theme we may embroider a few variations, by way of
exposition and enlargement.

GOODNESS is the first thing and the most needful. An ugly, envious,
irritable disposition is not fitted for talk. The occasions for offence
are too numerous, and the way into strife is too short and easy. A
touch of good-natured combativeness, a fondness for brisk argument, a
readiness to try a friendly bout with any comer, on any ground, is a
decided advantage in a talker. It breaks up the offensive monotony of
polite concurrence, and makes things lively. But quarrelsomeness is
quite another affair, and very fatal.

I am always a little uneasy in a discourse with the Reverend Bellicosus
Macduff. It is like playing golf on links liable to earthquakes. One
never knows when the landscape will be thrown into convulsions. Macduff
has a tendency to regard a difference of opinion as a personal insult.
If he makes a bad stroke he seems to think that the way to retrieve it
is to deliver the next one on the head of the other player. He does
not tarry for the invitation to lay on; and before you know what has
happened you find yourself in a position where you are obliged to cry,
"Hold, enough!" and to be liberally damned without any bargain to that
effect. This is discouraging, and calculated to make one wish that human
intercourse might be put, as far as Macduff is concerned, upon the gold
basis of silence.

On the other hand, what a delight it was to talk with that old worthy,
Chancellor Howard Crosby. He was a fighting man for four or five
generations hack, Dutch on one side, English on the other. But there was
not one little drop of gall in his blood. His opinions were fixed to a
degree; he loved to do battle for them; he never changed them--at least
never in the course of the same discussion. He admired and respected
a gallant adversary, and urged him on, with quips and puns and daring
assaults and unqualified statements, to do his best. Easy victories were
not to his taste. Even if he joined with you in laying out some common
falsehood for burial, you might be sure that before the affair was
concluded there would be every prospect of what an Irishman would call
"an elegant wake." If you stood up against him on one of his favorite
subjects of discussion you must be prepared for hot work. You would have
to take off your coat. But when the combat was over he would be the man
to help you on with it again; and you would walk home together arm in
arm, through the twilight, smoking the pipe of peace. Talk like that
does good. It quickens the beating of the heart, and leaves no scars
upon it.

But this manly spirit, which loves


     "To drink delight of battle with its peers,"


is a very different thing from that mean, bad, hostile temper which
loves to inflict wounds and injuries just for the sake of showing power,
and which is never so happy as when it is making some one wince. There
are such people in the world, and sometimes their brilliancy tempts us
to forget their malignancy. But to have much converse with them is as if
we should make playmates of rattlesnakes for their grace of movement and
swiftness of stroke.

I knew a man once (I will not name him even with an initial) who was
malignant to the core. Learned, industrious, accomplished, he kept
all his talents at the service of a perfect genius for hatred. If you
crossed his path but once, he would never cease to curse you. The grave
might close over you, but he would revile your epitaph and mock at your
memory. It was not even necessary that you should do anything to incur
his enmity. It was enough to be upright and sincere and successful, to
waken the wrath of this Shimei. Integrity was an offence to him, and
excellence of any kind filled him with spleen. There was no good cause
within his horizon that he did not give a bad word to, and no decent
man in the community whom he did not try either to use or to abuse. To
listen to him or to read what he had written was to learn to think a
little worse of every one that he mentioned, and worst of all of him. He
had the air of a gentleman, the vocabulary of a scholar, the style of a
Junius, and the heart of a Thersites.

Talk, in such company, is impossible. The sense of something evil,
lurking beneath the play of wit, is like the knowledge that there are
snakes in the grass. Every step must be taken with fear. But the
real pleasure of a walk through the meadow comes from the feeling of
security, of ease, of safe and happy abandon to the mood of the moment.
This ungirdled and unguarded felicity in mutual discourse depends, after
all, upon the assurance of real goodness in your companion. I do not
mean a stiff impeccability of conduct. Prudes and Pharisees are poor
comrades. I mean simply goodness of heart, the wholesome, generous,
kindly quality which thinketh no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, hopeth
all things, endureth all things, and wisheth well to all men. Where you
feel this quality you can let yourself go, in the ease of hearty talk.

FREEDOM is the second note that Montaigne strikes, and it is essential
to the harmony of talking. Very careful, prudent, precise persons are
seldom entertaining in familiar speech. They are like tennis players in
too fine clothes. They think more of their costume than of the game.

A mania for absolutely correct pronunciation is fatal. The people who
are afflicted with this painful ailment are as anxious about their
utterance as dyspeptics about their diet. They move through their
sentences as delicately as Agag walked. Their little airs of nicety,
their starched cadences and frilled phrases seem as if they had just
been taken out of a literary bandbox. If perchance you happen to
misplace an accent, you shall see their eyebrows curl up like an
interrogation mark, and they will ask you what authority you have
for that pronunciation. As if, forsooth, a man could not talk without
book-license! As if he must have a permit from some dusty lexicon before
he can take a good word into his mouth and speak it out like the people
with whom he has lived!

The truth is that the man who is very particular not to commit himself,
in pronunciation or otherwise, and talks as if his remarks were being
taken down in shorthand, and shudders at the thought of making a
mistake, will hardly be able to open your heart or let out the best that
is in his own.

Reserve and precision are a great protection to overrated reputations;
but they are death to talk.

In talk it is not correctness of grammar nor elegance of enunciation
that charms us; it is spirit, VERVE, the sudden turn of humour, the
keen, pungent taste of life. For this reason a touch of dialect, a
flavour of brogue, is delightful. Any dialect is classic that has
conveyed beautiful thoughts. Who that ever talked with the poet
Tennyson, when he let himself go, over the pipes, would miss the savour
of his broad-rolling Lincolnshire vowels, now heightening the humour,
now deepening the pathos, of his genuine manly speech? There are many
good stories lingering in the memories of those who knew Dr. James
McCosh, the late president of Princeton University,--stories too good, I
fear, to get into a biography; but the best of them, in print, would not
have the snap and vigour of the poorest of them, in talk, with his own
inimitable Scotch-Irish brogue to set it forth.

A brogue is not a fault. It is a beauty, an heirloom, a distinction. A
local accent is like a landed inheritance; it marks a man's place in the
world, tells where he comes from. Of course it is possible to have too
much of it. A man does not need to carry the soil of his whole farm
around with him on his boots. But, within limits, the accent of a native
region is delightful. 'T is the flavour of heather in the grouse,
the taste of wild herbs and evergreen-buds in the venison. I like the
maple-sugar tang of the Vermonter's sharp-edged speech; the round,
full-waisted r's of Pennsylvania and Ohio; the soft, indolent vowels
of the South. One of the best talkers now living is a schoolmaster from
Virginia, Colonel Gordon McCabe. I once crossed the ocean with him on
a stream of stories that reached from Liverpool to New York. He did not
talk in the least like a book. He talked like a Virginian.

When Montaigne mentions GAYETY as the third clement of satisfying
discourse, I fancy he does not mean mere fun, though that has its value
at the right time and place. But there is another quality which is far
more valuable and always fit. Indeed it underlies the best fun and makes
it wholesome. It is cheerfulness, the temper which makes the best
of things and squeezes the little drops of honey even out of
thistle-blossoms. I think this is what Montaigne meant. Certainly it is
what he had.

Cheerfulness is the background of all good talk. A sense of humour is a
means of grace. With it I have heard a pleasant soul make even that
most perilous of all subjects, the description of a long illness,
entertaining. The various physicians moved through the recital as
excellent comedians, and the medicines appeared like a succession of
timely jests.

There is no occasion upon which this precious element of talkability
comes out stronger than when we are on a journey. Travel with a
cheerless and easily discouraged companion is an unadulterated
misery. But a cheerful comrade is better than a waterproof coat and a
foot-warmer.

I remember riding once with my lady Graygown fifteen miles through a
cold rainstorm, in an open buckboard, over the worst road in the world,
from LAC A LA BELLE RIVIERE to the Metabetchouan River. Such was the
cheerfulness of her ejaculations (the only possible form of talk)
that we arrived at our destination as warm and merry as if we had been
sitting beside a roaring camp-fire.


But after all, the very best thing in good talk, and the thing that
helps it most, is FRIENDSHIP. How it dissolves the barriers that divide
us, and loosens all constraint, and diffuses itself like some fine old
cordial through all the veins of life--this feeling that we understand
and trust each other, and wish each other heartily well! Everything into
which it really comes is good. It transforms letter-writing from a task
into a pleasure. It makes music a thousand times more sweet. The people
who play and sing not at us, but TO us,--how delightful it is to listen
to them! Yes, there is a talkability that can express itself even
without words. There is an exchange of thought and feeling which is
happy alike in speech and in silence. It is quietness pervaded with
friendship.


Having come thus far in the exposition of Montaigne, I shall conclude
with an opinion of my own, even though I cannot quote a sentence of his
to back it.

The one person of all the world in whom talkability is most desirable,
and talkativeness least endurable, is a wife.




A WILD STRAWBERRY


     "Such is the story of the Boblink; once spiritual, musical,
     admired, the joy of the meadows, and the favourite bird of
     spring; finally a gross little sensualist who expiates his
     sensuality in the larder. His story contains a moral, worthy
     the attention of all little birds and little boys; warning
     them to keep to those refined and intellectual pursuits
     which raised him to so high a pitch of popularity during the
     early part of his career; but to eschew all tendency to that
     gross and dissipated indulgence, which brought this mistaken
     little bird to an untimely end."

     --WASHINGTON IRVING: Wolfert's Roost.


The Swiftwater brook was laughing softly to itself as it ran through a
strip of hemlock forest on the edge of the Woodlings' farm. Among the
evergreen branches overhead the gayly-dressed warblers,--little friends
of the forest,--were flitting to and fro, lisping their June songs of
contented love: milder, slower, lazier notes than those in which
they voiced the amourous raptures of May. Prince's Pine and golden
loose-strife and pink laurel and blue hare-bells and purple-fringed
orchids, and a score of lovely flowers were all abloom. The late spring
had hindered some; the sudden heats of early summer had hastened others;
and now they seemed to come out all together, as if Nature had suddenly
tilted up her cornucopia and poured forth her treasures in spendthrift
joy.

I lay on a mossy bank at the foot of a tree, filling my pipe after a
frugal lunch, and thinking how hard it would be to find in any quarter
of the globe a place more fair and fragrant than this hidden vale among
the Alleghany Mountains. The perfume of the flowers of the forest is
more sweet and subtle than the heavy scent of tropical blossoms. No
lily-field in Bermuda could give a fragrance half so magical as the
fairy-like odour of these woodland slopes, soft carpeted with the green
of glossy vines above whose tiny leaves, in delicate profusion,


     "The slight Linnaea hangs its twin-born heads."


Nor are there any birds in Africa, or among the Indian Isles, more
exquisite in colour than these miniature warblers, showing their gold
and green, their orange and black, their blue and white, against the
dark background of the rhododendron thicket.

But how seldom we put a cup of pleasure to our lips without a dash of
bitters, a touch of faultfinding. My drop of discontent, that day, was
the thought that the northern woodland, at least in June, yielded no
fruit to match its beauty and its fragrance.

There is good browsing among the leaves of the wood and the grasses of
the meadow, as every well-instructed angler knows. The bright emerald
tips that break from the hemlock and the balsam like verdant flames have
a pleasant savour to the tongue. The leaves of the sassafras are full
of spice, and the bark of the black-birch twigs holds a fine cordial.
Crinkle-root is spicy, but you must partake of it delicately, or it will
bite your tongue. Spearmint and peppermint never lose their charm for
the palate that still remembers the delights of youth. Wild sorrel has
an agreeable, sour, shivery flavour. Even the tender stalk of a young
blade of grass is a thing that can be chewed by a person of childlike
mind with much contentment.

But, after all, these are only relishes. They whet the appetite more
than they appease it. There should be something to eat, in the June
woods, as perfect in its kind, as satisfying to the sense of taste, as
the birds and the flowers are to the senses of sight and hearing and
smell. Blueberries are good, but they are far away in July. Blackberries
are luscious when they are fully ripe, but that will not be until
August. Then the fishing will be over, and the angler's hour of need
will be past. The one thing that is lacking now beside this mountain
stream is some fruit more luscious and dainty than grows in the tropics,
to melt upon the lips and fill the mouth with pleasure.

But that is what these cold northern woods will not offer. They are too
reserved, too lofty, too puritanical to make provision for the grosser
wants of humanity. They are not friendly to luxury.

Just then, as I shifted my head to find a softer pillow of moss after
this philosophic and immoral reflection, Nature gave me her silent
answer. Three wild strawberries, nodding on their long stems, hung over
my face. It was an invitation to taste and see that they were good.

The berries were not the round and rosy ones of the meadow, but the
long, slender, dark crimson ones of the forest. One, two, three; no more
on that vine; but each one as it touched my lips was a drop of nectar
and a crumb of ambrosia, a concentrated essence of all the pungent
sweetness of the wildwood, sapid, penetrating, and delicious. I tasted
the odour of a hundred blossoms and the green shimmering of innumerable
leaves and the sparkle of sifted sunbeams and the breath of highland
breezes and the song of many birds and the murmur of flowing
streams,--all in a wild strawberry.


Do you remember, in THE COMPLEAT ANGLER, a remark which Isaak Walton
quotes from a certain "Doctor Boteler" about strawberries? "Doubtless,"
said that wise old man, "God could have made a better berry, but
doubtless God never did."

Well, the wild strawberry is the one that God made.

I think it would have been pleasant to know a man who could sum up
his reflections upon the important question of berries in such a pithy
saying as that which Walton repeats. His tongue must have been in close
communication with his heart. He must have had a fair sense of that
sprightly humour without which piety itself is often insipid.

I have often tried to find out more about him, and some day I hope I
shall. But up to the present, all that the books have told me of this
obscure sage is that his name was William Butler, and that he was an
eminent physician, sometimes called "the Aesculapius of his age." He was
born at Ipswich, in 1535, and educated at Clare Hall, Cambridge; in the
neighbourhood of which town he appears to have spent the most of his
life, in high repute as a practitioner of physic. He had the honour of
doctoring King James the First after an accident on the hunting field,
and must have proved himself a pleasant old fellow, for the king looked
him up at Cambridge the next year, and spent an hour in his lodgings.
This wise physician also invented a medicinal beverage called "Doctor
Butler's Ale." I do not quite like the sound of it, but perhaps it was
better than its name. This much is sure, at all events: either it was
really a harmless drink, or else the doctor must have confined its use
entirely to his patients; for he lived to the ripe age of eighty-three
years.

Between the time when William Butler first needed the services of a
physician, in 1535, and the time when he last prescribed for a patient,
in 1618, there was plenty of trouble in England. Bloody Queen Mary sat
on the throne; and there were all kinds of quarrels about religion and
politics; and Catholics and Protestants were killing one another in
the name of God. After that the red-haired Elizabeth, called the Virgin
Queen, wore the crown, and waged triumphant war and tempestuous love.
Then fat James of Scotland was made king of Great Britain; and Guy
Fawkes tried to blow him up with gunpowder, and failed; and the king
tried to blow out all the pipes in England with his COUNTERBLAST AGAINST
TOBACCO; but he failed too. Somewhere about that time, early in the
seventeenth century, a very small event happened. A new berry was
brought over from Virginia,--FRAGRARIA VIRGINIANA,--and then, amid wars
and rumours of wars, Doctor Butler's happiness was secure. That new
berry was so much richer and sweeter and more generous than the familiar
FRAGRARIA VESCA of Europe, that it attracted the sincere interest of all
persons of good taste. It inaugurated a new era in the history of the
strawberry. The long lost masterpiece of Paradise was restored to its
true place in the affections of man.

Is there not a touch of merry contempt for all the vain controversies
and conflicts of humanity in the grateful ejaculation with which the old
doctor greeted that peaceful, comforting gift of Providence?

"From this time forward," he seems to say, "the fates cannot beggar
me, for I have eaten strawberries. With every Maytime that visits this
distracted island, the white blossoms with hearts of gold will arrive.
In every June the red drops of pleasant savour will hang among the
scalloped leaves. The children of this world may wrangle and give one
another wounds that even my good ale cannot cure. Nevertheless, the
earth as God created it is a fair dwelling and full of comfort for all
who have a quiet mind and a thankful heart. Doubtless God might have
made a better world, but doubtless this is the world He made for us; and
in it He planted the strawberry."

Fine old doctor! Brave philosopher of cheerfulness! The Virginian berry
should have been brought to England sooner, or you should have lived
longer, at least to a hundred years, so that you might have welcomed a
score of strawberry-seasons with gratitude and an epigram.

Since that time a great change has passed over the fruit which Doctor
Butler praised so well. That product of creative art which Divine wisdom
did not choose to surpass, human industry has laboured to improve. It
has grown immensely in size and substance. The traveller from America
who steams into Queenstown harbour in early summer is presented (for a
consideration) with a cabbage-leaf full of pale-hued berries, sweet and
juicy, any one of which would outbulk a dozen of those that used to grow
in Virginia when Pocahontas was smitten with the charms of Captain John
Smith. They are superb, those light-tinted Irish strawberries. And there
are wonderful new varieties developed in the gardens of New Jersey and
Rhode Island, which compare with the ancient berries of the woods and
meadows as Leviathan with a minnow. The huge crimson cushions hang among
the plants so thick that they seem like bunches of fruit with a few
leaves attached for ornament. You can satisfy your hunger in such a
berry-patch in ten minutes, while out in the field you must pick for
half an hour, and in the forest thrice as long, before you can fill a
small tin cup.

Yet, after all, it is questionable whether men have really bettered
God's CHEF D'OEUVRE in the berry line. They have enlarged it and made
it more plentiful and more certain in its harvest. But sweeter, more
fragrant, more poignant in its flavour? No. The wild berry still stands
first in its subtle gusto.

Size is not the measure of excellence. Perfection lies in quality, not
in quantity. Concentration enhances pleasure, gives it a point so that
it goes deeper.

Is not a ten-inch trout better than a ten-foot sturgeon? I would rather
read a tiny essay by Charles Lamb than a five-hundred page libel on
life by a modern British novelist who shall be nameless. Flavour is the
priceless quality. Style is the thing that counts and is remembered, in
literature, in art, and in berries.

No JOCUNDA, nor TRIUMPH, nor VICTORIA, nor any other high-titled fruit
that ever took the first prize at an agricultural fair, is half so
delicate and satisfying as the wild strawberry that dropped into my
mouth, under the hemlock tree, beside the Swiftwater.

A touch of surprise is essential to perfect sweetness.

To get what you have been wishing for is pleasant; but to get what
you have not been sure of, makes the pleasure tingle. A new door of
happiness is opened when you go out to hunt for something and discover
it with your own eyes. But there is an experience even better than that.
When you have stupidly forgotten (or despondently forgone) to look
about you for the unclaimed treasures and unearned blessings which are
scattered along the by-ways of life, then, sometimes by a special mercy,
a small sample of them is quietly laid before you so that you cannot
help seeing it, and it brings you back to a sense of the joyful
possibilities of living.

How full of enjoyment is the search after wild things,--wild birds, wild
flowers, wild honey, wild berries! There was a country club on Storm
King Mountain, above the Hudson River, where they used to celebrate a
festival of flowers every spring. Men and women who had conservatories
of their own, full of rare plants and costly orchids, came together
to admire the gathered blossoms of the woodlands and meadows. But the
people who had the best of the entertainment were the boys and girls who
wandered through the thickets and down the brooks, pushed their way into
the tangled copses and crept venturesomely across the swamps, to look
for the flowers. Some of the seekers may have had a few gray hairs; but
for that day at least they were all boys and girls. Nature was as young
as ever, and they were all her children. Hand touched hand without a
glove. The hidden blossoms of friendship unfolded. Laughter and merry
shouts and snatches of half-forgotten song rose to the lips. Gay
adventure sparkled in the air. School was out and nobody listened for
the bell. It was just a day to live, and be natural, and take no thought
for the morrow.

There is great luck in this affair of looking for flowers. I do not see
how any one who is prejudiced against games of chance can consistently
undertake it.

For my own part, I approve of garden flowers because they are so orderly
and so certain; but wild flowers I love, just because there is so much
chance about them. Nature is all in favour of certainty in great laws
and of uncertainty in small events. You cannot appoint the day and the
place for her flower-shows. If you happen to drop in at the right moment
she will give you a free admission. But even then it seems as if the
table of beauty had been spread for the joy of a higher visitor, and in
obedience to secret orders which you have not heard.

Have you ever found the fringed gentian?


          "Just before the snows,
     There came a purple creature
      That lavished all the hill:
     And summer hid her forehead,
      And mockery was still.

     The frosts were her condition:
      The Tyrian would not come
     Until the North evoked her,--
      'Creator, shall I bloom?'"


There are strange freaks of fortune in the finding of wild flowers,
and curious coincidences which make us feel as if some one were playing
friendly tricks on us. I remember reading, one evening in May, a passage
in a good book called THE PROCESSION OF THE FLOWERS, in which Colonel
Higginson describes the singular luck that a friend of his enjoyed, year
after year, in finding the rare blossoms of the double rueanemone. It
seems that this man needed only to take a walk in the suburbs of any
town, and he would come upon a bed of these flowers, without effort or
design. I envied him his good fortune, for I had never discovered
even one of them. But the next morning, as I strolled out to fish the
Swiftwater, down below Billy Lerns's spring-house I found a green bank
in the shadow of the wood all bespangled with tiny, trembling, twofold
stars,--double rueanemones, for luck! It was a favourable omen, and that
day I came home with a creel full of trout.

The theory that Adam lived out in the woods for some time before he was
put into the garden of Eden "to dress it and to keep it" has an air of
probability. How else shall we account for the arboreal instincts that
cling to his posterity?

There is a wilding strain in our blood that all the civilization in the
world will not eradicate. I never knew a real boy--or, for that matter,
a girl worth knowing--who would not rather climb a tree, any day, than
walk up a golden stairway.

It is a touch of this instinct, I suppose, that makes it more delightful
to fish in the most insignificant of free streams than in a carefully
stocked and preserved pond, where the fish are brought up by hand and
fed on minced liver. Such elaborate precautions to ensure good luck
extract all the spice from the sport of angling. Casting the fly in such
a pond, if you hooked a fish, you might expect to hear the keeper say,
"Ah, that is Charles, we will play him and put him back, if you please,
sir; for the master is very fond of him,"--or, "Now you have got hold of
Edward; let us land him and keep him; he is three years old this month,
and just ready to be eaten." It would seem like taking trout out of cold
storage.

Who could find any pleasure in angling for the tame carp in the
fish-pool of Fontainebleau? They gather at the marble steps, those
venerable, courtly fish, to receive their rations; and there are
veterans among them, in ancient livery, with fringes of green moss on
their shoulders, who could tell you pretty tales of being fed by the
white hands of maids of honour, or even of nibbling their crumbs of
bread from the jewelled fingers of a princess.

There is no sport in bringing pets to the table. It may be necessary
sometimes; but the true sportsman would always prefer to leave the
unpleasant task of execution to menial hands, while he goes out into the
wild country to capture his game by his own skill,--if he has good
luck. I would rather run some risk in this enterprise (even as the young
Tobias did, when the voracious pike sprang at him from the waters of the
Tigris, and would have devoured him but for the friendly instruction
of the piscatory Angel, who taught Tobias how to land the monster),--I
would far rather take any number of chances in my sport than have it
domesticated to the point of dulness.

The trim plantations of trees which are called "forests" in certain
parts of Europe--scientifically pruned and tended, counted every year by
uniformed foresters, and defended against all possible depredations--are
admirable and useful in their way; but they lack the mystic enchantment
of the fragments of native woodland which linger among the Adirondacks
and the White Mountains, or the vast, shaggy, sylvan wildernesses which
hide the lakes and rivers of Canada. These Laurentian Hills lie in No
Man's Land. Here you do not need to keep to the path, for there is none.
You may make your own trail, whithersoever fancy leads you; and at night
you may pitch your tent under any tree that looks friendly and firm.

Here, if anywhere, you shall find Dryads, and Naiads, and Oreads. And
if you chance to see one, by moonlight, combing her long hair beside
the glimmering waterfall, or slipping silently, with gleaming shoulders,
through the grove of silver birches, you may call her by the name that
pleases you best. She is all your own discovery. There is no social
directory in the wilderness.

One side of our nature, no doubt, finds its satisfaction in the regular,
the proper, the conventional. But there is another side of our
nature, underneath, that takes delight in the strange, the free, the
spontaneous. We like to discover what we call a law of Nature, and make
our calculations about it, and harness the force which lies behind it
for our own purposes. But we taste a different kind of joy when an
event occurs which nobody has foreseen or counted upon. It seems like
an evidence that there is something in the world which is alive and
mysterious and untrammelled.

The weather-prophet tells us of an approaching storm. It comes according
to the programme. We admire the accuracy of the prediction, and
congratulate ourselves that we have such a good meteorological service.
But when, perchance, a bright, crystalline piece of weather arrives
instead of the foretold tempest, do we not feel a secret sense of
pleasure which goes beyond our mere comfort in the sunshine? The whole
affair is not as easy as a sum in simple addition, after all,--at least
not with our present knowledge. It is a good joke on the Weather Bureau.
"Aha, Old Probabilities!" we say, "you don't know it all yet; there are
still some chances to be taken!"

Some day, I suppose, all things in the heavens above, and in the earth
beneath, and in the hearts of the men and women who dwell between, will
be investigated and explained. We shall live a perfectly ordered life,
with no accidents, happy or unhappy. Everybody will act according to
rule, and there will be no dotted lines on the map of human existence,
no regions marked "unexplored." Perhaps that golden age of the machine
will come, but you and I will hardly live to see it. And if that seems
to you a matter for tears, you must do your own weeping, for I cannot
find it in my heart to add a single drop of regret.

The results of education and social discipline in humanity are fine. It
is a good thing that we can count upon them. But at the same time let us
rejoice in the play of native traits and individual vagaries. Cultivated
manners are admirable, yet there is a sudden touch of inborn grace and
courtesy that goes beyond them all. No array of accomplishments can
rival the charm of an unsuspected gift of nature, brought suddenly to
light. I once heard a peasant girl singing down the Traunthal, and the
echo of her song outlives, in the hearing of my heart, all memories of
the grand opera.

The harvest of the gardens and the orchards, the result of prudent
planting and patient cultivation, is full of satisfaction. We anticipate
it in due season, and when it comes we fill our mouths and are grateful.
But pray, kind Providence, let me slip over the fence out of the garden
now and then, to shake a nut-tree that grows untended in the wood. Give
me liberty to put off my black coat for a day, and go a-fishing on a
free stream, and find by chance a wild strawberry.




LOVERS AND LANDSCAPE


"He insisted that the love that was of real value in the world was
n't interesting, and that the love that was interesting was n't always
admirable. Love that happened to a person like the measles or fits, and
was really of no particular credit to itself or its victims, was the
sort that got into the books and was made much of; whereas the kind that
was attained by the endeavour of true souls, and that had wear in it,
and that made things go right instead of tangling them up, was too much
like duty to make satisfactory reading for people of sentiment."--E. S.
MARTIN: My Cousin Anthony.


The first day of spring is one thing, and the first spring day is
another. The difference between them is sometimes as great as a month.

The first day of spring is due to arrive, if the calendar does not break
down, about the twenty-first of March, when the earth turns the corner
of Sun Alley and starts for Summer Street. But the first spring day
is not on the time-table at all. It comes when it is ready, and in the
latitude of New York this is usually not till after All Fools' Day.

About this time,--


     "When chinks in April's windy dome
      Let through a day of June,
      And foot and thought incline to roam,
      And every sound's a tune,"--


it is the habit of the angler who lives in town to prepare for the
labours of the approaching season by longer walks or bicycle-rides in
the parks, or along the riverside, or in the somewhat demoralized
Edens of the suburbs. In the course of these vernal peregrinations and
circumrotations, I observe that lovers of various kinds begin to occupy
a notable place in the landscape.

The burnished dove puts a livelier iris around his neck, and practises
fantastic bows and amourous quicksteps along the verandah of the
pigeon-house and on every convenient roof. The young male of the human
species, less gifted in the matter of rainbows, does his best with a
gay cravat, and turns the thoughts which circulate above it towards the
securing or propitiating of a best girl.

The objects of these more or less brilliant attentions, doves and girls,
show a becoming reciprocity, and act in a way which leads us to infer
(so far as inferences hold good in the mysterious region of female
conduct) that they are not seriously displeased. To a rightly tempered
mind, pleasure is a pleasant sight. And the philosophic observer
who could look upon this spring spectacle of the lovers with any but
friendly feelings would be indeed what the great Dr. Samuel Johnson
called "a person not to be envied."

Far be it from me to fall into such a desiccated and supercilious mood.
My small olive-branch of fancy will be withered, in truth, and ready to
drop budless from the tree, when I cease to feel a mild delight in the
billings and cooings of the little birds that separate from the
flocks to fly together in pairs, or in the uninstructive but mutually
satisfactory converse which Strephon holds with Chloe while they dally
along the primrose path.

I am glad that even the stony and tumultuous city affords some
opportunities for these amiable observations. In the month of April
there is hardly a clump of shrubbery in the Central Park which will not
serve as a trysting-place for yellow warblers and catbirds just home
from their southern tours. At the same time, you shall see many a bench,
designed for the accommodation of six persons, occupied at the sunset
hour by only two, and apparently so much too small for them that they
cannot avoid a little crowding.

These are infallible signs. Taken in conjunction with the eruption
of tops and marbles among the small boys, and the purchase of
fishing-tackle and golf-clubs by the old boys, they certify us that the
vernal equinox has arrived, not only in the celestial regions, but also
in the heart of man.


I have been reflecting of late upon the relation of lovers to the
landscape, and questioning whether art has given it quite the same place
as that which belongs to it in nature. In fiction, for example, and in
the drama, and in music, I have some vague misgivings that romantic love
has come to hold a more prominent and a more permanent position than it
fills in real life.

This is dangerous ground to venture upon, even in the most modest and
deprecatory way. The man who expresses an opinion, or even a doubt, on
this subject, contrary to the ruling traditions, will have a swarm of
angry critics buzzing about him. He will be called a heretic, a heathen,
a cold-blooded freak of nature. As for the woman who hesitates to
subscribe all the thirty-nine articles of romantic love, if such a one
dares to put her reluctance into words, she is certain to be accused
either of unwomanly ambition or of feminine disappointment.

Let us make haste, then, to get back for safety to the ornithological
aspect of the subject. Here there can be no penalties for heresy. And
here I make bold to avow my conviction that the pairing season is not
the only point of interest in the life of the birds; nor is the instinct
by which they mate altogether and beyond comparison the noblest passion
that stirs their feathered breasts.

'T is true, the time of mating is their prettiest season; but it is very
short. How little we should know of the drama of their airy life if we
had eyes only for this brief scene! Their finest qualities come out
in the patient cares that protect the young in the nest, in the varied
struggles for existence through the changing year, and in the incredible
heroisms of the annual migrations. Herein is a parable.

It may be observed further, without fear of rebuke, that the behaviour
of the different kinds of birds during the prevalence of romantic
love is not always equally above reproach. The courtship of English
sparrows--blustering, noisy, vulgar--is a sight to offend the taste
of every gentle on-looker. Some birds reiterate and vociferate their
love-songs in a fashion that displays their inconsiderateness as well as
their ignorance of music. This trait is most marked in domestic fowls.
There was a guinea-cock, once, that chose to do his wooing close under
the window of a farm-house where I was lodged. He had no regard for
my hours of sleep or meditation. His amatory click-clack prevented the
morning and wrecked the tranquillity of the evening. It was odious,
brutal,--worse, it was absolutely thoughtless. Herein is another
parable.

Let us admit cheerfully that lovers have a place in the landscape and
lend a charm to it. This does not mean that they are to take up all
the room there is. Suppose, for example, that a pair of them, on Goat
Island, put themselves in such a position as to completely block out
your view of Niagara. You cannot regard them with gratitude. They
even become a little tedious. Or suppose that you are visiting at a
country-house, and you find that you must not enjoy the moonlight on the
verandah because Augustus and Amanda are murmuring in one corner, and
that you must not go into the garden because Louis and Lizzie are there,
and that you cannot have a sail on the lake because Richard and Rebecca
have taken the boat.

Of course, unless you happen to be a selfish old curmudgeon, you
rejoice, by sympathy, in the happiness of these estimable young people.
But you fail to see why it should cover so much ground.

Why should they not pool their interests, and all go out in the boat, or
all walk in the garden, or all sit on the verandah? Then there would be
room for somebody else about the place.

In old times you could rely upon lovers for retirement. But nowadays
their role seems to be a bold ostentation of their condition. They rely
upon other people to do the timid, shrinking part. Society, in America,
is arranged principally for their convenience; and whatever portion of
the landscape strikes their fancy, they preempt and occupy. All
this goes upon the presumption that romantic love is really the only
important interest in life.

This train of thought was illuminated, the other night, by an incident
which befell me at a party. It was an assembly of men, drawn together by
their common devotion to the sport of canoeing. There were only three or
four of the gentler sex present (as honorary members), and only one
of whom it could be suspected that she was at that time a victim or an
object of the tender passion. In the course of the evening, by way of
diversion to our disputations on keels and centreboards, canvas and
birch-bark, cedar-wood and bass-wood, paddles and steering-gear, a fine
young Apollo, with a big, manly voice, sang us a few songs. But he did
not chant the joys of weathering a sudden squall, or running a rapid
feather-white with foam, or floating down a long, quiet, elm-bowered
river. Not all. His songs were full of sighs and yearnings, languid lips
and sheep's-eyes. His powerful voice informed us that crowns of thorns
seemed like garlands of roses, and kisses were as sweet as samples of
heaven, and various other curious sensations were experienced; and at
the end of every stanza the reason was stated, in tones of thunder--


     "Because I love you, dear."


Even if true, it seemed inappropriate. How foolish the average
audience in a drawing-room looks while it is listening to passionate
love-ditties! And yet I suppose the singer chose these songs, not from
any malice aforethought, but simply because songs of this kind are so
abundant that it is next to impossible to find anything else in the
shops.

In regard to novels, the situation is almost as discouraging. Ten
love-stories are printed to one of any other kind. We have a standing
invitation to consider the tribulations and difficulties of some young
man or young woman in finding a mate. It must be admitted that the
subject has its capabilities of interest. Nature has her uses for the
lover, and she gives him an excellent part to play in the drama of life.
But is this tantamount to saying that his interest is perennial and
all-absorbing, and that his role on the stage is the only one that is
significant and noteworthy?

Life is much too large to be expressed in the terms of a single passion.
Friendship, patriotism, parental tenderness, filial devotion, the ardour
of adventure, the thirst for knowledge, the ecstasy of religion,--these
all have their dwelling in the heart of man. They mould character.
They control conduct. They are stars of destiny shining in the inner
firmament. And if art would truly hold the mirror up to nature, it must
reflect these greater and lesser lights that rule the day and the night.

How many of the plays that divert and misinform the modern theatre-goer
turn on the pivot of a love-affair, not always pure, but generally
simple! And how many of those that are imported from France proceed
upon the theory that the Seventh is the only Commandment, and that the
principal attraction of life lies in the opportunity of breaking it! The
matinee-girl is not likely to have a very luminous or truthful idea of
existence floating around in her pretty little head.

But, after all, the great plays, those that take the deepest hold upon
the heart, like HAMLET and KING LEAR, MACBETH and OTHELLO, are not
love-plays. And the most charming comedies, like THE WINTER'S TALE, and
THE RIVALS, and RIP VAN WINKLE, are chiefly memorable for other things
than love-scenes.

Even in novels, love shows at its best when it does not absorb the whole
plot. LORNA DOONE is a lovers' story, but there is a blessed minimum of
spooning in it, and always enough of working and fighting to keep the
air clear and fresh. THE HEART OF MIDLOTHIAN, and HYPATIA, and ROMOLA,
and THE CLOISTER AND THE HEARTH, and JOHN INGLESANT, and THE THREE
MUSKETEERS, and NOTRE DAME, and PEACE AND WAR, and QUO VADIS,--these are
great novels because they are much more than tales of romantic love. As
for HENRY ESMOND, (which seems to me the best of all,) certainly "love
at first sight" does not play the finest role in that book.

There are good stories of our own day--pathetic, humourous,
entertaining, powerful--in which the element of romantic love is
altogether subordinate, or even imperceptible. THE RISE OF SILAS LAPHAM
does not owe its deep interest to the engagement of the very charming
young people who enliven it. MADAME DELPHINE and OLE 'STRACTED are
perfect stories of their kind. I would not barter THE JUNGLE BOOKS for a
hundred of THE BRUSHWOOD BOY.

The truth is that love, considered merely as the preference of one
person for another of the opposite sex, is not "the greatest thing in
the world." It becomes great only when it leads on, as it often does,
to heroism and self-sacrifice and fidelity. Its chief value for art (the
interpreter) lies not in itself, but in its quickening relation to the
other elements of life. It must be seen and shown in its due proportion,
and in harmony with the broader landscape.

Do you believe that in all the world there is only one woman specially
created for each man, and that the order of the universe will be
hopelessly askew unless these two needles find each other in the
haystack? You believe it for yourself, perhaps; but do you believe it
for Tom Johnson? You remember what a terrific disturbance he made in the
summer of 189-, at Bar Harbor, about Ellinor Brown, and how he ran away
with her in September. You have also seen them together (occasionally)
at Lenox and Newport, since their marriage. Are you honestly of the
opinion that if Tom had not married Ellinor, these two young lives would
have been a total wreck?

Adam Smith, in his book on THE MORAL SENTIMENTS, goes so far as to say
that "love is not interesting to the observer because it is AN AFFECTION
OF THE IMAGINATION, into which it is difficult for a third party to
enter." Something of the same kind occurred to me in regard to Tom and
Ellinor. Yet I would not have presumed to suggest this thought to either
of them. Nor would I have quoted in their hearing the melancholy and
frigid prediction of Ralph Waldo Emerson, to the effect that they would
some day discover "that all which at first drew them together--those
once sacred features, that magical play of charm--was deciduous."

DECIDUOUS, indeed? Cold, unpleasant, botanical word! Rather would I
prognosticate for the lovers something perennial,


     "A sober certainty of waking bliss,"


to survive the evanescence of love's young dream. Ellinor should turn
out to be a woman like the Lady Elizabeth Hastings, of whom Richard
Steele wrote that "to love her was a liberal education." Tom should
prove that he had in him the lasting stuff of a true man and a hero.
Then it would make little difference whether their conjunction had been
eternally prescribed in the book of fate or not. It would be evidently a
fit match, made on earth and illustrative of heaven.

But even in the making of such a match as this, the various stages of
attraction, infatuation, and appropriation should not be displayed too
prominently before the world, nor treated as events of overwhelming
importance and enduring moment. I would not counsel Tom and Ellinor,
in the midsummer of their engagement, to have their photographs taken
together in affectionate attitudes.

The pictures of an imaginary kind which deal with the subject of
romantic love are, almost without exception, fatuous and futile. The
inanely amatory, with their languishing eyes, weary us. The endlessly
osculatory, with their protracted salutations, are sickening. Even when
an air of sentimental propriety is thrown about them by some such title
as "Wedded" or "The Honeymoon," they fatigue us. For the most part, they
remind me of the remark which the Commodore made upon a certain painting
of Jupiter and lo which hangs in the writing-room of the Contrary Club.

"Sir," said that gently piercing critic, "that picture is equally
unsatisfactory to the artist, to the moralist, and to the voluptuary."


Nevertheless, having made a clean breast of my misgivings and
reservations on the subject of lovers and landscape, I will now confess
that the whole of my doubts do not weigh much against my unreasoned
faith in romantic love. At heart I am no infidel, but a most obstinate
believer and devotee. My seasons of skepticism are transient. They
are connected with a torpid liver and aggravated by confinement to a
sedentary life and enforced abstinence from angling. Out-of-doors, I
return to a saner and happier frame of mind.

As my wheel rolls along the Riverside Drive in the golden glow of the
sunset, I rejoice that the episode of Charles Henry and Matilda Jane has
not been omitted from the view. This vast and populous city, with all
its passing show of life, would be little better than a waste, howling
wilderness if we could not catch a glimpse, now and then, of young
people falling in love in the good old-fashioned way. Even on a
trout-stream, I have seen nothing prettier than the sight upon which I
once came suddenly as I was fishing down the Neversink.

A boy was kneeling beside the brook, and a girl was giving him a drink
of water out of her rosy hands. They stared with wonder and compassion
at the wet and solitary angler, wading down the stream, as if he were
some kind of a mild lunatic. But as I glanced discreetly at their
small tableau, I was not unconscious of the new joy that came into the
landscape with the presence of


     "A lover and his lass."


I knew how sweet the water tasted from that kind of a cup. I also have
lived in Arcadia, and have not forgotten the way back.




A FATAL SUCCESS


     "What surprises me in her behaviour," said he, "is its
     thoroughness. Woman seldom does things by halves, but often
     by doubles."

     --SOLOMON SINGLEWITZ: The Life of Adam.


Beekman De Peyster was probably the most passionate and triumphant
fisherman in the Petrine Club. He angled with the same dash and
confidence that he threw into his operations in the stock-market. He was
sure to be the first man to get his flies on the water at the opening of
the season. And when we came together for our fall meeting, to compare
notes of our wanderings on various streams and make up the fish-stories
for the year, Beekman was almost always "high hook." We expected, as
a matter of course, to hear that he had taken the most and the largest
fish.

It was so with everything that he undertook. He was a masterful man.
If there was an unusually large trout in a river, Beekman knew about it
before any one else, and got there first, and came home with the fish.
It did not make him unduly proud, because there was nothing uncommon
about it. It was his habit to succeed, and all the rest of us were
hardened to it.

When he married Cornelia Cochrane, we were consoled for our partial loss
by the apparent fitness and brilliancy of the match. If Beekman was a
masterful man, Cornelia was certainly what you might call a mistressful
woman. She had been the head of her house since she was eighteen years
old. She carried her good looks like the family plate; and when she came
into the breakfast-room and said good-morning, it was with an air as if
she presented every one with a check for a thousand dollars. Her tastes
were accepted as judgments, and her preferences had the force of laws.
Wherever she wanted to go in the summer-time, there the finger of
household destiny pointed. At Newport, at Bar Harbour, at Lenox, at
Southampton, she made a record. When she was joined in holy wedlock to
Beekman De Peyster, her father and mother heaved a sigh of satisfaction,
and settled down for a quiet vacation in Cherry Valley.

It was in the second summer after the wedding that Beekman admitted to
a few of his ancient Petrine cronies, in moments of confidence
(unjustifiable, but natural), that his wife had one fault.

"It is not exactly a fault," he said, "not a positive fault, you know.
It is just a kind of a defect, due to her education, of course. In
everything else she's magnificent. But she does n't care for
fishing. She says it's stupid,--can't see why any one should like the
woods,--calls camping out the lunatic's diversion. It's rather awkward
for a man with my habits to have his wife take such a view. But it can
be changed by training. I intend to educate her and convert her. I shall
make an angler of her yet."

And so he did.

The new education was begun in the Adirondacks, and the first lesson was
given at Paul Smith's. It was a complete failure.

Beekman persuaded her to come out with him for a day on Meacham River,
and promised to convince her of the charm of angling. She wore a new
gown, fawn-colour and violet, with a picture-hat, very taking. But the
Meacham River trout was shy that day; not even Beekman could induce him
to rise to the fly. What the trout lacked in confidence the mosquitoes
more than made up. Mrs. De Peyster came home much sunburned, and
expressed a highly unfavourable opinion of fishing as an amusement and
of Meacham River as a resort.

"The nice people don't come to the Adirondacks to fish," said she; "they
come to talk about the fishing twenty years ago. Besides, what do you
want to catch that trout for? If you do, the other men will say you
bought it, and the hotel will have to put in a new one for the rest of
the season."

The following year Beekman tried Moosehead Lake. Here he found an
atmosphere more favourable to his plan of education. There were a good
many people who really fished, and short expeditions in the woods were
quite fashionable. Cornelia had a camping-costume of the most approved
style made by Dewlap on Fifth Avenue,--pearl-gray with linings of
rose-silk,--and consented to go with her husband on a trip up Moose
River. They pitched their tent the first evening at the mouth of Misery
Stream, and a storm came on. The rain sifted through the canvas in a
fine spray, and Mrs. De Peyster sat up all night in a waterproof cloak,
holding an umbrella. The next day they were back at the hotel in time
for lunch.

"It was horrid," she told her most intimate friend, "perfectly horrid.
The idea of sleeping in a shower-bath, and eating your breakfast from a
tin plate, just for sake of catching a few silly fish! Why not send your
guides out to get them for you?"

But, in spite of this profession of obstinate heresy, Beekman observed
with secret joy that there were signs, before the end of the
season, that Cornelia was drifting a little, a very little but still
perceptibly, in the direction of a change of heart. She began to take
an interest, as the big trout came along in September, in the reports
of the catches made by the different anglers. She would saunter out with
the other people to the corner of the porch to see the fish weighed
and spread out on the grass. Several times she went with Beekman in the
canoe to Hardscrabble Point, and showed distinct evidences of pleasure
when he caught large trout. The last day of the season, when he returned
from a successful expedition to Roach River and Lily Bay, she inquired
with some particularity about the results of his sport; and in the
evening, as the company sat before the great open fire in the hall of
the hotel, she was heard to use this information with considerable skill
in putting down Mrs. Minot Peabody of Boston, who was recounting the
details of her husband's catch at Spencer Pond. Cornelia was not a
person to be contented with the back seat, even in fish-stories.

When Beekman observed these indications he was much encouraged, and
resolved to push his educational experiment briskly forward to his
customary goal of success.

"Some things can be done, as well as others," he said in his masterful
way, as three of us were walking home together after the autumnal dinner
of the Petrine Club, which he always attended as a graduate member. "A
real fisherman never gives up. I told you I'd make an angler out of
my wife; and so I will. It has been rather difficult. She is 'dour'
in rising. But she's beginning to take notice of the fly now. Give me
another season, and I'll have her landed."

Good old Beekman! Little did he think--But I must not interrupt the
story with moral reflections.

The preparations that he made for his final effort at conversion were
thorough and prudent. He had a private interview with Dewlap in regard
to the construction of a practical fishing-costume for a lady, which
resulted in something more reasonable and workmanlike than had ever been
turned out by that famous artist. He ordered from Hook and Catchett a
lady's angling-outfit of the most enticing description,--a split-bamboo
rod, light as a girl's wish, and strong as a matron's will; an oxidized
silver reel, with a monogram on one side, and a sapphire set in the
handle for good luck; a book of flies, of all sizes and colours, with
the correct names inscribed in gilt letters on each page. He surrounded
his favourite sport with an aureole of elegance and beauty. And then he
took Cornelia in September to the Upper Dam at Rangeley.

She went reluctant. She arrived disgusted. She stayed incredulous. She
returned--Wait a bit, and you shall hear how she returned.

The Upper Dam at Rangeley is the place, of all others in the world,
where the lunacy of angling may be seen in its incurable stage. There is
a cosy little inn, called a camp, at the foot of a big lake. In front of
the inn is a huge dam of gray stone, over which the river plunges into
a great oval pool, where the trout assemble in the early fall to
perpetuate their race. From the tenth of September to the thirtieth,
there is not an hour of the day or night when there are no boats
floating on that pool, and no anglers trailing the fly across its
waters. Before the late fishermen are ready to come in at midnight, the
early fishermen may be seen creeping down to the shore with lanterns
in order to begin before cock-crow. The number of fish taken is
not large,--perhaps five or six for the whole company on an average
day,--but the size is sometimes enormous,--nothing under three pounds is
counted,--and they pervade thought and conversation at the Upper Dam to
the exclusion of every other subject. There is no driving, no dancing,
no golf, no tennis. There is nothing to do but fish or die.

At first, Cornelia thought she would choose the latter alternative.
But a remark of that skilful and morose old angler, McTurk, which she
overheard on the verandah after supper, changed her mind.

"Women have no sporting instinct," said he. "They only fish because they
see men doing it. They are imitative animals."

That same night she told Beekman, in the subdued tone which the
architectural construction of the house imposes upon all confidential
communications in the bedrooms, but with resolution in every accent,
that she proposed to go fishing with him on the morrow.

"But not on that pool, right in front of the house, you understand.
There must be some other place, out on the lake, where we can fish for
three or four days, until I get the trick of this wobbly rod. Then I'll
show that old bear, McTurk, what kind of an animal woman is."

Beekman was simply delighted. Five days of diligent practice at the
mouth of Mill Brook brought his pupil to the point where he pronounced
her safe.

"Of course," he said patronizingly, "you have 'nt learned all about it
yet. That will take years. But you can get your fly out thirty feet, and
you can keep the tip of your rod up. If you do that, the trout will hook
himself, in rapid water, eight times out of ten. For playing him, if
you follow my directions, you 'll be all right. We will try the pool
tonight, and hope for a medium-sized fish."

Cornelia said nothing, but smiled and nodded. She had her own thoughts.

At about nine o'clock Saturday night, they anchored their boat on the
edge of the shoal where the big eddy swings around, put out the lantern
and began to fish. Beekman sat in the bow of the boat, with his rod over
the left side; Cornelia in the stern, with her rod over the right side.
The night was cloudy and very black. Each of them had put on the largest
possible fly, one a "Bee-Pond" and the other a "Dragon;" but even these
were invisible. They measured out the right length of line, and let
the flies drift back until they hung over the shoal, in the curly water
where the two currents meet.

There were three other boats to the left of them. McTurk was their only
neighbour in the darkness on the right. Once they heard him swearing
softly to himself, and knew that he had hooked and lost a fish.

Away down at the tail of the pool, dimly visible through the gloom, the
furtive fisherman, Parsons, had anchored his boat. No noise ever came
from that craft. If he wished to change his position, he did not pull
up the anchor and let it down again with a bump. He simply lengthened or
shortened his anchor rope. There was no click of the reel when he played
a fish. He drew in and paid out the line through the rings by hand,
without a sound. What he thought when a fish got away, no one knew,
for he never said it. He concealed his angling as if it had been a
conspiracy. Twice that night they heard a faint splash in the water
near his boat, and twice they saw him put his arm over the side in the
darkness and bring it back again very quietly.

"That's the second fish for Parsons," whispered Beekman, "what a
secretive old Fortunatus he is! He knows more about fishing than any man
on the pool, and talks less."

Cornelia did not answer. Her thoughts were all on the tip of her own
rod. About eleven o'clock a fine, drizzling rain set in. The fishing was
very slack. All the other boats gave it up in despair; but Cornelia said
she wanted to stay out a little longer, they might as well finish up the
week.

At precisely fifty minutes past eleven, Beekman reeled up his line, and
remarked with firmness that the holy Sabbath day was almost at hand and
they ought to go in.

"Not till I 've landed this trout," said Cornelia.

"What? A trout! Have you got one?"

"Certainly; I 've had him on for at least fifteen minutes. I 'm playing
him Mr. Parsons' way. You might as well light the lantern and get the
net ready; he's coming in towards the boat now."

Beekman broke three matches before he made the lantern burn; and when he
held it up over the gunwale, there was the trout sure enough, gleaming
ghostly pale in the dark water, close to the boat, and quite tired out.
He slipped the net over the fish and drew it in,--a monster.

"I 'll carry that trout, if you please," said Cornelia, as they stepped
out of the boat; and she walked into the camp, on the last stroke
of midnight, with the fish in her hand, and quietly asked for the
steelyard.

Eight pounds and fourteen ounces,--that was the weight. Everybody was
amazed. It was the "best fish" of the year. Cornelia showed no sign of
exultation, until just as John was carrying the trout to the ice-house.
Then she flashed out:--"Quite a fair imitation, Mr. McTurk,--is n't it?"

Now McTurk's best record for the last fifteen years was seven pounds and
twelve ounces.

So far as McTurk is concerned, this is the end of the story. But not for
the De Peysters. I wish it were. Beekman went to sleep that night with
a contented spirit. He felt that his experiment in education had been a
success. He had made his wife an angler.

He had indeed, and to an extent which he little suspected. That Upper
Dam trout was to her like the first taste of blood to the tiger. It
seemed to change, at once, not so much her character as the direction
of her vital energy. She yielded to the lunacy of angling, not by slow
degrees, (as first a transient delusion, then a fixed idea, then a
chronic infirmity, finally a mild insanity,) but by a sudden plunge into
the most violent mania. So far from being ready to die at Upper Dam,
her desire now was to live there--and to live solely for the sake of
fishing--as long as the season was open.

There were two hundred and forty hours left to midnight on the thirtieth
of September. At least two hundred of these she spent on the pool; and
when Beekman was too exhausted to manage the boat and the net and the
lantern for her, she engaged a trustworthy guide to take Beekman's place
while he slept. At the end of the last day her score was twenty-three,
with an average of five pounds and a quarter. His score was nine, with
an average of four pounds. He had succeeded far beyond his wildest
hopes.

The next year his success became even more astonishing. They went to the
Titan Club in Canada. The ugliest and most inaccessible sheet of
water in that territory is Lake Pharaoh. But it is famous for the
extraordinary fishing at a certain spot near the outlet, where there
is just room enough for one canoe. They camped on Lake Pharaoh for six
weeks, by Mrs. De Peyster's command; and her canoe was always the first
to reach the fishing-ground in the morning, and the last to leave it in
the evening.

Some one asked him, when he returned to the city, whether he had good
luck.

"Quite fair," he tossed off in a careless way; "we took over three
hundred pounds."

"To your own rod?" asked the inquirer, in admiration.

"No-o-o," said Beekman, "there were two of us."

There were two of them, also, the following year, when they joined the
Natasheebo Salmon Club and fished that celebrated river in Labrador. The
custom of drawing lots every night for the water that each member was
to angle over the next day, seemed to be especially designed to fit the
situation. Mrs. De Peyster could fish her own pool and her husband's
too. The result of that year's fishing was something phenomenal. She had
a score that made a paragraph in the newspapers and called out editorial
comment. One editor was so inadequate to the situation as to entitle the
article in which he described her triumph "The Equivalence of Woman." It
was well-meant, but she was not at all pleased with it.

She was now not merely an angler, but a "record" angler of the most
virulent type. Wherever they went, she wanted, and she got, the pick
of the water. She seemed to be equally at home on all kinds of streams,
large and small. She would pursue the little mountain-brook trout in
the early spring, and the Labrador salmon in July, and the huge speckled
trout of the northern lakes in September, with the same avidity and
resolution. All that she cared for was to get the best and the most of
the fishing at each place where she angled. This she always did.

And Beekman,--well, for him there were no more long separations from
the partner of his life while he went off to fish some favourite stream.
There were no more home-comings after a good day's sport to find her
clad in cool and dainty raiment on the verandah, ready to welcome him
with friendly badinage. There was not even any casting of the fly around
Hardscrabble Point while she sat in the canoe reading a novel, looking
up with mild and pleasant interest when he caught a larger fish than
usual, as an older and wiser person looks at a child playing some
innocent game. Those days of a divided interest between man and wife
were gone. She was now fully converted, and more. Beekman and Cornelia
were one; and she was the one.

The last time I saw the De Peysters he was following her along the
Beaverkill, carrying a landing-net and a basket, but no rod. She paused
for a moment to exchange greetings, and then strode on down the stream.
He lingered for a few minutes longer to light a pipe.

"Well, old man," I said, "you certainly have succeeded in making an
angler of Mrs. De Peyster."

"Yes, indeed," he answered,--"have n't I?" Then he continued, after a
few thoughtful puffs of smoke, "Do you know, I 'm not quite so sure as I
used to be that fishing is the best of all sports. I sometimes think of
giving it up and going in for croquet."



FISHING IN BOOKS


     "SIMPSON.--Have you ever seen any American books on angling,
     Fisher?"

     "FISHER.--No, I do not think there are any published.
     Brother Jonathan is not yet sufficiently civilized to
     produce anything original on the gentle art.  There is good
     trout-fishing in America, and the streams, which are all
     free, are much less fished than in our Island, 'from the
     small number of gentlemen,' as an American writer says, 'who
     are at leisure to give their time to it.'"

     --WILLIAM ANDREW CHATTO: The Angler's Souvenir (London,
     1835).


That wise man and accomplished scholar, Sir Henry Wotton, the friend of
Izaak Walton and ambassador of King James I to the republic of Venice,
was accustomed to say that "he would rather live five May months than
forty Decembers." The reason for this preference was no secret to those
who knew him. It had nothing to do with British or Venetian politics. It
was simply because December, with all its domestic joys, is practically
a dead month in the angler's calendar.

His occupation is gone. The better sort of fish are out of season. The
trout are lean and haggard: it is no trick to catch them and no treat to
eat them. The salmon, all except the silly kelts, have run out to sea,
and the place of their habitation no man knoweth. There is nothing
for the angler to do but wait for the return of spring, and meanwhile
encourage and sustain his patience with such small consolations in kind
as a friendly Providence may put within his reach.


Some solace may be found, on a day of crisp, wintry weather, in the
childish diversion of catching pickerel through the ice. This method of
taking fish is practised on a large scale and with elaborate machinery
by men who supply the market. I speak not of their commercial enterprise
and its gross equipage, but of ice-fishing in its more sportive and
desultory form, as it is pursued by country boys and the incorrigible
village idler.

You choose for this pastime a pond where the ice is not too thick, lest
the labour of cutting through should be discouraging; nor too thin, lest
the chance of breaking in should be embarrassing. You then chop out,
with almost any kind of a hatchet or pick, a number of holes in the ice,
making each one six or eight inches in diameter, and placing them about
five or six feet apart. If you happen to know the course of a current
flowing through the pond, or the location of a shoal frequented by
minnows, you will do well to keep near it. Over each hole you set a
small contrivance called a "tilt-up." It consists of two sticks fastened
in the middle, at right angles to each other. The stronger of the two is
laid across the opening in the ice. The other is thus balanced above
the aperture, with a baited hook and line attached to one end, while the
other end is adorned with a little flag. For choice, I would have the
flags red. They look gayer, and I imagine they are more lucky.

When you have thus baited and set your tilt-ups,--twenty or thirty of
them,--you may put on your skates and amuse yourself by gliding to
and fro on the smooth surface of the ice, cutting figures of eight and
grapevines and diamond twists, while you wait for the pickerel to begin
their part of the performance. They will let you know when they are
ready.

A fish, swimming around in the dim depths under the ice, sees one of
your baits, fancies it, and takes it in. The moment he tries to run away
with it he tilts the little red flag into the air and waves it backward
and forward. "Be quick!" he signals all unconsciously; "here I am; come
and pull me up!"

When two or three flags are fluttering at the same moment, far apart on
the pond, you must skate with speed and haul in your lines promptly.

How hard it is, sometimes, to decide which one you will take first! That
flag in the middle of the pond has been waving for at least a minute;
but the other, in the corner of the bay, is tilting up and down more
violently: it must be a larger fish. Great Dagon! There's another red
signal flying, away over by the point! You hesitate, you make a few
strokes in one direction, then you whirl around and dart the other way.
Meantime one of the tilt-ups, constructed with too short a cross-stick,
has been pulled to one side, and disappears in the hole. One pickerel in
the pond carries a flag. Another tilt-up ceases to move and falls flat
upon the ice. The bait has been stolen. You dash desperately toward
the third flag and pull in the only fish that is left,--probably the
smallest of them all!

A surplus of opportunities does not insure the best luck.

A room with seven doors--like the famous apartment in Washington's
headquarters at Newburgh--is an invitation to bewilderment. I would
rather see one fair opening in life than be confused by three dazzling
chances.

There was a good story about fishing through the ice which formed part
of the stock-in-conversation of that ingenious woodsman, Martin Moody,
Esquire, of Big Tupper Lake. "'T was a blame cold day," he said, "and
the lines friz up stiffer 'n a fence-wire, jus' as fast as I pulled 'em
in, and my fingers got so dum' frosted I could n't bait the hooks. But
the fish was thicker and hungrier 'n flies in June. So I jus' took
a piece of bait and held it over one o' the holes. Every time a fish
jumped up to git it, I 'd kick him out on the ice. I tell ye, sir, I
kicked out more 'n four hundred pounds of pick'rel that morning. Yaas,
't was a big lot, I 'low, but then 't was a cold day! I jus' stacked 'em
up solid, like cordwood."

Let us now leave this frigid subject! Iced fishing is but a chilling and
unsatisfactory imitation of real sport. The angler will soon turn from
it with satiety, and seek a better consolation for the winter of his
discontent in the entertainment of fishing in books.


Angling is the only sport that boasts the honour of having given a
classic to literature.

Izaak Walton's success with THE COMPLEAT ANGLER was a fine illustration
of fisherman's luck. He set out, with some aid from an adept in
fly-fishing and cookery, named Thomas Barker, to produce a little
"discourse of fish and fishing" which should serve as a useful manual
for quiet persons inclined to follow the contemplative man's recreation.
He came home with a book which has made his name beloved by ten
generations of gentle readers, and given him a secure place in the
Pantheon of letters,--not a haughty eminence, but a modest niche, all
his own, and ever adorned with grateful offerings of fresh flowers.

This was great luck. But it was well-deserved, and therefore it has not
been grudged or envied.

Walton was a man so peaceful and contented, so friendly in his
disposition, and so innocent in all his goings, that only three other
writers, so far as I know, have ever spoken ill of him.

One was that sour-complexioned Cromwellian trooper, Richard Franck, who
wrote in 1658 an envious book entitled NORTHERN MEMOIRS, CALCULATED FOR
THE MERIDIAN OF SCOTLAND, ETC., TO WHICH IS ADDED THE CONTEMPLATIVE AND
PRACTICAL ANGLER. In this book the furious Franck first pays Walton the
flattery of imitation, and then further adorns him with abuse, calling
THE COMPLEAT ANGLER "an indigested octavo, stuffed with morals from
Dubravius and others," and more than hinting that the father of anglers
knew little or nothing of "his uncultivated art." Walton was a Churchman
and a Loyalist, you see, while Franck was a Commonwealth man and an
Independent.

The second detractor of Walton was Lord Byron, who wrote


     "The quaint, old, cruel coxcomb in his gullet
      Should have a hook, and a small trout to pull it."


But Byron is certainly a poor authority on the quality of mercy. His
contempt need not cause an honest man overwhelming distress. I should
call it a complimentary dislike.

The third author who expressed unpleasant sentiments in regard to
Walton was Leigh Hunt. Here, again, I fancy that partizan prejudice had
something to do with the dislike. Hunt was a radical in politics and
religion. Moreover there was a feline strain in his character, which
made it necessary for him to scratch somebody now and then, as a relief
to his feelings.

Walton was a great quoter. His book is not "stuffed," as Franck
jealously alleged, but it is certainly well sauced with piquant
references to other writers, as early as the author of the Book of Job,
and as late as John Dennys, who betrayed to the world THE SECRETS OF
ANGLING in 1613. Walton further seasoned his book with fragments of
information about fish and fishing, more or less apocryphal, gathered
from Aelian, Pliny, Plutarch, Sir Francis Bacon, Dubravius, Gesner,
Rondeletius, the learned Aldrovandus, the venerable Bede, the divine
Du Bartas, and many others. He borrowed freely for the adornment of
his discourse, and did not scorn to make use of what may be called
LIVE QUOTATIONS,--that is to say, the unpublished remarks of his near
contemporaries, caught in friendly conversation, or handed down by oral
tradition.

But these various seasonings did not disguise, they only enhanced, the
delicate flavour of the dish which he served up to his readers. This was
all of his own taking, and of a sweetness quite incomparable.

I like a writer who is original enough to water his garden with
quotations, without fear of being drowned out. Such men are Charles Lamb
and James Russell Lowell and John Burroughs.

Walton's book is as fresh as a handful of wild violets and sweet
lavender. It breathes the odours of the green fields and the woods. It
tastes of simple, homely, appetizing things like the "syllabub of new
verjuice in a new-made haycock" which the milkwoman promised to give
Piscator the next time he came that way. Its music plays the tune of A
CONTENTED HEART over and over again without dulness, and charms us into
harmony with


     "A noise like the sound of a hidden brook
      In the leafy month of June,
      That to the sleeping woods all night
      Singeth a quiet tune."


Walton has been quoted even more than any of the writers whom he quotes.
It would be difficult, even if it were not ungrateful, to write
about angling without referring to him. Some pretty saying, some wise
reflection from his pages, suggests itself at almost every turn of the
subject.

And yet his book, though it be the best, is not the only readable one
that his favourite recreation has begotten. The literature of angling
is extensive, as any one may see who will look at the list of the
collection presented by Mr. John Bartlett to Harvard University, or
study the catalogue of the piscatorial library of Mr. Dean Sage,
of Albany, who himself has contributed an admirable book on THE
RISTIGOUCHE.

Nor is this literature altogether composed of dry and technical
treatises, interesting only to the confirmed anglimaniac, or to the
young novice ardent in pursuit of practical information. There is a good
deal of juicy reading in it.


Books about angling should be divided (according to De Quincey's method)
into two classes,--the literature of knowledge, and the literature of
power.

The first class contains the handbooks on rods and tackle, the
directions how to angle for different kinds of fish, and the guides to
various fishing-resorts. The weakness of these books is that they soon
fall out of date, as the manufacture of tackle is improved, the art
of angling refined, and the fish in once-famous waters are educated or
exterminated.

Alas, how transient is the fashion of this world, even in angling! The
old manuals with their precise instruction for trimming and painting
trout-rods eighteen feet long, and their painful description of
"oyntments" made of nettle-juice, fish-hawk oil, camphor, cat's fat, or
assafoedita, (supposed to allure the fish,) are altogether behind the
age. Many of the flies described by Charles Cotton and Thomas Barker
seem to have gone out of style among the trout. Perhaps familiarity has
bred contempt. Generation after generation of fish have seen these same
old feathered confections floating on the water, and learned by sharp
experience that they do not taste good. The blase trout demand something
new, something modern. It is for this reason, I suppose, that an
altogether original fly, unheard of, startling, will often do great
execution in an over-fished pool.

Certain it is that the art of angling, in settled regions, is growing
more dainty and difficult. You must cast a longer, lighter line; you
must use finer leaders; you must have your flies dressed on smaller
hooks.

And another thing is certain: in many places (described in the
ancient volumes) where fish were once abundant, they are now like the
shipwrecked sailors in Vergil his Aeneid,--


     "rari nantes in gurgite vasto."


The floods themselves are also disappearing. Mr. Edmund Clarence Stedman
was telling me, the other day, of the trout-brook that used to run
through the Connecticut village when he nourished a poet's youth.
He went back to visit the stream a few years since, and it was gone,
literally vanished from the face of earth, stolen to make a watersupply
for the town, and used for such base purposes as the washing of clothes
and the sprinkling of streets.

I remember an expedition with my father, some twenty years ago, to Nova
Scotia, whither we set out to realize the hopes kindled by an ANGLER'S
GUIDE written in the early sixties. It was like looking for tall clocks
in the farmhouses around Boston. The harvest had been well gleaned
before our arrival, and in the very place where our visionary author
located his most famous catch we found a summer hotel and a sawmill.

'T is strange and sad, how many regions there are where "the fishing was
wonderful forty years ago"!


The second class of angling books--the literature of power--includes
all (even those written with some purpose of instruction) in which
the gentle fascinations of the sport, the attractions of living
out-of-doors, the beauties of stream and woodland, the recollections of
happy adventure, and the cheerful thoughts that make the best of a day's
luck, come clearly before the author's mind and find some fit expression
in his words. Of such books, thank Heaven, there is a plenty to bring a
Maytide charm and cheer into the fisherman's dull December. I will name,
by way of random tribute from a grateful but unmethodical memory, a few
of these consolatory volumes.

First of all comes a family of books that were born in Scotland and
smell of the heather.

Whatever a Scotchman's conscience permits him to do, is likely to be
done with vigour and a fiery mind. In trade and in theology, in fishing
and in fighting, he is all there and thoroughly kindled.

There is an old-fashioned book called THE MOOR AND THE LOCH, by John
Colquhoun, which is full of contagious enthusiasm. Thomas Tod Stoddart
was a most impassioned angler, (though over-given to strong language,)
and in his ANGLING REMINISCENCES he has touched the subject with a happy
hand,--happiest when he breaks into poetry and tosses out a song for the
fisherman. Professor John Wilson of the University of Edinburgh held the
chair of Moral Philosophy in that institution, but his true fame rests
on his well-earned titles of A. M. and F. R. S.,--Master of Angling,
and Fisherman Royal of Scotland. His RECREATIONS OF CHRISTOPHER NORTH,
albeit their humour is sometimes too boisterously hammered in, are
genial and generous essays, overflowing with passages of good-fellowship
and pedestrian fancy. I would recommend any person in a dry and
melancholy state of mind to read his paper on "Streams," in the first
volume of ESSAYS CRITICAL AND IMAGINATIVE. But it must be said, by way
of warning to those with whom dryness is a matter of principle, that all
Scotch fishing-books are likely to be sprinkled with Highland Dew.

Among English anglers, Sir Humphry Davy is one of whom Christopher
North speaks rather slightingly. Nevertheless his SALMONIA is well worth
reading, not only because it was written by a learned man, but because
it exhales the spirit of cheerful piety and vital wisdom. Charles
Kingsley was another great man who wrote well about angling. His
CHALK-STREAM STUDIES are clear and sparkling. They cleanse the mind
and refresh the heart and put us more in love with living. Of quite a
different style are the MAXIMS AND HINTS FOR AN ANGLER, AND MISERIES OF
FISHING, which were written by Richard Penn, a grandson of the founder
of Pennsylvania. This is a curious and rare little volume, professing
to be a compilation from the "Common Place Book of the Houghton Fishing
Club," and dealing with the subject from a Pickwickian point of view.
I suppose that William Penn would have thought his grandson a frivolous
writer.

But he could not have entertained such an opinion of the Honourable
Robert Boyle, of whose OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS no less than twelve
discourses treat "of Angling Improved to Spiritual Uses." The titles
of some of these discourses are quaint enough to quote. "Upon the being
called upon to rise early on a very fair morning." "Upon the mounting,
singing, and lighting of larks." "Upon fishing with a counterfeit fly."
"Upon a danger arising from an unseasonable contest with the steersman."
"Upon one's drinking water out of the brim of his hat." With such good
texts it is easy to endure, and easier still to spare, the sermons.

Englishmen carry their love of travel into their anglimania, and many of
their books describe fishing adventures in foreign parts. RAMBLES WITH
A FISHING-ROD, by E. S. Roscoe, tells of happy days in the Salzkammergut
and the Bavarian Highlands and Normandy. FISH-TAILS AND A FEW OTHERS, by
Bradnock Hall, contains some delightful chapters on Norway. THE ROD IN
INDIA, by H. S. Thomas, narrates wonderful adventures with the Mahseer
and the Rohu and other pagan fish.

But, after all, I like the English angler best when he travels at home,
and writes of dry-fly fishing in the Itchen or the Test, or of wet-fly
fishing in Northumberland or Sutherlandshire. There is a fascinating
booklet that appeared quietly, some years ago, called AN AMATEUR
ANGLER'S DAYS IN DOVE DALE. It runs as easily and merrily and kindly
as a little river, full of peace and pure enjoyment. Other books of the
same quality have since been written by the same pen,--DAYS IN CLOVER,
FRESH WOODS, BY MEADOW AND STREAM. It is no secret, I believe, that
the author is Mr. Edward Marston, the senior member of a London
publishing-house. But he still clings to his retiring pen-name of "The
Amateur Angler," and represents himself, by a graceful fiction, as all
unskilled in the art. An instance of similar modesty is found in Mr.
Andrew Lang, who entitles the first chapter of his delightful
ANGLING SKETCHES (without which no fisherman's library is complete),
"Confessions of a Duffer." This an engaging liberty which no one else
would dare to take.

The best English fish-story pure and simple, that I know, is "Crocker's
Hole," by H. D. Black-more, the creator of LORNA DOONE.

Let us turn now to American books about angling. Of these the merciful
dispensations of Providence have brought forth no small store since Mr.
William Andrew Chatto made the ill-natured remark which is pilloried at
the head of this chapter. By the way, it seems that Mr. Chatto had never
heard of "The Schuylkill Fishing Company," which was founded on that
romantic stream near Philadelphia in 1732, nor seen the AUTHENTIC
HISTORICAL MEMOIR of that celebrated and amusing society.

I am sorry for the man who cannot find pleasure in reading the appendix
of THE AMERICAN ANGLER'S BOOK, by Thaddeus Norris; or the discursive
pages of Frank Forester's FISH AND FISHING; or the introduction and
notes of that unexcelled edition of Walton which was made by the
Reverend Doctor George W. Bethune; or SUPERIOR FISHING and GAME FISH OF
THE NORTH, by Mr. Robert B. Roosevelt; or Henshall's BOOK OF THE BLACK
BASS; or the admirable disgressions of Mr. Henry P. Wells, in his
FLY-RODS AND FLY-TACKLE, and THE AMERICAN SALMON ANGLER. Dr. William C.
Prime has never put his profound knowledge of the art of angling into a
manual of technical instruction; but he has written of the delights of
the sport in OWL CREEK LETTERS, and in I GO A-FISHING, and in some of
the chapters of ALONG NEW ENGLAND ROADS and AMONG NEW ENGLAND HILLS,
with a persuasive skill that has created many new anglers, and made
many old ones grateful. It is a fitting coincidence of heredity that his
niece, Mrs. Annie Trumbull Slosson, is the author of the most tender and
pathetic of all angling stories, FISHIN' JIMMY.


But it is not only in books written altogether from his peculiar point
of view and to humour his harmless insanity, that the angler may find
pleasant reading about his favourite pastime. There are excellent bits
of fishing scattered all through the field of good literature. It seems
as if almost all the men who could write well had a friendly feeling for
the contemplative sport.

Plutarch, in THE LIVES OF THE NOBLE GRECIANS AND ROMANS, tells a capital
fish-story of the manner in which the Egyptian Cleopatra fooled that
far-famed Roman wight, Marc Antony, when they were angling together on
the Nile. As I recall it, from a perusal in early boyhood, Antony was
having very bad luck indeed; in fact he had taken nothing, and was sadly
put out about it. Cleopatra, thinking to get a rise out of him, secretly
told one of her attendants to dive over the opposite side of the barge
and fasten a salt fish to the Roman general's hook. The attendant was
much pleased with this commission, and, having executed it, proceeded to
add a fine stroke of his own; for when he had made the fish fast on the
hook, he gave a great pull to the line and held on tightly. Antony was
much excited and began to haul violently at his tackle.

"By Jupiter!" he exclaimed, "it was long in coming, but I have a
colossal bite now."

"Have a care," said Cleopatra, laughing behind her sunshade, "or he will
drag you into the water. You must give him line when he pulls hard."

"Not a denarius will I give!" rudely responded Antony. "I mean to have
this halibut or Hades!"

At this moment the man under the boat, being out of breath, let the line
go, and Antony, falling backward, drew up the salted herring.

"Take that fish off the hook, Palinurus," he proudly said. "It is not
as large as I thought, but it looks like the oldest one that has been
caught to-day."

Such, in effect, is the tale narrated by the veracious Plutarch. And
if any careful critic wishes to verify my quotation from memory, he may
compare it with the proper page of Langhorne's translation; I think it
is in the second volume, near the end.

Sir Walter Scott, who once described himself as


     "No fisher,
      But a well-wisher
      To the game,"


has an amusing passage of angling in the third chapter of REDGAUNTLET.
Darsie Latimer is relating his adventures in Dumfriesshire. "By the
way," says he, "old Cotton's instructions, by which I hoped to qualify
myself for the gentle society of anglers, are not worth a farthing for
this meridian. I learned this by mere accident, after I had waited four
mortal hours. I shall never forget an impudent urchin, a cowherd, about
twelve years old, without either brogue or bonnet, barelegged, with a
very indifferent pair of breeches,--how the villain grinned in scorn at
my landing-net, my plummet, and the gorgeous jury of flies which I had
assembled to destroy all the fish in the river. I was induced at last to
lend the rod to the sneering scoundrel, to see what he would make of it;
and he not only half-filled my basket in an hour, but literally taught
me to kill two trouts with my own hand."

Thus ancient and well-authenticated is the superstition of the angling
powers of the barefooted country-boy,--in fiction.

Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, in that valuable but over-capitalized book,
MY NOVEL, makes use of Fishing for Allegorical Purposes. The episode of
John Burley and the One-eyed Perch not only points a Moral but adorns
the Tale.

In the works of R. D. Blackmore, angling plays a less instructive but a
pleasanter part. It is closely interwoven with love. There is a magical
description of trout-fishing on a meadow-brook in ALICE LORRAINE. And
who that has read LORNA DOONE, (pity for the man or woman that knows not
the delight of that book!) can ever forget how young John Ridd dared
his way up the gliddery water-slide, after loaches, and found Lorna in a
fair green meadow adorned with flowers, at the top of the brook?

I made a little journey into the Doone Country once, just to see that
brook and to fish in it. The stream looked smaller, and the water-slide
less terrible, than they seemed in the book. But it was a mighty pretty
place after all; and I suppose that even John Ridd, when he came back to
it in after years, found it shrunken a little.

All the streams were larger in our boyhood than they are now, except,
perhaps, that which flows from the sweetest spring of all, the fountain
of love, which John Ridd discovered beside the Bagworthy River,--and I,
on the willow-shaded banks of the Patapsco, where the Baltimore girls
fish for gudgeons,--and you? Come, gentle reader, is there no stream
whose name is musical to you, because of a hidden spring of love that
you once found on its shore? The waters of that fountain never fail, and
in them alone we taste the undiminished fulness of immortal youth.

The stories of William Black are enlivened with fish, and he knew,
better than most men, how they should be taken. Whenever he wanted to
get two young people engaged to each other, all other devices failing,
he sent them out to angle together. If it had not been for fishing,
everything in A PRINCESS OF THULE and WHITE HEATHER would have gone
wrong.

But even men who have been disappointed in love may angle for solace or
diversion. I have known some old bachelors who fished excellently well;
and others I have known who could find, and give, much pleasure in a day
on the stream, though they had no skill in the sport. Of this class was
Washington Irving, with an extract from whose SKETCH BOOK I will bring
this rambling dissertation to an end.

"Our first essay," says he, "was along a mountain brook among the
highlands of the Hudson; a most unfortunate place for the execution of
those piscatory tactics which had been invented along the velvet margins
of quiet English rivulets. It was one of those wild streams that lavish,
among our romantic solitudes, unheeded beauties enough to fill the
sketch-book of a hunter of the picturesque. Sometimes it would leap down
rocky shelves, making small cascades, over which the trees threw their
broad balancing sprays, and long nameless weeds hung in fringes from the
impending banks, dripping with diamond drops. Sometimes it would brawl
and fret along a ravine in the matted shade of a forest, filling it with
murmurs; and, after this termagant career, would steal forth into open
day, with the most placid, demure face imaginable; as I have seen some
pestilent shrew of a housewife, after filling her home with uproar and
ill-humour, come dimpling out of doors, swimming and courtesying, and
smiling upon all the world.

"How smoothly would this vagrant brook glide, at such times, through
some bosom of green meadow-land among the mountains, where the quiet
was only interrupted by the occasional tinkling of a bell from the lazy
cattle among the clover, or the sound of a woodcutter's axe from the
neighbouring forest!

"For my part, I was always a bungler at all kinds of sport that required
either patience or adroitness, and had not angled above half an hour
before I had completely 'satisfied the sentiment,' and convinced myself
of the truth of Izaak Walton's opinion, that angling is something like
poetry,--a man must be born to it. I hooked myself instead of the fish;
tangled my line in every tree; lost my bait; broke my rod; until I gave
up the attempt in despair, and passed the day under the trees, reading
old Izaak, satisfied that it was his fascinating vein of honest
simplicity and rural feeling that had bewitched me, and not the passion
for angling."




A NORWEGIAN HONEYMOON


     "The best rose-bush, after all, is not that which has the
     fewest thorns, but that which bears the finest roses."

     --SOLOMON SINGLEWITZ: The Life of Adam.


I


It was not all unadulterated sweetness, of course. There were enough
difficulties in the way to make it seem desirable; and a few stings
of annoyance, now and then, lent piquancy to the adventure. But a good
memory, in dealing with the past, has the art of straining out all the
beeswax of discomfort, and storing up little jars of pure hydromel. As
we look back at our six weeks in Norway, we agree that no period of our
partnership in experimental honeymooning has yielded more honey to the
same amount of comb.

Several considerations led us to the resolve of taking our honeymoon
experimentally rather than chronologically. We started from the
self-evident proposition that it ought to be the happiest time in
married life.

"It is perfectly ridiculous," said my lady Graygown, "to suppose that
a thing like that can be fixed by the calendar. It may possibly fall in
the first month after the wedding, but it is not likely. Just think how
slightly two people know each other when they get married. They are
in love, of course, but that is not at all the same as being well
acquainted. Sometimes the more love, the less acquaintance! And
sometimes the more acquaintance, the less love! Besides, at first there
are always the notes of thanks for the wedding-presents to be written,
and the letters of congratulation to be answered, and it is awfully hard
to make each one sound a little different from the others and perfectly
natural. Then, you know, everybody seems to suspect you of the folly of
being newly married. You run across your friends everywhere, and they
grin when they see you. You can't help feeling as if a lot of people
were watching you through opera-glasses, or taking snap-shots at you
with a kodak. It is absurd to imagine that the first month must be the
real honeymoon. And just suppose it were,--what bad luck that would be!
What would there be to look forward to?"

Every word that fell from her lips seemed to me like the wisdom of
Diotima.

"You are right," I cried; "Portia could not hold a candle to you for
clear argument. Besides, suppose two people are imprudent enough to get
married in the first week of December, as we did!--what becomes of the
chronological honeymoon then? There is no fishing in December, and all
the rivers of Paradise, at least in our latitude, are frozen up. No, my
lady, we will discover our month of honey by the empirical method. Each
year we will set out together to seek it in a solitude for two; and we
will compare notes on moons, and strike the final balance when we are
sure that our happiest experiment has been completed."

We are not sure of that, even yet. We are still engaged, as a committee
of two, in our philosophical investigation, and we decline to make
anything but a report of progress. We know more now than we did when we
first went honeymooning in the city of Washington. For one thing, we are
certain that not even the far-famed rosemary-fields of Narbonne, or
the fragrant hillsides of the Corbieres, yield a sweeter harvest to the
busy-ness of the bees than the Norwegian meadows and mountain-slopes
yielded to our idleness in the summer of 1888.


II


The rural landscape of Norway, on the long easterly slope that leads up
to the watershed among the mountains of the western coast, is not unlike
that of Vermont or New Hampshire. The railway from Christiania to the
Randsfjord carried us through a hilly country of scattered farms and
villages. Wood played a prominent part in the scenery. There were dark
stretches of forest on the hilltops and in the valleys; rivers filled
with floating logs; sawmills beside the waterfalls; wooden farmhouses
painted white; and rail-fences around the fields. The people seemed
sturdy, prosperous, independent. They had the familiar habit of coming
down to the station to see the train arrive and depart. We might have
fancied ourselves on a journey through the Connecticut valley, if it had
not been for the soft sing-song of the Norwegian speech and the uniform
politeness of the railway officials.

What a room that was in the inn at Randsfjord where we spent our first
night out! Vast, bare, primitive, with eight windows to admit the
persistent nocturnal twilight; a sea-like floor of blue-painted boards,
unbroken by a single island of carpet; and a castellated stove in one
corner: an apartment for giants, with two little beds for dwarfs on
opposite shores of the ocean. There was no telephone; so we arranged
a system of communication with a fishing-line, to make sure that
the sleepy partner should be awake in time for the early boat in the
morning.

The journey up the lake took seven hours, and reminded us of a voyage
on Lake George; placid, picturesque, and pervaded by summer boarders.
Somewhere on the way we had lunch, and were well fortified to take the
road when the steamboat landed us at Odnaes, at the head of the lake,
about two o'clock in the afternoon.

There are several methods in which you may drive through Norway. The
government maintains posting-stations at the farms along the main
travelled highways, where you can hire horses and carriages of various
kinds. There are also English tourist agencies which make a business of
providing travellers with complete transportation. You may try either of
these methods alone, or you may make a judicious mixture.

Thus, by an application of the theory of permutations and combinations,
you have your choice among four ways of accomplishing a driving-tour.
First, you may engage a carriage and pair, with a driver, from one of
the tourist agencies, and roll through your journey in sedentary case,
provided your horses do not go lame or give out. Second, you may rely
altogether upon the posting-stations to send you on your journey; and
this is a very pleasant, lively way, provided there is not a crowd
of travellers on the road before you, who take up all the comfortable
conveyances and leave you nothing but a jolting cart or a ramshackle
KARIOL of the time of St. Olaf. Third, you may rent an easy-riding
vehicle (by choice a well-hung gig) for the entire trip, and change
ponies at the stations as you drive along; this is the safest way. The
fourth method is to hire your horseflesh at the beginning for the whole
journey, and pick up your vehicles from place to place. This method is
theoretically possible, but I do not know any one who has tried it.

Our gig was waiting for us at Odnaes. There was a brisk little
mouse-coloured pony in the shafts; and it took but a moment to strap our
leather portmanteau on the board at the back, perch the postboy on top
of it, and set out for our first experience of a Norwegian driving-tour.

The road at first was level and easy; and we bowled along smoothly
through the valley of the Etnaelv, among drooping birch-trees and green
fields where the larks were singing. At Tomlevolden, ten miles farther
on, we reached the first station, a comfortable old farmhouse, with a
great array of wooden outbuildings. Here we had a chance to try our
luck with the Norwegian language in demanding "en hest, saa straxt som
muligt." This was what the guide-book told us to say when we wanted a
horse.

There is great fun in making a random cast on the surface of a strange
language. You cannot tell what will come up. It is like an experiment in
witchcraft. We should not have been at all surprised, I must confess, if
our preliminary incantation had brought forth a cow or a basket of eggs.

But the good people seemed to divine our intentions; and while we were
waiting for one of the stable-boys to catch and harness the new horse, a
yellow-haired maiden inquired, in very fair English, if we would not be
pleased to have a cup of tea and some butter-bread; which we did with
great comfort.

The SKYDSGUT, or so-called postboy, for the next stage of the journey,
was a full-grown man of considerable weight. As he climbed to his perch
on our portmanteau, my lady Graygown congratulated me on the prudence
which had provided that one side of that receptacle should be of an
inflexible stiffness, quite incapable of being crushed; otherwise, asked
she, what would have become of her Sunday frock under the pressure of
this stern necessity of a postboy?

But I think we should not have cared very much if all our luggage had
been smashed on this journey, for the road now began to ascend, and the
views over the Etnadal, with its winding river, were of a breadth and
sweetness most consoling. Up and up we went, curving in and out through
the forest, crossing wild ravines and shadowy dells, looking back at
every turn on the wide landscape bathed in golden light. At the station
of Sveen, where we changed horse and postboy again, it was already
evening. The sun was down, but the mystical radiance of the northern
twilight illumined the sky. The dark fir-woods spread around us, and
their odourous breath was diffused through the cool, still air. We were
crossing the level summit of the plateau, twenty-three hundred feet
above the sea. Two tiny woodland lakes gleamed out among the trees. Then
the road began to slope gently towards the west, and emerged suddenly
on the edge of the forest, looking out over the long, lovely vale of
Valders, with snow-touched mountains on the horizon, and the river
Baegna shimmering along its bed, a thousand feet below us.

What a heart-enlarging outlook! What a keen joy of motion, as the wheels
rolled down the long incline, and the sure-footed pony swung between the
shafts and rattled his hoofs merrily on the hard road! What long,
deep breaths of silent pleasure in the crisp night air! What wondrous
mingling of lights in the afterglow of sunset, and the primrose bloom
of the first stars, and faint foregleamings of the rising moon creeping
over the hill behind us! What perfection of companionship without words,
as we rode together through a strange land, along the edge of the dark!

When we finished the thirty-fifth mile, and drew up in the courtyard of
the station at Frydenlund, Graygown sprang out, with a little sigh of
regret.

"Is it last night," she cried, "or to-morrow morning? I have n't the
least idea what time it is; it seems as if we had been travelling in
eternity."

"It is just ten o'clock," I answered, "and the landlord says there will
be a hot supper of trout ready for us in five minutes."

It would be vain to attempt to give a daily record of the whole
journey in which we made this fair beginning. It was a most idle and
unsystematic pilgrimage. We wandered up and down, and turned aside when
fancy beckoned. Sometimes we hurried on as fast as the horses would
carry us, driving sixty or seventy miles a day; sometimes we loitered
and dawdled, as if we did not care whether we got anywhere or not. If a
place pleased us, we stayed and tried the fishing. If we were tired of
driving, we took to the water, and travelled by steamer along a fjord,
or hired a rowboat to cross from point to point. One day we would be in
a good little hotel, with polyglot guests, and serving-maids in stagey
Norse costumes,--like the famous inn at Stalheim, which commands the
amazing panorama of the Naerodal. Another day we would lodge in a plain
farmhouse like the station at Nedre Vasenden, where eggs and fish were
the staples of diet, and the farmer's daughter wore the picturesque
peasants' dress, with its tall cap, without any dramatic airs. Lakes
and rivers, precipices and gorges, waterfalls and glaciers and snowy
mountains were our daily repast. We drove over five hundred miles in
various kinds of open wagons, KARIOLS for one, and STOLKJAERRES for
two, after we had left our comfortable gig behind us. We saw the ancient
dragon-gabled church of Burgund; and the delightful, showery town of
Bergen; and the gloomy cliffs of the Geiranger-Fjord laced with filmy
cataracts; and the bewitched crags of the Romsdal; and the wide,
desolate landscape of Jerkin; and a hundred other unforgotten scenes.
Somehow or other we went, (around and about, and up and down, now
on wheels, and now on foot, and now in a boat,) all the way from
Christiania to Throndhjem. My lady Graygown could give you the exact
itinerary, for she has been well brought up, and always keeps a diary.
All I know is, that we set out from one city and arrived at the other,
and we gathered by the way a collection of instantaneous photographs.
I am going to turn them over now, and pick out a few of the clearest
pictures.



III


Here is the bridge over the Naeselv at Fagernaes. Just below it is a
good pool for trout, but the river is broad and deep and swift. It is
difficult wading to get out within reach of the fish. I have taken half
a dozen small ones and come to the end of my cast. There is a big one
lying out in the middle of the river, I am sure. But the water already
rises to my hips; another step will bring it over the top of my waders,
and send me downstream feet uppermost.

"Take care!" cries Graygown from the grassy bank, where she sits
placidly crocheting some mysterious fabric of white yarn.

She does not see the large rock lying at the bottom of the river just
beyond me. If I can step on that, and stand there without being swept
away, I can reach the mid-current with my flies. It is a long stride
and a slippery foothold, but by good luck "the last step which costs" is
accomplished. The tiny black and orange hackle goes curling out over the
stream, lights softly, and swings around with the current, folding
and expanding its feathers as if it were alive. The big trout takes
it promptly the instant it passes over him; and I play him and net him
without moving from my perilous perch.

Graygown waves her crochet-work like a flag, "Bravo!" she cries. "That's
a beauty, nearly two pounds! But do be careful about coming back; you
are not good enough to take any risks yet."


The station at Skogstad is a solitary farmhouse lying far up on the
bare hillside, with its barns and out-buildings grouped around a central
courtyard, like a rude fortress. The river travels along the valley
below, now wrestling its way through a narrow passage among the rocks,
now spreading out at leisure in a green meadow. As we cross the bridge,
the crystal water is changed to opal by the sunset glow, and a gentle
breeze ruffles the long pools, and the trout are rising freely. It is
the perfect hour for fishing. Would Graygown dare to drive on alone to
the gate of the fortress, and blow upon the long horn which doubtless
hangs beside it, and demand admittance and a lodging, "in the name of
the great Jehovah and the Continental Congress,"--while I angle down the
river a mile or so?

Certainly she would. What door is there in Europe at which the American
girl is afraid to knock? "But wait a moment. How do you ask for fried
chicken and pancakes in Norwegian? KYLLING OG PANDEKAGE? How fierce it
sounds! All right now. Run along and fish."

The river welcomes me like an old friend. The tune that it sings is the
same that the flowing water repeats all around the world. Not otherwise
do the lively rapids carry the familiar air, and the larger falls drone
out a burly bass, along the west branch of the Penobscot, or down the
valley of the Bouquet. But here there are no forests to conceal the
course of the stream. It lies as free to the view as a child's thought.
As I follow on from pool to pool, picking out a good trout here and
there, now from a rocky corner edged with foam, now from a swift
gravelly run, now from a snug hiding-place that the current has hollowed
out beneath the bank, all the way I can see the fortress far above me on
the hillside.

I am as sure that it has already surrendered to Graygown as if I could
discern her white banner of crochet-work floating from the battlements.

Just before dark, I climb the hill with a heavy basket of fish. The
castle gate is open. The scent of chicken and pancakes salutes the weary
pilgrim. In a cosy little parlour, adorned with fluffy mats and pictures
framed in pine-cones, lit by a hanging lamp with glass pendants,
sits the mistress of the occasion, calmly triumphant and plying her
crochet-needle.

There is something mysterious about a woman's fancy-work. It seems
to have all the soothing charm of the tobacco-plant, without its
inconveniences. Just to see her tranquillity, while she relaxes her mind
and busies her fingers with a bit of tatting or embroidery or crochet,
gives me a sense of being domesticated, a "homey" feeling, anywhere in
the wide world.


If you ever go to Norway, you must be sure to see the Loenvand. You can
set out from the comfortable hotel at Faleide, go up the Indvik Fjord
in a rowboat, cross over a two-mile hill on foot or by carriage, spend a
happy day on the lake, and return to your inn in time for a late supper.
The lake is perhaps the most beautiful in Norway. Long and narrow, it
lies like a priceless emerald of palest green, hidden and guarded by
jealous mountains. It is fed by huge glaciers, which hang over the
shoulders of the hills like ragged cloaks of ice.

As we row along the shore, trolling in vain for the trout that live in
the ice-cold water, fragments of the tattered cloth-of-silver far above
us, on the opposite side, are loosened by the touch of the summer
sun, and fall from the precipice. They drift downward, at first,
as noiselessly as thistledowns; then they strike the rocks and come
crashing towards the lake with the hollow roar of an avalanche.

At the head of the lake we find ourselves in an enormous amphitheatre
of mountains. Glaciers are peering down upon us. Snow-fields glare at us
with glistening eyes. Black crags seem to bend above us with an eternal
frown. Streamers of foam float from the forehead of the hills and the
lips of the dark ravines. But there is a little river of cold, pure
water flowing from one of the rivers of ice, and a pleasant shelter of
young trees and bushes growing among the debris of shattered rocks; and
there we build our camp-fire and eat our lunch.

Hunger is a most impudent appetite. It makes a man forget all the
proprieties. What place is there so lofty, so awful, that he will not
dare to sit down in it and partake of food? Even on the side of Mount
Sinai, the elders of Israel spread their out-of-door table, "and did eat
and drink."


I see the Tarn of the Elk at this moment, just as it looked in the clear
sunlight of that August afternoon, ten years ago. Far down in a hollow
of the desolate hills it nestles, four thousand feet above the sea. The
moorland trail hangs high above it, and, though it is a mile away, every
curve of the treeless shore, every shoal and reef in the light green
water is clearly visible. With a powerful field-glass one can almost see
the large trout for which the pond is famous.

The shelter-hut on the bank is built of rough gray stones, and the roof
is leaky to the light as well as to the weather. But there are two beds
in it, one for my guide and one for me; and a practicable fireplace,
which is soon filled with a blaze of comfort. There is also a random
library of novels, which former fishermen have thoughtfully left behind
them. I like strong reading in the wilderness. Give me a story with
plenty of danger and wholesome fighting in it,--"The Three Musketeers,"
or "Treasure Island," or "The Afghan's Knife." Intricate studies of
social dilemmas and tales of mild philandering seem bloodless and
insipid.

The trout in the Tarn of the Elk are large, undoubtedly, but they are
also few in number and shy in disposition. Either some of the peasants
have been fishing over them with the deadly "otter," or else they
belong to that variety of the trout family known as TRUTTA DAMNOSA,--the
species which you can see but cannot take. We watched these aggravating
fish playing on the surface at sunset; we saw them dart beneath our boat
in the early morning; but not until a driving snowstorm set in, about
noon of the second day, did we succeed in persuading any of them to take
the fly. Then they rose, for a couple of hours, with amiable perversity.
I caught five, weighing between two and four pounds each, and stopped
because my hands were so numb that I could cast no longer.

Now for a long tramp over the hills and home. Yes, home; for yonder in
the white house at Drivstuen, with fuchsias and geraniums blooming in
the windows, and a pretty, friendly Norse girl to keep her company, my
lady is waiting for me. See, she comes running out to the door, in the
gathering dusk, with a red flower in her hair, and hails me with the
fisherman's greeting. WHAT LUCK?

Well, THIS luck, at all events! I can show you a few good fish, and sit
down with you to a supper of reindeer-venison and a quiet evening of
music and talk.


Shall I forget thee, hospitable Stuefloten, dearest to our memory of all
the rustic stations in Norway? There are no stars beside thy name in the
pages of Baedeker. But in the book of our hearts a whole constellation
is thine.

The long, low, white farmhouse stands on a green hill at the head of
the Romsdal. A flourishing crop of grass and flowers grows on the
stable-roof, and there is a little belfry with a big bell to call the
labourers home from the fields. In the corner of the living-room of the
old house there is a broad fireplace built across the angle. Curious
cupboards are tucked away everywhere. The long table in the dining-room
groans thrice a day with generous fare. There are as many kinds of hot
bread as in a Virginia country-house; the cream is thick enough to
make a spoon stand up in amazement; once, at dinner, we sat embarrassed
before six different varieties of pudding.

In the evening, when the saffron light is beginning to fade, we go out
and walk in the road before the house, looking down the long mystical
vale of the Rauma, or up to the purple western hills from which the
clear streams of the Ulvaa flow to meet us.

Above Stuefloten the Rauma lingers and meanders through a smoother and
more open valley, with broad beds of gravel and flowery meadows. Here
the trout and grayling grow fat and lusty, and here we angle for them,
day after day, in water so crystalline that when one steps into the
stream one hardly knows whether to expect a depth of six inches or six
feet.

Tiny English flies and leaders of gossamer are the tackle for such water
in midsummer. With this delicate outfit, and with a light hand and
a long line, one may easily outfish the native angler, and fill a
twelve-pound basket every fair day. I remember an old Norwegian, an
inveterate fisherman, whose footmarks we saw ahead of us on the stream
all through an afternoon. Footmarks I call them; and so they were,
literally, for there were only the prints of a single foot to be seen
on the banks of sand, and between them, a series of small, round, deep
holes.

"What kind of a bird made those marks, Frederik?" I asked my faithful
guide.

"That is old Pedersen," he said, "with his wooden leg. He makes a dot
after every step. We shall catch him in a little while."

Sure enough, about six o'clock we saw him standing on a grassy point,
hurling his line, with a fat worm on the end of it, far across the
stream, and letting it drift down with the current. But the water was
too fine for that style of fishing, and the poor old fellow had but a
half dozen little fish. My creel was already overflowing, so I emptied
out all of the grayling into his bag, and went on up the river to
complete my tale of trout before dark.

And when the fishing is over, there is Graygown with the wagon, waiting
at the appointed place under the trees, beside the road. The sturdy
white pony trots gayly homeward. The pale yellow stars blossom out above
the hills again, as they did on that first night when we were driving
down into the Valders. Frederik leans over the back of the seat, telling
us marvellous tales, in his broken English, of the fishing in a certain
lake among the mountains, and of the reindeer-shooting on the fjeld
beyond it.

"It is sad that you go to-morrow," says he "but you come back another
year, I think, to fish in that lake, and to shoot those reindeer."

Yes, Frederik, we are coming back to Norway some day, perhaps,--who can
tell? It is one of the hundred places that we are vaguely planning to
revisit. For, though we did not see the midnight sun there, we saw the
honeymoon most distinctly. And it was bright enough to take pictures by
its light.




WHO OWNS THE MOUNTAINS?


"My heart is fixed firm and stable in the belief that ultimately the
sunshine and the summer, the flowers and the azure sky, shall become, as
it were, interwoven into man's existence. He shall take from all their
beauty and enjoy their glory."--RICHARD JEFFERIES: The Life of the
Fields.


It was the little lad that asked the question; and the answer also, as
you will see, was mainly his.

We had been keeping Sunday afternoon together in our favourite fashion,
following out that pleasant text which tells us to "behold the fowls
of the air." There is no injunction of Holy Writ less burdensome in
acceptance, or more profitable in obedience, than this easy out-of-doors
commandment. For several hours we walked in the way of this precept,
through the untangled woods that lie behind the Forest Hills Lodge,
where a pair of pigeon-hawks had their nest; and around the
brambly shores of the small pond, where Maryland yellow-throats and
song-sparrows were settled; and under the lofty hemlocks of the fragment
of forest across the road, where rare warblers flitted silently among
the tree-tops. The light beneath the evergreens was growing dim as we
came out from their shadow into the widespread glow of the sunset,
on the edge of a grassy hill, overlooking the long valley of the Gale
River, and uplooking to the Franconia Mountains.

It was the benediction hour. The placid air of the day shed a new
tranquillity over the consoling landscape. The heart of the earth
seemed to taste a repose more perfect than that of common days.
A hermit-thrush, far up the vale, sang his vesper hymn; while the
swallows, seeking their evening meal, circled above the river-fields
without an effort, twittering softly, now and then, as if they must give
thanks. Slight and indefinable touches in the scene, perhaps the mere
absence of the tiny human figures passing along the road or labouring in
the distant meadows, perhaps the blue curls of smoke rising lazily
from the farmhouse chimneys, or the family groups sitting under the
maple-trees before the door, diffused a sabbath atmosphere over the
world.

Then said the lad, lying on the grass beside me, "Father, who owns the
mountains?"

I happened to have heard, the day before, of two or three lumber
companies that had bought some of the woodland slopes; so I told him
their names, adding that there were probably a good many different
owners, whose claims taken all together would cover the whole Franconia
range of hills.

"Well," answered the lad, after a moment of silence, "I don't see what
difference that makes. Everybody can look at them."

They lay stretched out before us in the level sunlight, the sharp peaks
outlined against the sky, the vast ridges of forest sinking smoothly
towards the valleys, the deep hollows gathering purple shadows in their
bosoms, and the little foothills standing out in rounded promontories of
brighter green from the darker mass behind them.

Far to the east, the long comb of Twin Mountain extended itself back
into the untrodden wilderness. Mount Garfield lifted a clear-cut
pyramid through the translucent air. The huge bulk of Lafayette ascended
majestically in front of us, crowned with a rosy diadem of rocks. Eagle
Cliff and Bald Mountain stretched their line of scalloped peaks across
the entrance to the Notch. Beyond that shadowy vale, the swelling
summits of Cannon Mountain rolled away to meet the tumbling waves of
Kinsman, dominated by one loftier crested billow that seemed almost
ready to curl and break out of green silence into snowy foam. Far down
the sleeping Landaff valley the undulating dome of Moosilauke trembled
in the distant blue.

They were all ours, from crested cliff to wooded base. The solemn groves
of firs and spruces, the plumed sierras of lofty pines, the stately
pillared forests of birch and beech, the wild ravines, the tremulous
thickets of silvery poplar, the bare peaks with their wide outlooks, and
the cool vales resounding with the ceaseless song of little rivers,--we
knew and loved them all; they ministered peace and joy to us; they were
all ours, though we held no title deeds and our ownership had never been
recorded.

What is property, after all? The law says there are two kinds, real and
personal. But it seems to me that the only real property is that which
is truly personal, that which we take into our inner life and make our
own forever, by understanding and admiration and sympathy and love. This
is the only kind of possession that is worth anything.

A gallery of great paintings adorns the house of the Honourable Midas
Bond, and every year adds a new treasure to his collection. He knows
how much they cost him, and he keeps the run of the quotations at the
auction sales, congratulating himself as the price of the works of
his well-chosen artists rises in the scale, and the value of his art
treasures is enhanced. But why should he call them his? He is only their
custodian. He keeps them well varnished, and framed in gilt. But he
never passes through those gilded frames into the world of beauty that
lies behind the painted canvas. He knows nothing of those lovely places
from which the artist's soul and hand have drawn their inspiration. They
are closed and barred to him. He has bought the pictures, but he cannot
buy the key. The poor art student who wanders through his gallery,
lingering with awe and love before the masterpieces, owns them far more
truly than Midas does.

Pomposus Silverman purchased a rich library a few years ago. The books
were rare and costly. That was the reason why Pomposus bought them. He
was proud to feel that he was the possessor of literary treasures which
were not to be found in the houses of his wealthiest acquaintances.
But the threadbare Bucherfreund, who was engaged at a slender salary to
catalogue the library and take care of it, became the real proprietor.
Pomposus paid for the books, but Bucherfreund enjoyed them.

I do not mean to say that the possession of much money is always a
barrier to real wealth of mind and heart. Nor would I maintain that all
the poor of this world are rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom. But
some of them are. And if some of the rich of this world (through the
grace of Him with whom all things are possible) are also modest in their
tastes, and gentle in their hearts, and open in their minds, and ready
to be pleased with unbought pleasures, they simply share in the best
things which are provided for all.

I speak not now of the strife that men wage over the definition and
the laws of property. Doubtless there is much here that needs to be set
right. There are men and women in the world who are shut out from the
right to earn a living, so poor that they must perish for want of daily
bread, so full of misery that there is no room for the tiniest seed of
joy in their lives. This is the lingering shame of civilization. Some
day, perhaps, we shall find the way to banish it. Some day, every
man shall have his title to a share in the world's great work and the
world's large joy.

But meantime it is certain that, where there are a hundred poor bodies
who suffer from physical privation, there are a thousand poor souls who
suffer from spiritual poverty. To relive this greater suffering there
needs no change of laws, only a change of heart.

What does it profit a man to be the landed proprietor of countless acres
unless he can reap the harvest of delight that blooms from every rood of
God's earth for the seeing eye and the loving spirit? And who can reap
that harvest so closely that there shall not be abundant gleaning left
for all mankind? The most that a wide estate can yield to its legal
owner is a living. But the real owner can gather from a field of
goldenrod, shining in the August sunlight, an unearned increment of
delight.

We measure success by accumulation. The measure is false. The true
measure is appreciation. He who loves most has most.

How foolishly we train ourselves for the work of life! We give our most
arduous and eager efforts to the cultivation of those faculties which
will serve us in the competitions of the forum and the market-place.
But if we were wise, we should care infinitely more for the unfolding of
those inward, secret, spiritual powers by which alone we can become
the owners of anything that is worth having. Surely God is the
great proprietor. Yet all His works He has given away. He holds no
title-deeds. The one thing that is His, is the perfect understanding,
the perfect joy, the perfect love, of all things that He has made. To
a share in this high ownership He welcomes all who are poor in spirit.
This is the earth which the meek inherit. This is the patrimony of the
saints in light.

"Come, laddie," I said to my comrade, "let us go home. You and I are
very rich. We own the mountains. But we can never sell them, and we
don't want to."




A LAZY, IDLE BROOK


     "Perpetual devotion to what a man calls his business is only
     to be sustained by perpetual neglect of many other things.
     And it is not by any means certain that a man's business is
     the most important thing he has to do."

     --ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: An Apology for Idlers.




I. A CASUAL INTRODUCTION


On the South Shore of Long Island, all things incline to a natural
somnolence. There are no ambitious mountains, no braggart cliffs, no
hasty torrents, no hustling waterfalls in that land,


   "In which it seemeth always afternoon."


The salt meadows sleep in the summer sun; the farms and market-gardens
yield a placid harvest to a race of singularly unhurried tillers of the
soil; the low hills rise with gentle slopes, not caring to get too high
in the world, only far enough to catch a pleasant glimpse of the sea and
a breath of fresh air; the very trees grow leisurely, as if they felt
that they had "all the time there is." And from this dreamy land, close
as it lies to the unresting ocean, the tumult of the breakers and the
foam of ever-turning tides are shut off by the languid lagoons of the
Great South Bay and a long range of dunes, crested with wire-grass,
bay-bushes, and wild-roses.

In such a country you could not expect a little brook to be noisy,
fussy, energetic. If it were not lazy, it would be out of keeping.

But the actual and undisguised idleness of this particular brook was
another affair, and one in which it was distinguished among its fellows.
For almost all the other little rivers of the South Shore, lazy as they
may be by nature, yet manage to do some kind of work before they finish
the journey from their crystal-clear springs into the brackish waters
of the bay. They turn the wheels of sleepy gristmills, while the miller
sits with his hands in his pockets underneath the willow-trees. They
fill reservoirs out of which great steam-engines pump the water to
quench the thirst of Brooklyn. Even the smaller streams tarry long
enough in their seaward sauntering to irrigate a few cranberry-bogs
and so provide that savoury sauce which makes the Long Island turkey a
fitter subject for Thanksgiving.

But this brook of which I speak did none of these useful things. It was
absolutely out of business.

There was not a mill, nor a reservoir, nor a cranberry-bog, on all its
course of a short mile. The only profitable affair it ever undertook was
to fill a small ice-pond near its entrance into the Great South Bay.
You could hardly call this a very energetic enterprise. It amounted to
little more than a good-natured consent to allow itself to be used by
the winter for the making of ice, if the winter happened to be cold
enough. Even this passive industry came to nothing; for the water, being
separated from the bay only by a short tideway under a wooden bridge on
the south country road, was too brackish to freeze easily; and the ice,
being pervaded with weeds, was not much relished by the public. So the
wooden ice-house, innocent of paint, and toned by the weather to a soft,
sad-coloured gray, stood like an improvised ruin among the pine-trees
beside the pond.

It was through this unharvested ice-pond, this fallow field of water,
that my lady Graygown and I entered on acquaintance with our lazy, idle
brook. We had a house, that summer, a few miles down the bay. But it was
a very small house, and the room that we like best was out of doors.
So we spent much time in a sailboat,--by name "The Patience,"--making
voyages of exploration into watery corners and byways. Sailing past the
wooden bridge one day, when a strong east wind had made a very low
tide, we observed the water flowing out beneath the road with an eddying
current. We were interested to discover where such a stream came from.
But the sailboat could not go under the bridge, nor even make a landing
on the shore without risk of getting aground. The next day we came back
in a rowboat to follow the clue of curiosity. The tide was high now, and
we passed with the reversed current under the bridge, almost bumping our
heads against the timbers. Emerging upon the pond, we rowed across its
shallow, weed-encumbered waters, and were introduced without ceremony to
one of the most agreeable brooks that we had ever met.

It was quite broad where it came into the pond,--a hundred feet from
side to side,--bordered with flags and rushes and feathery meadow
grasses. The real channel meandered in sweeping curves from bank to
bank, and the water, except in the swifter current, was filled with an
amazing quantity of some aquatic moss. The woods came straggling down on
either shore. There were fallen trees in the stream here and there. On
one of the points an old swamp-maple, with its decrepit branches and its
leaves already touched with the hectic colours of decay, hung far out
over the water which was undermining it, looking and leaning downward,
like an aged man who bends, half-sadly and half-willingly, towards the
grave.

But for the most part the brook lay wide open to the sky, and the tide,
rising and sinking somewhat irregularly in the pond below, made curious
alternations in its depth and in the swiftness of its current. For about
half a mile we navigated this lazy little river, and then we found
that rowing would carry us no farther, for we came to a place where the
stream issued with a livelier flood from an archway in a thicket.

This woodland portal was not more than four feet wide, and the branches
of the small trees were closely interwoven overhead. We shipped the oars
and took one of them for a paddle. Stooping down, we pushed the boat
through the archway and found ourselves in the Fairy Dell. It was a
long, narrow bower, perhaps four hundred feet from end to end, with the
brook dancing through it in a joyous, musical flow over a bed of clean
yellow sand and white pebbles. There were deep places in the curves
where you could hardly touch bottom with an oar, and shallow places
in the straight runs where the boat would barely float. Not a ray
of unbroken sunlight leaked through the green roof of this winding
corridor; and all along the sides there were delicate mosses and tall
ferns and wildwood flowers that love the shade.

At the upper end of the bower our progress in the boat was barred by a
low bridge, on a forgotten road that wound through the pine-woods. Here
I left my lady Graygown, seated on the shady corner of the bridge with a
book, swinging her feet over the stream, while I set out to explore its
further course. Above the wood-road there were no more fairy dells, nor
easy-going estuaries. The water came down through the most complicated
piece of underbrush that I have ever encountered. Alders and swamp
maples and pussy-willows and gray birches grew together in a wild
confusion. Blackberry bushes and fox-grapes and cat-briers trailed and
twisted themselves in an incredible tangle. There was only one way to
advance, and that was to wade in the middle of the brook, stooping low,
lifting up the pendulous alder-branches, threading a tortuous course,
now under and now over the innumerable obstacles, as a darning-needle is
pushed in and out through the yarn of a woollen stocking.

It was dark and lonely in that difficult passage. The brook divided into
many channels, turning this way and that way, as if it were lost in the
woods. There were huge clumps of OSMUNDA REGALIS spreading their fronds
in tropical profusion. Mouldering logs were covered with moss. The water
gurgled slowly into deep corners under the banks. Catbirds and blue
jays fluttered screaming from the thickets. Cotton-tailed rabbits darted
away, showing the white flag of fear. Once I thought I saw the fuscous
gleam of a red fox stealing silently through the brush. It would have
been no surprise to hear the bark of a raccoon, or see the eyes of a
wildcat gleaming through the leaves.

For more than an hour I was pushing my way through this miniature
wilderness of half a mile; and then I emerged suddenly, to find myself
face to face with--a railroad embankment and the afternoon express, with
its parlour-cars, thundering down to Southampton!

It was a strange and startling contrast. The explorer's joy, the sense
of adventure, the feeling of wildness and freedom, withered and crumpled
somewhat preposterously at the sight of the parlour-cars. My scratched
hands and wet boots and torn coat seemed unkempt and disreputable.
Perhaps some of the well-dressed people looking out at the windows
of the train were the friends with whom we were to dine on Saturday.
BATECHE! What would they say to such a costume as mine? What did I care
what they said!

But, all the same, it was a shock, a disenchantment, to find that
civilization, with all its absurdities and conventionalities, was so
threateningly close to my new-found wilderness. My first enthusiasm was
not a little chilled as I walked back, along an open woodland path, to
the bridge where Graygown was placidly reading. Reading, I say, though
her book was closed, and her brown eyes were wandering over the green
leaves of the thicket, and the white clouds drifting, drifting lazily
across the blue deep of the sky.




II. A BETTER ACQUAINTANCE


On the voyage home, she gently talked me out of my disappointment, and
into a wiser frame of mind.

It was a surprise, of course, she admitted, to find that our wilderness
was so little, and to discover the trail of a parlour-car on the edge
of Paradise. But why not turn the surprise around, and make it pleasant
instead of disagreeable? Why not look at the contrast from the side that
we liked best?

It was not necessary that everybody should take the same view of life
that pleased us. The world would not get on very well without people
who preferred parlour-cars to canoes, and patent-leather shoes to
India-rubber boots, and ten-course dinners to picnics in the woods.
These good people were unconsciously toiling at the hard and necessary
work of life in order that we, of the chosen and fortunate few, should
be at liberty to enjoy the best things in the world.

Why should we neglect our opportunities, which were also our real
duties? The nervous disease of civilization might prevail all around
us, but that ought not to destroy our grateful enjoyment of the lucid
intervals that were granted to us by a merciful Providence.

Why should we not take this little untamed brook, running its humble
course through the borders of civilized life and midway between two
flourishing summer resorts,--a brook without a single house or a
cultivated field on its banks, as free and beautiful and secluded as if
it flowed through miles of trackless forest,--why not take this brook as
a sign that the ordering of the universe had a "good intention" even for
inveterate idlers, and that the great Arranger of the world felt some
kindness for such gipsy-hearts as ours? What law, human or divine, was
there to prevent us from making this stream our symbol of deliverance
from the conventional and commonplace, our guide to liberty and a quiet
mind?

So reasoned Graygown with her


          "most silver flow
     Of subtle-paced counsel in distress."


And, according to her word, so did we. That lazy, idle brook became to
us one of the best of friends; the pathfinder of happiness on many a
bright summer day; and, through long vacations, the faithful encourager
of indolence.

Indolence in the proper sense of the word, you understand. The meaning
which is commonly given to it, as Archbishop Trench pointed out in his
suggestive book about WORDS AND THEIR USES, is altogether false. To
speak of indolence as if it were a vice is just a great big verbal
slander.

Indolence is a virtue. It comes from two Latin words, which mean freedom
from anxiety or grief. And that is a wholesome state of mind. There are
times and seasons when it is even a pious and blessed state of mind. Not
to be in a hurry; not to be ambitious or jealous or resentful; not
to feel envious of anybody; not to fret about to-day nor worry about
to-morrow,--that is the way we ought all to feel at some time in our
lives; and that is the kind of indolence in which our brook faithfully
encouraged us.

'T is an age in which such encouragement is greatly needed. We have
fallen so much into the habit of being always busy that we know not how
nor when to break it off with firmness. Our business tags after us into
the midst of our pleasures, and we are ill at ease beyond reach of the
telegraph and the daily newspaper. We agitate ourselves amazingly
about a multitude of affairs,--the politics of Europe, the state of the
weather all around the globe, the marriages and festivities of very rich
people, and the latest novelties in crime, none of which are of vital
interest to us. The more earnest souls among us are cultivating
a vicious tendency to Summer Schools, and Seaside Institutes of
Philosophy, and Mountaintop Seminaries of Modern Languages.

We toil assiduously to cram something more into those scrap-bags of
knowledge which we fondly call our minds. Seldom do we rest tranquil
long enough to find out whether there is anything in them already that
is of real value,--any native feeling, any original thought, which would
like to come out and sun itself for a while in quiet.

For my part, I am sure that I stand more in need of a deeper sense of
contentment with life than of a knowledge of the Bulgarian tongue, and
that all the paradoxes of Hegel would not do me so much good as one hour
of vital sympathy with the careless play of children. The Marquis du
Paty de l'Huitre may espouse the daughter and heiress of the Honourable
James Bulger with all imaginable pomp, if he will. CA NE M'INTRIGUE
POINT DU TOUT. I would rather stretch myself out on the grass and watch
yonder pair of kingbirds carrying luscious flies to their young ones in
the nest, or chasing away the marauding crow with shrill cries of anger.

What a pretty battle it is, and in a good cause, too! Waste no pity on
that big black ruffian. He is a villain and a thief, an egg-stealer, an
ogre, a devourer of unfledged innocents. The kingbirds are not afraid of
him, knowing that he is a coward at heart. They fly upon him, now from
below, now from above. They buffet him from one side and from the other.
They circle round him like a pair of swift gunboats round an antiquated
man-of-war. They even perch upon his back and dash their beaks into
his neck and pluck feathers from his piratical plumage. At last his
lumbering flight has carried him far enough away, and the brave little
defenders fly back to the nest, poising above it on quivering wings for
a moment, then dipping down swiftly in pursuit of some passing insect.
The war is over. Courage has had its turn. Now tenderness comes into
play. The young birds, all ignorant of the passing danger, but always
conscious of an insatiable hunger, are uttering loud remonstrances and
plaintive demands for food. Domestic life begins again, and they that
sow not, neither gather into barns, are fed.


Do you suppose that this wondrous stage of earth was set, and all the
myriad actors on it taught to play their parts, without a spectator in
view? Do you think that there is anything better for you and me to do,
now and then, than to sit down quietly in a humble seat, and watch a few
scenes in the drama? Has it not something to say to us, and do we not
understand it best when we have a peaceful heart and free from dolor?
That is what IN-DOLENCE means, and there are no better teachers of it
then the light-hearted birds and untoiling flowers, commended by the
wisest of all masters to our consideration; nor can we find a more
pleasant pedagogue to lead us to their school than a small, merry brook.

And this was what our chosen stream did for us. It was always luring us
away from an artificial life into restful companionship with nature.

Suppose, for example, we found ourselves growing a bit dissatisfied
with the domestic arrangements of our little cottage, and coveting the
splendours of a grander establishment. An afternoon on the brook was
a good cure for that folly. Or suppose a day came when there was an
imminent prospect of many formal calls. We had an important engagement
up the brook; and while we kept it we could think with satisfaction of
the joy of our callers when they discovered that they could discharge
their whole duty with a piece of pasteboard. This was an altruistic
pleasure. Or suppose that a few friends were coming to supper, and there
were no flowers for the supper-table. We could easily have bought them
in the village. But it was far more to our liking to take the children
up the brook, and come back with great bunches of wild white honeysuckle
and blue flag, or posies of arrowheads and cardinal-flowers. Or suppose
that I was very unwisely and reluctantly labouring at some serious
piece of literary work, promised for the next number of THE SCRIBBLER'S
REVIEW; and suppose that in the midst of this labour the sad news came
to me that the fisherman had forgotten to leave any fish at our cottage
that morning. Should my innocent babes and my devoted wife be left to
perish of starvation while I continued my poetical comparison of the two
Williams, Shakspeare and Watson? Inhuman selfishness! Of course it was
my plain duty to sacrifice my inclinations, and get my fly-rod, and row
away across the bay, with a deceptive appearance of cheerfulness, to
catch a basket of trout in--




III. THE SECRETS OF INTIMACY


THERE! I came within eight letters of telling the name of the brook,
a thing that I am firmly resolved not to do. If it were an ordinary
fishless little river, or even a stream with nothing better than
grass-pike and sunfish in it, you should have the name and welcome. But
when a brook contains speckled trout, and when their presence is known
to a very few persons who guard the secret as the dragon guarded the
golden apples of the Hesperides, and when the size of the trout is large
beyond the dreams of hope,--well, when did you know a true angler who
would willingly give away the name of such a brook as that? You may find
an encourager of indolence in almost any stream of the South Side, and
I wish you joy of your brook. But if you want to catch trout in mine
you must discover it for yourself, or perhaps go with me some day, and
solemnly swear secrecy.

That was the way in which the freedom of the stream was conferred
upon me. There was a small boy in the village, the son of rich but
respectable parents, and an inveterate all-round sportsman, aged
fourteen years, with whom I had formed a close intimacy. I was telling
him about the pleasure of exploring the idle brook, and expressing the
opinion that in bygone days, (in that mythical "forty years ago" when
all fishing was good), there must have been trout in it. A certain
look came over the boy's face. He gazed at me solemnly, as if he were
searching the inmost depths of my character before he spoke.

"Say, do you want to know something?"

I assured him that an increase of knowledge was the chief aim of my
life.

"Do you promise you won't tell?"

I expressed my readiness to be bound to silence by the most awful pledge
that the law would sanction.

"Wish you may die?"

I not only wished that I might die, but was perfectly certain that I
would die.

"Well, what's the matter with catching trout in that brook now? Do you
want to go with me next Saturday? I saw four or five bully ones last
week, and got three."

On the appointed day we made the voyage, landed at the upper bridge,
walked around by the woodpath to the railroad embankment, and began
to worm our way down through the tangled wilderness. Fly-fishing, of
course, was out of the question. The only possible method of angling
was to let the line, baited with a juicy "garden hackle," drift down the
current as far as possible before you, under the alder-branches and the
cat-briers, into the holes and corners of the stream. Then, if there
came a gentle tug on the rod, you must strike, to one side or the other,
as the branches might allow, and trust wholly to luck for a chance to
play the fish. Many a trout we lost that day,--the largest ones, of
course,--and many a hook was embedded in a sunken log, or hopelessly
entwined among the boughs overhead. But when we came out at the bridge,
very wet and disheveled, we had seven pretty fish, the heaviest about
half a pound. The Fairy Dell yielded a brace of smaller ones, and
altogether we were reasonably happy as we took up the oars and pushed
out upon the open stream.

But if there were fish above, why should there not be fish below? It was
about sunset, the angler's golden hour. We were already committed to
the crime of being late for supper. It would add little to our guilt and
much to our pleasure to drift slowly down the middle of the brook and
cast the artful fly in the deeper corners on either shore. So I took off
the vulgar bait-hook and put on a delicate leader with a Queen of the
Water for a tail-fly and a Yellow Sally for a dropper,--innocent little
confections of feathers and tinsel, dressed on the tiniest hooks, and
calculated to tempt the appetite or the curiosity of the most capricious
trout.

For a long time the whipping of the water produced no result, and it
seemed as if the dainty style of angling were destined to prove less
profitable than plain fishing with a worm. But presently we came to
an elbow of the brook, just above the estuary, where there was quite a
stretch of clear water along the lower side, with two half-sunken logs
sticking out from the bank, against which the current had drifted a
broad raft of weeds. I made a long cast, and sent the tail-fly close to
the edge of the weeds. There was a swelling ripple on the surface of the
water, and a noble fish darted from under the logs, dashed at the fly,
missed it, and whirled back to his shelter.

"Gee!" said the boy, "that was a whacker! He made a wake like a
steamboat."

It was a moment for serious thought. What was best to be done with that
fish? Leave him to settle down for the night and come back after him
another day? Or try another cast for him at once? A fish on Saturday
evening is worth two on Monday morning. I changed the Queen of the
Water for a Royal Coachman tied on a number fourteen hook,--white wings,
peacock body with a belt of crimson silk,--and sent it out again, a foot
farther up the stream and a shade closer to the weeds. As it settled on
the water, there was a flash of gold from the shadow beneath the logs,
and a quick turn of the wrist made the tiny hook fast in the fish. He
fought wildly to get back to the shelter of his logs, but the four ounce
rod had spring enough in it to hold him firmly away from that dangerous
retreat. Then he splurged up and down the open water, and made fierce
dashes among the grassy shallows, and seemed about to escape a dozen
times. But at last his force was played out; he came slowly towards the
boat, turning on his side, and I netted him in my hat.

"Bully for us;" said the boy, "we got him! What a dandy!"

It was indeed one of the handsomest fish that I have ever taken on the
South Side,--just short of two pounds and a quarter,--small head, broad
tail, and well-rounded sides coloured with orange and blue and gold and
red. A pair of the same kind, one weighing two pounds and the other a
pound and three quarters, were taken by careful fishing down the lower
end of the pool, and then we rowed home through the dusk, pleasantly
convinced that there is no virtue more certainly rewarded than the
patience of anglers, and entirely willing to put up with a cold supper
and a mild reproof for the sake of sport.

Of course we could not resist the temptation to show those fish to
the neighbours. But, equally of course, we evaded the request to give
precise information as to the precise place where they were caught.
Indeed, I fear that there must have been something confused in our
description of where we had been on that afternoon. Our carefully
selected language may have been open to misunderstanding. At all events,
the next day, which was the Sabbath, there was a row of eager but
unprincipled anglers sitting on a bridge OVER ANOTHER STREAM, and
fishing for trout with worms and large expectations, but without visible
results.

The boy and I agreed that if this did not teach a good moral lesson it
was not our fault.

I obtained the boy's consent to admit the partner of my life's joys and
two of our children to the secret of the brook, and thereafter, when
we visited it, we took the fly-rod with us. If by chance another boat
passed us in the estuary, we were never fishing, but only gathering
flowers, or going for a picnic, or taking photographs. But when the
uninitiated ones had passed by, we would get out the rod again, and try
a few more casts.

One day in particular I remember, when Graygown and little Teddy were
my companions. We really had no hopes of angling, for the hour was
mid-noon, and the day was warm and still. But suddenly the trout, by
one of those unaccountable freaks which make their disposition so
interesting and attractive, began to rise all about us in a bend of the
stream.

"Look!" said Teddy; "wherever you see one of those big smiles on the
water, I believe there's a fish!"

Fortunately the rod was at hand. Graygown and Teddy managed the boat and
the landing-net with consummate skill. We landed no less than a dozen
beautiful fish at that most unlikely hour and then solemnly shook hands
all around.

There is a peculiar pleasure in doing a thing like this, catching trout
in a place where nobody thinks of looking for them, and at an hour when
everybody believes they cannot be caught. It is more fun to take one
good fish out of an old, fished-out stream, near at hand to the village,
than to fill a basket from some far-famed and well-stocked water. It
is the unexpected touch that tickles our sense of pleasure. While life
lasts, we are always hoping for it and expecting it. There is no country
so civilized, no existence so humdrum, that there is not room enough in
it somewhere for a lazy, idle brook, an encourager of indolence, with
hope of happy surprises.




THE OPEN FIRE


     "It is a vulgar notion that a fire is only for heat.  A
     chief value of it is, however, to look at.  And it is never
     twice the same."

     --CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER: Backlog Studies.




I. LIGHTING UP


Man is the animal that has made friends with the fire.

All the other creatures, in their natural state, are afraid of it. They
look upon it with wonder and dismay. It fascinates them, sometimes,
with its glittering eyes in the night. The squirrels and the hares come
pattering softly towards it through the underbrush around the new camp.
The fascinated deer stares into the blaze of the jack-light while the
hunter's canoe creeps through the lily-pads. But the charm that masters
them is one of dread, not of love. It is the witchcraft of the serpent's
lambent look. When they know what it means, when the heat of the
fire touches them, or even when its smell comes clearly to their most
delicate sense, they recognize it as their enemy, the Wild Huntsman
whose red hounds can follow, follow for days without wearying, growing
stronger and more furious with every turn of the chase. Let but a trail
of smoke drift down the wind across the forest, and all the game for
miles and miles will catch the signal for fear and flight.

Many of the animals have learned how to make houses for themselves.
The CABANE of the beaver is a wonder of neatness and comfort, much
preferable to the wigwam of his Indian hunter. The muskrat knows how
thick and high to build the dome of his waterside cottage, in order to
protect himself against the frost of the coming winter and the floods of
the following spring. The woodchuck's house has two or three doors; and
the squirrel's dwelling is provided with a good bed and a convenient
storehouse for nuts and acorns. The sportive otters have a toboggan
slide in front of their residence; and the moose in winter make a
"yard," where they can take exercise comfortably and find shelter for
sleep. But there is one thing lacking in all these various dwellings,--a
fireplace.

Man is the only creature that dares to light a fire and to live with it.
The reason? Because he alone has learned how to put it out.

It is true that two of his humbler friends have been converted to
fire-worship. The dog and the cat, being half-humanized, have begun to
love the fire. I suppose that a cat seldom comes so near to feeling a
true sense of affection as when she has finished her saucer of bread and
milk, and stretched herself luxuriously underneath the kitchen stove,
while her faithful mistress washes up the dishes. As for a dog, I am
sure that his admiring love for his master is never greater than when
they come in together from the hunt, wet and tired, and the man gathers
a pile of wood in front of the tent, touches it with a tiny magic wand,
and suddenly the clear, consoling flame springs up, saying cheerfully,
"Here we are, at home in the forest; come into the warmth; rest, and
eat, and sleep." When the weary, shivering dog sees this miracle, he
knows that his master is a great man and a lord of things.

After all, that is the only real open fire. Wood is the fuel for it.
Out-of-doors is the place for it. A furnace is an underground prison
for a toiling slave. A stove is a cage for a tame bird. Even a broad
hearthstone and a pair of glittering andirons--the best ornament of a
room--must be accepted as an imitation of the real thing. The veritable
open fire is built in the open, with the whole earth for a fireplace and
the sky for a chimney.

To start a fire in the open is by no means as easy as it looks. It is
one of those simple tricks that every one thinks he can perform until he
tries it.

To do it without trying,--accidentally and unwillingly,--that, of
course, is a thing for which any fool is fit. You knock out the ashes
from your pipe on a fallen log; you toss the end of a match into a patch
of grass, green on top, but dry as punk underneath; you scatter the
dead brands of an old fire among the moss,--a conflagration is under way
before you know it.

A fire in the woods is one thing; a comfort and a joy. Fire in the woods
is another thing; a terror, an uncontrollable fury, a burning shame.

But the lighting up of a proper fire, kindly, approachable, serviceable,
docile, is a work of intelligence. If, perhaps, you have to do it in the
rain, with a single match, it requires no little art and skill.

There is plenty of wood everywhere, but not a bit to burn. The fallen
trees are waterlogged. The dead leaves are as damp as grief. The charred
sticks that you find in an old fireplace are absolutely incombustible.
Do not trust the handful of withered twigs and branches that you gather
from the spruce-trees. They seem dry, but they are little better for
your purpose than so much asbestos. You make a pile of them in some
apparently suitable hollow, and lay a few larger sticks on top. Then
you hastily scratch your solitary match on the seat of your trousers and
thrust it into the pile of twigs. What happens? The wind whirls around
in your stupid little hollow, and the blue flame of the sulphur spirts
and sputters for an instant, and then goes out. Or perhaps there is
a moment of stillness; the match flares up bravely; the nearest twigs
catch fire, crackling and sparkling; you hurriedly lay on more sticks;
but the fire deliberately dodges them, creeps to the corner of the pile
where the twigs are fewest and dampest, snaps feebly a few times, and
expires in smoke. Now where are you? How far is it to the nearest match?

If you are wise, you will always make your fire before you light it.
Time is never saved by doing a thing badly.




II. THE CAMP-FIRE


In the making of fires there is as much difference as in the building of
houses. Everything depends upon the purpose that you have in view. There
is the camp-fire, and the cooking-fire, and the smudge-fire, and the
little friendship-fire,--not to speak of other minor varieties. Each of
these has its own proper style of architecture, and to mix them is false
art and poor economy.

The object of the camp-fire is to give heat, and incidentally light, to
your tent or shanty. You can hardly build this kind of a fire unless you
have a good axe and know how to chop. For the first thing that you need
is a solid backlog, the thicker the better, to hold the heat and reflect
it into the tent. This log must not be too dry, or it will burn
out quickly. Neither must it be too damp, else it will smoulder and
discourage the fire. The best wood for it is the body of a yellow birch,
and, next to that, a green balsam. It should be five or six feet long,
and at least two and a half feet in diameter. If you cannot find a
tree thick enough, cut two or three lengths of a smaller one; lay the
thickest log on the ground first, about ten or twelve feet in front of
the tent; drive two strong stakes behind it, slanting a little backward;
and lay the other logs on top of the first, resting against the stakes.

Now you are ready for the hand-chunks, or andirons. These are shorter
sticks of wood, eight or ten inches thick, laid at right angles to the
backlog, four or five feet apart. Across these you are to build up the
firewood proper.

Use a dry spruce-tree, not one that has fallen, but one that is dead and
still standing, if you want a lively, snapping fire. Use a hard maple
or a hickory if you want a fire that will burn steadily and make few
sparks. But if you like a fire to blaze up at first with a splendid
flame, and then burn on with an enduring heat far into the night, a
young white birch with the bark on is the tree to choose. Six or eight
round sticks of this laid across the hand-chunks, with perhaps a few
quarterings of a larger tree, will make a glorious fire.

But before you put these on, you must be ready to light up. A few
splinters of dry spruce or pine or balsam, stood endwise against
the backlog, or, better still, piled up in a pyramid between the
hand-chunks; a few strips of birch-bark; and one good match,--these
are all that you want. But be sure that your match is a good one. It is
better to see to this before you go into the brush. Your comfort, even
your life, may depend on it.

"AVEC CES ALLUMETTES-LA," said my guide at LAC ST. JEAN one day, as he
vainly tried to light his pipe with a box of parlour matches from the
hotel,--AVEC CES GNOGNOTTES D'ALLUMETTES ON POURRA MOURIR AU BOIS!"

In the woods, the old-fashioned brimstone match of our grandfathers--the
match with a brown head and a stout stick and a dreadful smell--is the
best. But if you have only one, do not trust even that to light your
fire directly. Use it first to touch off a roll of birch-bark which you
hold in your hand. Then, when the bark is well alight, crinkling and
curling, push it under the heap of kindlings, give the flame time to
take a good hold, and lay your wood over it, a stick at a time, until
the whole pile is blazing. Now your fire is started. Your friendly
little red-haired gnome is ready to serve you through the night.

He will dry your clothes if you are wet. He will cheer you up if you are
despondent. He will diffuse an air of sociability through the camp, and
draw the men together in a half circle for storytelling and jokes and
singing. He will hold a flambeau for you while you spread your blankets
on the boughs and dress for bed. He will keep you warm while you
sleep,--at least till about three o'clock in the morning, when you dream
that you are out sleighing in your pajamas, and wake up with a shiver.

"HOLA, FERDINAND, FRANCOIS!" you call out from your bed, pulling the
blankets over your ears; "RAMANCHEZ LE FEU, S'IL VOUS PLAIT. C'EST UN
FREITE DE CHIEN."




III. THE COOKING-FIRE


Of course such a fire as I have been describing can be used for cooking,
when it has burned down a little, and there is a bed of hot embers in
front of the backlog. But a correct kitchen fire should be constructed
after another fashion. What you want now is not blaze, but heat, and
that not diffused, but concentrated. You must be able to get close to
your fire without burning your boots or scorching your face.

If you have time and the material, make a fireplace of big stones. But
not of granite, for that will split with the heat, and perhaps fly in
your face.

If you are in a hurry and there are no suitable stones at hand, lay two
good logs nearly parallel with each other, a foot or so apart, and build
your fire between them. For a cooking-fire, use split wood in short
sticks. Let the first supply burn to glowing coals before you begin.
A frying-pan that is lukewarm one minute and red-hot the next is the
abomination of desolation. If you want black toast, have it made before
a fresh, sputtering, blazing heap of wood.

In fires, as in men, an excess of energy is a lack of usefulness. The
best work is done without many sparks. Just enough is the right kind of
a fire and a feast.

To know how to cook is not a very elegant accomplishment. Yet there are
times and seasons when it seems to come in better than familiarity with
the dead languages, or much skill upon the lute.

You cannot always rely on your guides for a tasteful preparation of
food. Many of them are ignorant of the difference between frying and
broiling, and their notion of boiling a potato or a fish is to reduce it
to a pulp. Now and then you find a man who has a natural inclination to
the culinary art, and who does very well within familiar limits.

Old Edouard, the Montaignais Indian who cooked for my friends H. E. G.
and C. S. D. last summer on the STE. MARGUERITE EN BAS, was such a man.
But Edouard could not read, and the only way he could tell the nature
of the canned provisions was by the pictures on the cans. If the picture
was strange to him, there was no guessing what he would do with the
contents of the can. He was capable of roasting strawberries, and
serving green peas cold for dessert. One day a can of mullagatawny soup
and a can of apricots were handed out to him simultaneously and without
explanations. Edouard solved the problem by opening both cans and
cooking them together. We had a new soup that day, MULLAGATAWNY AUX
APRICOTS. It was not as bad as it sounds. It tasted somewhat like
chutney.

The real reason why food that is cooked over an open fire tastes so good
to us is because we are really hungry when we get it. The man who puts
up provisions for camp has a great advantage over the dealers who must
satisfy the pampered appetite of people in houses. I never can get any
bacon in New York like that which I buy at a little shop in Quebec to
take into the woods. If I ever set up in the grocery business, I shall
try to get a good trade among anglers. It will be easy to please my
customers.

The reputation that trout enjoy as a food-fish is partly due to the fact
that they are usually cooked over an open fire. In the city they never
taste as good. It is not merely a difference in freshness. It is a
change in the sauce. If the truth must be told, even by an angler, there
are at least five salt-water fish which are better than trout,--to eat.
There is none better to catch.




IV. THE SMUDGE-FIRE


But enough of the cooking-fire. Let us turn now to the subject of
the smudge, known in Lower Canada as LA BOUCANE. The smudge owes its
existence to the pungent mosquito, the sanguinary black-fly, and the
peppery midge,--LE MARINGOUIN, LA MOUSTIQUE, ET LE BRULOT. To what it
owes its English name I do not know; but its French name means simply a
thick, nauseating, intolerable smoke.

The smudge is called into being for the express purpose of creating
a smoke of this kind, which is as disagreeable to the mosquito, the
black-fly, and the midge as it is to the man whom they are devouring.
But the man survives the smoke, while the insects succumb to it, being
destroyed or driven away. Therefore the smudge, dark and bitter in
itself, frequently becomes, like adversity, sweet in its uses. It must
be regarded as a form of fire with which man has made friends under the
pressure of a cruel necessity.

It would seem as if it ought to be the simplest affair in the world to
light up a smudge. And so it is--if you are not trying.

An attempt to produce almost any other kind of a fire will bring forth
smoke abundantly. But when you deliberately undertake to create a
smudge, flames break from the wettest timber, and green moss blazes with
a furious heat. You hastily gather handfuls of seemingly incombustible
material and throw it on the fire, but the conflagration increases.
Grass and green leaves hesitate for an instant and then flash up like
tinder. The more you put on, the more your smudge rebels against its
proper task of smudging. It makes a pleasant warmth, to encourage the
black-flies; and bright light to attract and cheer the mosquitoes. Your
effort is a brilliant failure.

The proper way to make a smudge is this. Begin with a very little, lowly
fire. Let it be bright, but not ambitious. Don't try to make a smoke
yet.

Then gather a good supply of stuff which seems likely to suppress fire
without smothering it. Moss of a certain kind will do, but not the soft,
feathery moss that grows so deep among the spruce-trees. Half-decayed
wood is good; spongy, moist, unpleasant stuff, a vegetable wet blanket.
The bark of dead evergreen trees, hemlock, spruce, or balsam, is better
still. Gather a plentiful store of it. But don't try to make a smoke
yet.

Let your fire burn a while longer; cheer it up a little. Get some clear,
resolute, unquenchable coals aglow in the heart of it. Don't try to make
a smoke yet.

Now pile on your smouldering fuel. Fan it with your hat. Kneel down and
blow it, and in ten minutes you will have a smoke that will make you
wish you had never been born.

That is the proper way to make a smudge. But the easiest way is to ask
your guide to make it for you.

If he makes it in an old iron pot, so much the better, for then you can
move it around to the windward when the breeze veers, and carry it into
your tent without risk of setting everything on fire, and even take it
with you in the canoe while you are fishing.

Some of the pleasantest pictures in the angler's gallery of remembrance
are framed in the smoke that rises from a smudge.

With my eyes shut, I can call up a vision of eight birch-bark canoes
floating side by side on Moosehead Lake, on a fair June morning, fifteen
years ago. They are anchored off Green Island, riding easily on the
long, gentle waves. In the stern of each canoe there is a guide with
a long-handled net; in the bow, an angler with a light fly-rod; in the
middle, a smudge-kettle, smoking steadily. In the air to the windward
of the little fleet hovers a swarm of flies drifting down on the
shore breeze, with bloody purpose in their breasts, but baffled by the
protecting smoke. In the water to the leeward plays a school of speckled
trout, feeding on the minnows that hang around the sunken ledges of
rock. As a larger wave than usual passes over the ledges, it lifts the
fish up, and you can see the big fellows, three, and four, and even five
pounds apiece, poising themselves in the clear brown water. A long cast
will send the fly over one of them. Let it sink a foot. Draw it up with
a fluttering motion. Now the fish sees it, and turns to catch it. There
is a yellow gleam in the depth, a sudden swirl on the surface; you
strike sharply, and the trout is matching his strength against the
spring of your four ounces of split bamboo.

You can guess at his size, as he breaks water, by the breadth of his
tail: a pound of weight to an inch of tail,--that is the traditional
measure, and it usually comes pretty close to the mark, at least in the
case of large fish. But it is never safe to record the weight until the
trout is in the canoe. As the Canadian hunters say, "Sell not the skin
of the bear while he carries it."

Now the breeze that blows over Green Island drops away, and the smoke
of the eight smudge-kettles falls like a thick curtain. The canoes, the
dark shores of Norcross Point, the twin peaks of Spencer Mountain, the
dim blue summit of Katahdin, the dazzling sapphire sky, the flocks of
fleece-white clouds shepherded on high by the western wind, all have
vanished. With closed eyes I see another vision, still framed in
smoke,--a vision of yesterday.

It is a wild river flowing into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, on the COTE
NORD, far down towards Labrador. There is a long, narrow, swift pool
between two parallel ridges of rock. Over the ridge on the right pours
a cataract of pale yellow foam. At the bottom of the pool, the water
slides down into a furious rapid, and dashes straight through an
impassable gorge half a mile to the sea. The pool is full of salmon,
leaping merrily in their delight at coming into their native stream. The
air is full of black-flies, rejoicing in the warmth of the July sun. On
a slippery point of rock, below the fall, are two anglers, tempting the
fish and enduring the flies. Behind them is an old HABITANT raising a
mighty column of smoke.

Through the cloudy pillar which keeps back the Egyptian host, you see
the waving of a long rod. A silver-gray fly with a barbed tail darts out
across the pool, swings around with the current, well under water, and
slowly works past the big rock in the centre, just at the head of the
rapid. Almost past it, but not quite: for suddenly the fly disappears;
the line begins to run out; the reel sings sharp and shrill; a salmon is
hooked.

But how well is he hooked? That is the question. This is no easy pool to
play a fish in. There is no chance to jump into a canoe and drop below
him, and get the current to help you in drowning him. You cannot follow
him along the shore. You cannot even lead him into quiet water, where
the gaffer can creep near to him unseen and drag him in with a quick
stroke. You must fight your fish to a finish, and all the advantages are
on his side. The current is terribly strong. If he makes up his mind to
go downstream to the sea, the only thing you can do is to hold him by
main force; and then it is ten to one that the hook tears out or the
leader breaks.

It is not in human nature for one man to watch another handling a fish
in such a place without giving advice. "Keep the tip of your rod up.
Don't let your reel overrun. Stir him up a little, he 's sulking. Don't
let him 'jig,' or you'll lose him. You 're playing him too hard. There,
he 's going to jump again. Drop your tip. Stop him, quick! he 's going
down the rapid!"

Of course the man who is playing the salmon does not like this. If he is
quick-tempered, sooner or later he tells his counsellor to shut up. But
if he is a gentle, early-Christian kind of a man, wise as a serpent and
harmless as a dove, he follows the advice that is given to him, promptly
and exactly. Then, when it is all ended, and he has seen the big fish,
with the line over his shoulder, poised for an instant on the crest of
the first billow of the rapid, and has felt the leader stretch and give
and SNAP!--then he can have the satisfaction, while he reels in his
slack line, of saying to his friend, "Well, old man, I did everything
just as you told me. But I think if I had pushed that fish a little
harder at the beginning, AS I WANTED TO, I might have saved him."

But really, of course, the chances were all against it. In such a pool,
most of the larger fish get away. Their weight gives them a tremendous
pull. The fish that are stopped from going into the rapid, and dragged
back from the curling wave, are usually the smaller ones. Here they
are,--twelve pounds, eight pounds, six pounds, five pounds and a half,
FOUR POUNDS! Is not this the smallest salmon that you ever saw? Not
a grilse, you understand, but a real salmon, of brightest silver,
hall-marked with St. Andrew's cross.

Now let us sit down for a moment and watch the fish trying to leap up
the falls. There is a clear jump of about ten feet, and above that an
apparently impossible climb of ten feet more up a ladder of twisting
foam. A salmon darts from the boiling water at the bottom of the fall
like an arrow from a bow. He rises in a beautiful curve, fins laid close
to his body and tail quivering; but he has miscalculated his distance.
He is on the downward curve when the water strikes him and tumbles him
back. A bold little fish, not more than eighteen inches long, makes a
jump at the side of the fall, where the water is thin, and is rolled
over and over in the spray. A larger salmon rises close beside us with
a tremendous rush, bumps his nose against a jutting rock, and flops back
into the pool. Now comes a fish who has made his calculations exactly.
He leaves the pool about eight feet from the foot of the fall, rises
swiftly, spreads his fins, and curves his tail as if he were flying,
strikes the water where it is thickest just below the brink, holds on
desperately, and drives himself, with one last wriggle, through the
bending stream, over the edge, and up the first step of the foaming
stairway. He has obeyed the strongest instinct of his nature, and gone
up to make love in the highest fresh water that he can reach.

The smoke of the smudge-fire is sharp and tearful, but a man can learn
to endure a good deal of it when he can look through its rings at such
scenes as these.




V. THE LITTLE FRIENDSHIP-FIRE


There are times and seasons when the angler has no need of any of the
three fires of which we have been talking. He sleeps in a house. His
breakfast and dinner are cooked for him in a kitchen. He is in no great
danger from black-flies or mosquitoes. All he needs now, as he sets out
to spend a day on the Neversink, or the Willowemoc, or the Shepaug,
or the Swiftwater, is a good lunch in his pocket, and a little
friendship-fire to burn pleasantly beside him while he eats his frugal
fare and prolongs his noonday rest.

This form of fire does less work than any other in the world. Yet it is
far from being useless; and I, for one, should be sorry to live without
it. Its only use is to make a visible centre of interest where there are
two or three anglers eating their lunch together, or to supply a kind of
companionship to a lone fisherman. It is kindled and burns for no other
purpose than to give you the sense of being at home and at ease. Why the
fire should do this, I cannot tell, but it does.

You may build your friendship-fire in almost any way that pleases you;
but this is the way in which you shall build it best. You have no axe,
of course, so you must look about for the driest sticks that you can
find. Do not seek them close beside the stream, for there they are
likely to be water-soaked; but go back into the woods a bit and gather
a good armful of fuel. Then break it, if you can, into lengths of about
two feet, and construct your fire in the following fashion.

Lay two sticks parallel, and put between them a pile of dried grass,
dead leaves, small twigs, and the paper in which your lunch was wrapped.
Then lay two other sticks crosswise on top of your first pair. Strike
your match and touch your kindlings. As the fire catches, lay on other
pairs of sticks, each pair crosswise to the pair that is below it, until
you have a pyramid of flame. This is "a Micmac fire" such as the Indians
make in the woods.

Now you can pull off your wading-boots and warm your feet at the blaze.
You can toast your bread if you like. You can even make shift to broil
one of your trout, fastened on the end of a birch twig if you have a
fancy that way. When your hunger is satisfied, you shake out the crumbs
for the birds and the squirrels, pick up a stick with a coal at the end
to light your pipe, put some more wood on your fire, and settle down for
an hour's reading if you have a book in your pocket, or for a good talk
if you have a comrade with you.

The stream of time flows swift and smooth, by such a fire as this. The
moments slip past unheeded; the sun sinks down his western arch; the
shadows begin to fall across the brook; it is time to move on for the
afternoon fishing. The fire has almost burned out. But do not trust it
too much. Throw some sand over it, or bring a hatful of water from the
brook to pour on it, until you are sure that the last glowing ember is
extinguished, and nothing but the black coals and the charred ends of
the sticks are left.

Even the little friendship-fire must keep the law of the bush. All
lights out when their purpose is fulfilled!




VI. ALTARS OF REMEMBRANCE


It is a question that we have often debated, in the informal meetings of
our Petrine Club: Which is pleasanter,--to fish an old stream, or a new
one?

The younger members are all for the "fresh woods and pastures new."
They speak of the delight of turning off from the high-road into some
faintly-marked trail; following it blindly through the forest, not
knowing how far you have to go; hearing the voice of waters sounding
through the woodland; leaving the path impatiently and striking straight
across the underbrush; scrambling down a steep bank, pushing through
a thicket of alders, and coming out suddenly, face to face with a
beautiful, strange brook. It reminds you, of course, of some old friend.
It is a little like the Beaverkill, or the Ausable, or the Gale
River. And yet it is different. Every stream has its own character and
disposition. Your new acquaintance invites you to a day of discoveries.
If the water is high, you will follow it down, and have easy fishing.
If the water is low, you will go upstream, and fish "fine and far-off."
Every turn in the avenue which the little river has made for you opens
up a new view,--a rocky gorge where the deep pools are divided by
white-footed falls; a lofty forest where the shadows are deep and the
trees arch overhead; a flat, sunny stretch where the stream is spread
out, and pebbly islands divide the channels, and the big fish are
lurking at the sides in the sheltered corners under the bushes. From
scene to scene you follow on, delighted and expectant, until the night
suddenly drops its veil, and then you will be lucky if you can find your
way home in the dark!

Yes, it is all very good, this exploration of new streams. But, for my
part, I like still better to go back to a familiar little river, and
fish or dream along the banks where I have dreamed and fished before. I
know every bend and curve: the sharp turn where the water runs under the
roots of the old hemlock-tree; the snaky glen, where the alders stretch
their arms far out across the stream; the meadow reach, where the trout
are fat and silvery, and will only rise about sunrise or sundown, unless
the day is cloudy; the Naiad's Elbow, where the brook rounds itself,
smooth and dimpled, to embrace a cluster of pink laurel-bushes. All
these I know; yes, and almost every current and eddy and backwater I
know long before I come to it. I remember where I caught the big trout
the first year I came to the stream; and where I lost a bigger one. I
remember the pool where there were plenty of good fish last year, and
wonder whether they are there now.

Better things than these I remember: the companions with whom I have
followed the stream in days long past; the rendezvous with a comrade at
the place where the rustic bridge crosses the brook; the hours of sweet
converse beside the friendship-fire; the meeting at twilight with my
lady Graygown and the children, who have come down by the wood-road to
walk home with me.

Surely it is pleasant to follow an old stream. Flowers grow along its
banks which are not to be found anywhere else in the wide world. "There
is rosemary, that 's for remembrance; and there is pansies, that 's for
thoughts!"

One May evening, a couple of years since, I was angling in the
Swiftwater, and came upon Joseph Jefferson, stretched out on a large
rock in midstream, and casting the fly down a long pool. He had passed
the threescore years and ten, but he was as eager and as happy as a boy
in his fishing.

"You here!" I cried. "What good fortune brought you into these waters?"

"Ah," he answered, "I fished this brook forty-five years ago. It was in
the Paradise Valley that I first thought of Rip Van Winkle. I wanted to
come back again for the sake of old times."

But what has all this to do with an open fire? I will tell you. It is
at the places along the stream, where the little flames of love and
friendship have been kindled in bygone days, that the past returns most
vividly. These are the altars of remembrance.

It is strange how long a small fire will leave its mark. The charred
sticks, the black coals, do not decay easily. If they lie well up the
hank, out of reach of the spring floods, they will stay there for years.
If you have chanced to build a rough fireplace of stones from the brook,
it seems almost as if it would last forever.

There is a mossy knoll beneath a great butternut-tree on the Swiftwater
where such a fireplace was built four years ago; and whenever I come to
that place now I lay the rod aside, and sit down for a little while by
the fast-flowing water, and remember.

This is what I see: A man wading up the stream, with a creel over his
shoulder, and perhaps a dozen trout in it; two little lads in gray
corduroys running down the path through the woods to meet him, one
carrying a frying-pan and a kettle, the other with a basket of lunch on
his arm. Then I see the bright flames leaping up in the fireplace, and
hear the trout sizzling in the pan, and smell the appetizing odour. Now
I see the lads coming back across the foot-bridge that spans the stream,
with a bottle of milk from the nearest farmhouse. They are laughing
and teetering as they balance along the single plank. Now the table is
spread on the moss. How good the lunch tastes! Never were there such
pink-fleshed trout, such crisp and savoury slices of broiled bacon.
Douglas, (the beloved doll that the younger lad shamefacedly brings
out from the pocket of his jacket,) must certainly have some of it. And
after the lunch is finished, and the bird's portion has been scattered
on the moss, we creep carefully on our hands and knees to the edge
of the brook, and look over the bank at the big trout that is poising
himself in the amber water. We have tried a dozen times to catch him,
but never succeeded. The next time, perhaps--

Well, the fireplace is still standing. The butternut-tree spreads its
broad branches above the stream. The violets and the bishop's-caps and
the wild anemones are sprinkled over the banks. The yellow-throat
and the water-thrush and the vireos still sing the same tunes in the
thicket. And the elder of the two lads often comes back with me to that
pleasant place and shares my fisherman's luck beside the Swiftwater.

But the younger lad?

Ah, my little Barney, you have gone to follow a new stream,--clear as
crystal,--flowing through fields of wonderful flowers that never fade.
It is a strange river to Teddy and me; strange and very far away. Some
day we shall see it with you; and you will teach us the names of those
blossoms that do not wither. But till then, little Barney, the other
lad and I will follow the old stream that flows by the woodland
fireplace,--your altar.

Rue grows here. Yes, there is plenty of rue. But there is also
rosemary, that 's for remembrance! And close beside it I see a little
heart's-ease.




A SLUMBER SONG FOR THE FISHERMAN'S CHILD


          Furl your sail, my little boatie;
              Here 's the haven, still and deep,
          Where the dreaming tides, in-streaming,
                   Up the channel creep.
          See, the sunset breeze is dying;
          Hark, the plover, landward flying,
          Softly down the twilight crying;
              Come to anchor, little boatie,
                  In the port of Sleep.

          Far away, my little boatie,
              Roaring waves are white with foam;
          Ships are striving, onward driving,
                  Day and night they roam.
          Father 's at the deep-sea trawling,
          In the darkness, rowing, hauling,
          While the hungry winds are calling,--
             God protect him, little boatie,
                  Bring him safely home!

          Not for you, my little boatie,
              Is the wide and weary sea;
          You 're too slender, and too tender,
                  You must rest with me.
          All day long you have been straying
          Up and down the shore and playing;
          Come to port, make no delaying!
              Day is over, little boatie,
                  Night falls suddenly.

          Furl your sail, my little boatie;
              Fold your wings, my tired dove.
          Dews are sprinkling, stars are twinkling
                  Drowsily above.
          Cease from sailing, cease from rowing;
          Rock upon the dream-tide, knowing
          Safely o'er your rest are glowing,
              All the night, my little boatie,
                  Harbour-lights of love.

========================================
========================================

THE RULING PASSION

by Henry van Dyke




A WRITER'S REQUEST OF HIS MASTER


Let me never tag a moral to a story, nor tell a story without a meaning.
Make me respect my material so much that I dare not slight my work. Help
me to deal very honestly with words and with people because they are
both alive. Show me that as in a river, so in a writing, clearness is
the best quality, and a little that is pure is worth more than much that
is mixed. Teach me to see the local colour without being blind to the
inner light. Give me an ideal that will stand the strain of weaving into
human stuff on the loom of the real. Keep me from caring more for books
than for folks, for art than for life. Steady me to do my full stint of
work as well as I can: and when that is done, stop me, pay what wages
Thou wilt, and help me to say, from a quiet heart, a grateful AMEN.




PREFACE


In every life worth writing about there is a ruling passion,--"the very
pulse of the machine." Unless you touch that, you are groping around
outside of reality.

Sometimes it is romantic love: Natures masterpiece of interested
benevolence. In almost all lives this passion has its season of empire.
Therefore, and rightly, it is the favourite theme of the storyteller.
Romantic love interests almost everybody, because almost everybody knows
something about it, or would like to know.

But there are other passions, no less real, which also have their place
and power in human life. Some of them come earlier, and sometimes they
last longer, than romantic love. They play alongside of it and are mixed
up with it, now checking it, now advancing its flow and tingeing it with
their own colour.

Just because love is so universal, it is often to one of the other
passions that we must look for the distinctive hue, the individual
quality of a life-story. Granted, if you will, that everybody must fall
in love, or ought to fall in love, How will he do it? And what will
he do afterwards? These are questions not without interest to one who
watches the human drama as a friend. The answers depend upon those
hidden and durable desires, affections, and impulses to which men and
women give themselves up for rule and guidance.

Music, nature, children, honour, strife, revenge, money, pride,
friendship, loyalty, duty,--to these objects and others like them the
secret power of personal passion often turns, and the life unconsciously
follows it, as the tides in the sea follow the moon in the sky.

When circumstances cross the ruling passion, when rocks lie in the way
and winds are contrary, then things happen, characters emerge, slight
events are significant, mere adventures are transformed into a real
plot. What care I how many "hair-breadth 'scapes" and "moving accidents"
your hero may pass through, unless I know him for a man? He is but
a puppet strung on wires. His kisses are wooden and his wounds bleed
sawdust. There is nothing about him to remember except his name, and
perhaps a bit of dialect. Kill him or crown him,--what difference does
it make?

But go the other way about your work:

     "Take the least man of all mankind, as I;
      Look at his head and heart, find how and why
      He differs from his fellows utterly,"--

and now there is something to tell, with a meaning.

If you tell it at length, it is a novel,--a painting. If you tell it in
brief, it is a short story,--an etching. But the subject is always the
same: the unseen, mysterious, ruling passion weaving the stuff of human
nature into patterns wherein the soul is imaged and revealed.

To tell about some of these ruling passions, simply, clearly, and
concretely, is what I want to do in this book. The characters are
chosen, for the most part, among plain people, because their feelings
are expressed with fewer words and greater truth, not being costumed for
social effect. The scene is laid on Nature's stage because I like to be
out-of-doors, even when I am trying to think and learning to write.

"Avalon," Princeton, July 22, 1901.



CONTENTS

     I.  A Lover of Music

     II.  The Reward of Virtue

     III.  A Brave Heart

     IV.  The Gentle Life

     V.  A Friend of Justice

     VI.  The White Blot

     VII.  A Year of Nobility

     VIII.  The Keeper of the Light





I. A LOVER OF MUSIC




I

He entered the backwoods village of Bytown literally on the wings of the
wind. It whirled him along like a big snowflake, and dropped him at the
door of Moody's "Sportsmen's Retreat," as if he were a New Year's gift
from the North Pole. His coming seemed a mere chance; but perhaps there
was something more in it, after all. At all events, you shall hear, if
you will, the time and the manner of his arrival.

It was the last night of December, some thirty-five years ago. All the
city sportsmen who had hunted the deer under Bill Moody's direction had
long since retreated to their homes, leaving the little settlement
on the border of the Adirondack wilderness wholly under the social
direction of the natives.

The annual ball was in full swing in the dining-room of the hotel. At
one side of the room the tables and chairs were piled up, with their
legs projecting in the air like a thicket of very dead trees.

The huge stove in the southeast corner was blushing a rosy red through
its thin coat of whitewash, and exhaling a furious dry heat flavoured
with the smell of baked iron. At the north end, however, winter reigned;
and there were tiny ridges of fine snow on the floor, sifted in by the
wind through the cracks in the window-frames.

But the bouncing girls and the heavy-footed guides and lumbermen who
filled the ball-room did not appear to mind the heat or the cold. They
balanced and "sashayed" from the tropics to the arctic circle. They
swung at corners and made "ladies' change" all through the temperate
zone. They stamped their feet and did double-shuffles until the floor
trembled beneath them. The tin lamp-reflectors on the walls rattled like
castanets.

There was only one drawback to the hilarity of the occasion. The
band, which was usually imported from Sandy River Forks for such
festivities,--a fiddle, a cornet, a flute, and an accordion,--had not
arrived. There was a general idea that the mail-sleigh, in which the
musicians were to travel, had been delayed by the storm, and might
break its way through the snow-drifts and arrive at any moment. But Bill
Moody, who was naturally of a pessimistic temperament, had offered a
different explanation.

"I tell ye, old Baker's got that blame' band down to his hotel at
the Falls now, makin' 'em play fer his party. Them music fellers is
onsartin; can't trust 'em to keep anythin' 'cept the toon, and they
don't alluz keep that. Guess we might uz well shet up this ball, or go
to work playin' games."

At this proposal a thick gloom had fallen over the assembly; but it
had been dispersed by Serena Moody's cheerful offer to have the small
melodion brought out of the parlour, and to play for dancing as well as
she could. The company agreed that she was a smart girl, and prepared to
accept her performance with enthusiasm. As the dance went on, there were
frequent comments of approval to encourage her in the labour of love.

"Sereny's doin' splendid, ain't she?" said the other girls.

To which the men replied, "You bet! The playin' 's reel nice, and good
'nough fer anybody--outside o' city folks."

But Serena's repertory was weak, though her spirit was willing. There
was an unspoken sentiment among the men that "The Sweet By and By" was
not quite the best tune in the world for a quadrille. A Sunday-school
hymn, no matter how rapidly it was rendered, seemed to fall short of
the necessary vivacity for a polka. Besides, the wheezy little organ
positively refused to go faster than a certain gait. Hose Ransom
expressed the popular opinion of the instrument, after a figure in which
he and his partner had been half a bar ahead of the music from start to
finish, when he said:

"By Jolly! that old maloney may be chock full o' relijun and po'try; but
it ain't got no DANCE into it, no more 'n a saw-mill."


This was the situation of affairs inside of Moody's tavern on New Year's
Eve. But outside of the house the snow lay two feet deep on the level,
and shoulder-high in the drifts. The sky was at last swept clean of
clouds. The shivering stars and the shrunken moon looked infinitely
remote in the black vault of heaven. The frozen lake, on which the ice
was three feet thick and solid as rock, was like a vast, smooth bed,
covered with a white counterpane. The cruel wind still poured out of the
northwest, driving the dry snow along with it like a mist of powdered
diamonds.

Enveloped in this dazzling, pungent atmosphere, half blinded and
bewildered by it, buffeted and yet supported by the onrushing torrent
of air, a man on snow-shoes, with a light pack on his shoulders, emerged
from the shelter of the Three Sisters' Islands, and staggered straight
on, down the lake. He passed the headland of the bay where Moody's
tavern is ensconced, and probably would have drifted on beyond it, to
the marsh at the lower end of the lake, but for the yellow glare of the
ball-room windows and the sound of music and dancing which came out to
him suddenly through a lull in the wind.

He turned to the right, climbed over the low wall of broken ice-blocks
that bordered the lake, and pushed up the gentle slope to the open
passageway by which the two parts of the rambling house were joined
together. Crossing the porch with the last remnant of his strength, he
lifted his hand to knock, and fell heavily against the side door.

The noise, heard through the confusion within, awakened curiosity and
conjecture.

Just as when a letter comes to a forest cabin, it is turned over and
over, and many guesses are made as to the handwriting and the authorship
before it occurs to any one to open it and see who sent it, so was this
rude knocking at the gate the occasion of argument among the rustic
revellers as to what it might portend. Some thought it was the arrival
of the belated band. Others supposed the sound betokened a descent of
the Corey clan from the Upper Lake, or a change of heart on the part of
old Dan Dunning, who had refused to attend the ball because they would
not allow him to call out the figures. The guesses were various; but
no one thought of the possible arrival of a stranger at such an hour
on such a night, until Serena suggested that it would be a good plan
to open the door. Then the unbidden guest was discovered lying benumbed
along the threshold.

There was no want of knowledge as to what should be done with a
half-frozen man, and no lack of ready hands to do it. They carried him
not to the warm stove, but into the semi-arctic region of the parlour.
They rubbed his face and his hands vigorously with snow. They gave him
a drink of hot tea flavoured with whiskey--or perhaps it was a drink of
whiskey with a little hot tea in it--and then, as his senses began to
return to him, they rolled him in a blanket and left him on a sofa to
thaw out gradually, while they went on with the dance.

Naturally, he was the favourite subject of conversation for the next
hour.

"Who is he, anyhow? I never seen 'im before. Where'd he come from?"
asked the girls.

"I dunno," said Bill Moody; "he didn't say much. Talk seemed all froze
up. Frenchy, 'cordin' to what he did say. Guess he must a come from
Canady, workin' on a lumber job up Raquette River way. Got bounced out
o' the camp, p'raps. All them Frenchies is queer."

This summary of national character appeared to command general assent.

"Yaas," said Hose Ransom, "did ye take note how he hung on to that pack
o' his'n all the time? Wouldn't let go on it. Wonder what 't wuz? Seemed
kinder holler 'n light, fer all 'twuz so big an' wropped up in lots o'
coverin's."

"What's the use of wonderin'?" said one of the younger boys; "find out
later on. Now's the time fer dancin'. Whoop 'er up!"

So the sound of revelry swept on again in full flood. The men and maids
went careering up and down the room. Serena's willing fingers laboured
patiently over the yellow keys of the reluctant melodion. But the
ancient instrument was weakening under the strain; the bellows creaked;
the notes grew more and more asthmatic.

"Hold the Fort" was the tune, "Money Musk" was the dance; and it was a
preposterously bad fit. The figure was tangled up like a fishing-line
after trolling all day without a swivel. The dancers were doing their
best, determined to be happy, as cheerful as possible, but all out of
time. The organ was whirring and gasping and groaning for breath.

Suddenly a new music filled the room.

The right tune--the real old joyful "Money Musk," played jubilantly,
triumphantly, irresistibly--on a fiddle!

The melodion gave one final gasp of surprise and was dumb.

Every one looked up. There, in the parlour door, stood the stranger,
with his coat off, his violin hugged close under his chin, his right arm
making the bow fly over the strings, his black eyes sparkling, and his
stockinged feet marking time to the tune.

"DANSEZ! DANSEZ," he cried, "EN AVANT! Don' spik'. Don' res'! Ah'll
goin' play de feedle fo' yo' jess moch yo' lak', eef yo' h'only DANSE!"

The music gushed from the bow like water from the rock when Moses
touched it. Tune followed tune with endless fluency and variety--polkas,
galops, reels, jigs, quadrilles; fragments of airs from many lands--"The
Fisher's Hornpipe," "Charlie is my Darling," "Marianne s'en va-t-au
Moulin," "Petit Jean," "Jordan is a Hard Road to Trabbel," woven
together after the strangest fashion and set to the liveliest cadence.

It was a magical performance. No one could withstand it. They all danced
together, like the leaves on the shivering poplars when the wind blows
through them. The gentle Serena was swept away from her stool at the
organ as if she were a little canoe drawn into the rapids, and Bill
Moody stepped high and cut pigeon-wings that had been forgotten for
a generation. It was long after midnight when the dancers paused,
breathless and exhausted.

"Waal," said Hose Ransom, "that's jess the hightonedest music we ever
had to Bytown. You 're a reel player, Frenchy, that's what you are.
What's your name? Where'd you come from? Where you goin' to? What
brought you here, anyhow?"

"MOI?" said the fiddler, dropping his bow and taking a long breath.
"Mah nem Jacques Tremblay. Ah'll ben come fraum Kebeck. W'ere goin'? Ah
donno. Prob'ly Ah'll stop dis place, eef yo' lak' dat feedle so moch,
hein?"

His hand passed caressingly over the smooth brown wood of the violin. He
drew it up close to his face again, as if he would have kissed it, while
his eyes wandered timidly around the circle of listeners, and rested at
last, with a question in them, on the face of the hotel-keeper. Moody
was fairly warmed, for once, out of his customary temper of mistrust and
indecision. He spoke up promptly.

"You kin stop here jess long's you like. We don' care where you come
from, an' you need n't to go no fu'ther, less you wanter. But we ain't
got no use for French names round here. Guess we 'll call him Fiddlin'
Jack, hey, Sereny? He kin do the chores in the day-time, an' play the
fiddle at night."

This was the way in which Bytown came to have a lover of music among its
permanent inhabitants.




II


Jacques dropped into his place and filled it as if it had been made for
him. There was something in his disposition that seemed to fit him for
just the role that was vacant in the social drama of the settlement. It
was not a serious, important, responsible part, like that of a farmer,
or a store-keeper, or a professional hunter. It was rather an addition
to the regular programme of existence, something unannounced and
voluntary, and therefore not weighted with too heavy responsibilities.
There was a touch of the transient and uncertain about it. He seemed
like a perpetual visitor; and yet he stayed on as steadily as a native,
never showing, from the first, the slightest wish or intention to leave
the woodland village.

I do not mean that he was an idler. Bytown had not yet arrived at that
stage of civilization in which an ornamental element is supported at the
public expense.

He worked for his living, and earned it. He was full of a quick,
cheerful industry; and there was nothing that needed to be done about
Moody's establishment, from the wood-pile to the ice-house, at which he
did not bear a hand willingly and well.

"He kin work like a beaver," said Bill Moody, talking the stranger over
down at the post-office one day; "but I don't b'lieve he's got much
ambition. Jess does his work and takes his wages, and then gits his
fiddle out and plays."

"Tell ye what," said Hose Ransom, who set up for the village
philosopher, "he ain't got no 'magination. That's what makes men
slack. He don't know what it means to rise in the world; don't care fer
anythin' ez much ez he does fer his music. He's jess like a bird; let
him have 'nough to eat and a chance to sing, and he's all right. What's
he 'magine about a house of his own, and a barn, and sich things?"

Hosea's illustration was suggested by his own experience. He had just
put the profits of his last summer's guiding into a new barn, and his
imagination was already at work planning an addition to his house in the
shape of a kitchen L.

But in spite of his tone of contempt, he had a kindly feeling for the
unambitious fiddler. Indeed, this was the attitude of pretty much every
one in the community. A few men of the rougher sort had made fun of him
at first, and there had been one or two attempts at rude handling. But
Jacques was determined to take no offence; and he was so good-humoured,
so obliging, so pleasant in his way of whistling and singing about his
work, that all unfriendliness soon died out.

He had literally played his way into the affections of the village. The
winter seemed to pass more swiftly and merrily than it had done before
the violin was there. He was always ready to bring it out, and draw all
kinds of music from its strings, as long as any one wanted to listen or
to dance.

It made no difference whether there was a roomful of listeners, or only
a couple, Fiddlin' Jack was just as glad to play. With a little, quiet
audience, he loved to try the quaint, plaintive airs of the old French
songs--"A la Claire Fontaine," "Un Canadien Errant," and "Isabeau
s'y Promene"--and bits of simple melody from the great composers, and
familiar Scotch and English ballads--things that he had picked up heaven
knows where, and into which he put a world of meaning, sad and sweet.

He was at his best in this vein when he was alone with Serena in the
kitchen--she with a piece of sewing in her lap, sitting beside the lamp;
he in the corner by the stove, with the brown violin tucked under his
chin, wandering on from one air to another, and perfectly content if
she looked up now and then from her work and told him that she liked the
tune.

Serena was a pretty girl, with smooth, silky hair, end eyes of the
colour of the nodding harebells that blossom on the edge of the woods.
She was slight and delicate. The neighbours called her sickly; and a
great doctor from Philadelphia who had spent a summer at Bytown had
put his ear to her chest, and looked grave, and said that she ought
to winter in a mild climate. That was before people had discovered the
Adirondacks as a sanitarium for consumptives.

But the inhabitants of Bytown were not in the way of paying much
attention to the theories of physicians in regard to climate. They held
that if you were rugged, it was a great advantage, almost a virtue; but
if you were sickly, you just had to make the best of it, and get along
with the weather as well as you could.

So Serena stayed at home and adapted herself very cheerfully to the
situation. She kept indoors in winter more than the other girls, and had
a quieter way about her; but you would never have called her an invalid.
There was only a clearer blue in her eyes, and a smoother lustre on
her brown hair, and a brighter spot of red on her cheek. She was
particularly fond of reading and of music. It was this that made her
so glad of the arrival of the violin. The violin's master knew it, and
turned to her as a sympathetic soul. I think he liked her eyes too,
and the soft tones of her voice. He was a sentimentalist, this little
Canadian, for all he was so merry; and love--but that comes later.

"Where'd you get your fiddle, Jack? said Serena, one night as they sat
together in the kitchen.

"Ah'll get heem in Kebeck," answered Jacques, passing his hand lightly
over the instrument, as he always did when any one spoke of it. "Vair'
nice VIOLON, hein? W'at you t'ink? Ma h'ole teacher, to de College, he
was gif' me dat VIOLON, w'en Ah was gone away to de woods."

"I want to know! Were you in the College? What'd you go off to the woods
for?"

"Ah'll get tire' fraum dat teachin'--read, read, read, h'all taim'.
Ah'll not lak' dat so moch. Rader be out-door--run aroun'--paddle de
CANOE--go wid de boys in de woods--mek' dem dance at ma MUSIQUE. A-a-ah!
Dat was fon! P'raps you t'ink dat not good, hem? You t'ink Jacques one
beeg fool, Ah suppose?"

"I dunno," said Serena, declining to commit herself, but pressing on
gently, as women do, to the point she had in view when she began the
talk. "Dunno's you're any more foolish than a man that keeps on doin'
what he don't like. But what made you come away from the boys in the
woods and travel down this way?"

A shade passed over the face of Jacques. He turned away from the lamp
and bent over the violin on his knees, fingering the strings nervously.
Then he spoke, in a changed, shaken voice.

"Ah'l tole you somet'ing, Ma'amselle Serene. You ma frien'. Don' you
h'ask me dat reason of it no more. Dat's somet'ing vair' bad, bad, bad.
Ah can't nevair tole dat--nevair."

There was something in the way he said it that gave a check to her
gentle curiosity and turned it into pity. A man with a secret in his
life? It was a new element in her experience; like a chapter in a book.
She was lady enough at heart to respect his silence. She kept away from
the forbidden ground. But the knowledge that it was there gave a new
interest to Jacques and his music. She embroidered some strange romances
around that secret while she sat in the kitchen sewing.

Other people at Bytown were less forbearing. They tried their best
to find out something about Fiddlin' Jack's past, but he was not
communicative. He talked about Canada. All Canadians do. But about
himself? No.

If the questions became too pressing, he would try to play himself away
from his inquisitors with new tunes. If that did not succeed, he would
take the violin under his arm and slip quickly out of the room. And if
you had followed him at such a time, you would have heard him drawing
strange, melancholy music from the instrument, sitting alone in the
barn, or in the darkness of his own room in the garret.

Once, and only once, he seemed to come near betraying himself. This was
how it happened.

There was a party at Moody's one night, and Bull Corey had come down
from the Upper Lake and filled himself up with whiskey.

Bull was an ugly-tempered fellow. The more he drank, up to a certain
point, the steadier he got on his legs, and the more necessary it seemed
for him to fight somebody. The tide of his pugnacity that night took a
straight set toward Fiddlin' Jack.

Bull began with musical criticisms. The fiddling did not suit him at
all. It was too quick, or else it was too slow. He failed to perceive
how any one could tolerate such music even in the infernal regions, and
he expressed himself in plain words to that effect. In fact, he damned
the performance without even the faintest praise.

But the majority of the audience gave him no support. On the contrary,
they told him to shut up. And Jack fiddled along cheerfully.

Then Bull returned to the attack, after having fortified himself in
the bar-room. And now he took national grounds. The French were, in
his opinion, a most despicable race. They were not a patch on the noble
American race. They talked too much, and their language was ridiculous.
They had a condemned, fool habit of taking off their hats when they
spoke to a lady. They ate frogs.

Having delivered himself of these sentiments in a loud voice, much to
the interruption of the music, he marched over to the table on which
Fiddlin' Jack was sitting, and grabbed the violin from his hands.

"Gimme that dam' fiddle," he cried, "till I see if there's a frog in
it."

Jacques leaped from the table, transported with rage. His face was
convulsed. His eyes blazed. He snatched a carving-knife from the dresser
behind him, and sprang at Corey.

"TORT DIEU!" he shrieked, "MON VIOLON! Ah'll keel you, beast!"

But he could not reach the enemy. Bill Moody's long arms were flung
around the struggling fiddler, and a pair of brawny guides had Corey
pinned by the elbows, hustling him backward. Half a dozen men thrust
themselves between the would-be combatants. There was a dead silence,
a scuffling of feet on the bare floor; then the danger was past, and a
tumult of talk burst forth.

But a strange alteration had passed over Jacques. He trembled. He turned
white. Tears poured down his cheeks. As Moody let him go, he dropped on
his knees, hid his face in his hands, and prayed in his own tongue.

"My God, it is here again! Was it not enough that I must be tempted once
before? Must I have the madness yet another time? My God, show the mercy
toward me, for the Blessed Virgin's sake. I am a sinner, but not the
second time; for the love of Jesus, not the second time! Ave Maria,
gratia plena, ora pro me!"

The others did not understand what he was saying. Indeed, they paid
little attention to him. They saw he was frightened, and thought it was
with fear. They were already discussing what ought to be done about the
fracas.

It was plain that Bull Corey, whose liquor had now taken effect
suddenly, and made him as limp as a strip of cedar bark, must be thrown
out of the door, and left to cool off on the beach. But what to do with
Fiddlin' Jack for his attempt at knifing--a detested crime? He might
have gone at Bull with a gun, or with a club, or with a chair, or with
any recognized weapon. But with a carving-knife! That was a serious
offence. Arrest him, and send him to jail at the Forks? Take him out,
and duck him in the lake? Lick him, and drive him out of the town?

There was a multitude of counsellors, but it was Hose Ransom who settled
the case. He was a well-known fighting-man, and a respected philosopher.
He swung his broad frame in front of the fiddler.

"Tell ye what we'll do. Jess nothin'! Ain't Bull Corey the blowin'est
and the mos' trouble-us cuss 'round these hull woods? And would n't it
be a fust-rate thing ef some o' the wind was let out 'n him?"

General assent greeted this pointed inquiry.

"And wa'n't Fiddlin' Jack peacerble 'nough 's long 's he was let alone?
What's the matter with lettin' him alone now?"

The argument seemed to carry weight. Hose saw his advantage, and
clinched it.

"Ain't he given us a lot o' fun here this winter in a innercent kind o'
way, with his old fiddle? I guess there ain't nothin' on airth he loves
better 'n that holler piece o' wood, and the toons that's inside o' it.
It's jess like a wife or a child to him. Where's that fiddle, anyhow?"

Some one had picked it deftly out of Corey's hand during the scuffle,
and now passed it up to Hose.

"Here, Frenchy, take yer long-necked, pot-bellied music-gourd. And I
want you boys to understand, ef any one teches that fiddle ag'in, I'll
knock hell out 'n him."

So the recording angel dropped another tear upon the record of Hosea
Ransom, and the books were closed for the night.




III


For some weeks after the incident of the violin and the carving-knife,
it looked as if a permanent cloud had settled upon the spirits of
Fiddlin' Jack. He was sad and nervous; if any one touched him, or
even spoke to him suddenly, he would jump like a deer. He kept out of
everybody's way as much as possible, sat out in the wood-shed when he
was not at work, and could not be persuaded to bring down his fiddle. He
seemed in a fair way to be transformed into "the melancholy Jaques."

It was Serena who broke the spell; and she did it in a woman's way, the
simplest way in the world--by taking no notice of it.

"Ain't you goin' to play for me to-night?" she asked one evening,
as Jacques passed through the kitchen. Whereupon the evil spirit was
exorcised, and the violin came back again to its place in the life of
the house.

But there was less time for music now than there had been in the winter.
As the snow vanished from the woods, and the frost leaked out of the
ground, and the ice on the lake was honeycombed, breaking away from the
shore, and finally going to pieces altogether in a warm southeast storm,
the Sportsmen's Retreat began to prepare for business. There was a
garden to be planted, and there were boats to be painted. The rotten old
wharf in front of the house stood badly in need of repairs. The fiddler
proved himself a Jack-of-all-trades and master of more than one.

In the middle of May the anglers began to arrive at the Retreat--a
quiet, sociable, friendly set of men, most of whom were old-time
acquaintances, and familiar lovers of the woods. They belonged to the
"early Adirondack period," these disciples of Walton. They were not very
rich, and they did not put on much style, but they understood how to
have a good time; and what they did not know about fishing was not worth
knowing.

Jacques fitted into their scheme of life as a well-made reel fits the
butt of a good rod. He was a steady oarsman, a lucky fisherman, with a
real genius for the use of the landing-net, and a cheerful companion,
who did not insist upon giving his views about artificial flies and
advice about casting, on every occasion. By the end of June he found
himself in steady employment as a guide.

He liked best to go with the anglers who were not too energetic, but
were satisfied to fish for a few hours in the morning and again at
sunset, after a long rest in the middle of the afternoon. This was just
the time for the violin; and if Jacques had his way, he would take it
with him, carefully tucked away in its case in the bow of the boat; and
when the pipes were lit after lunch, on the shore of Round Island or
at the mouth of Cold Brook, he would discourse sweet music until the
declining sun drew near the tree-tops and the veery rang his silver
bell for vespers. Then it was time to fish again, and the flies danced
merrily over the water, and the great speckled trout leaped eagerly to
catch them. For trolling all day long for lake-trout Jacques had little
liking.

"Dat is not de sport," he would say, "to hol' one r-r-ope in de 'and,
an' den pool heem in wid one feesh on t'ree hook, h'all tangle h'up
in hees mout'--dat is not de sport. Bisside, dat leef not taim' for la
musique."

Midsummer brought a new set of guests to the Retreat, and filled the
ramshackle old house to overflowing. The fishing fell off, but there
were picnics and camping-parties in abundance, and Jacques was in
demand. The ladies liked him; his manners were so pleasant, and they
took a great interest in his music. Moody bought a piano for the parlour
that summer; and there were two or three good players in the house,
to whom Jacques would listen with delight, sitting on a pile of logs
outside the parlour windows in the warm August evenings.

Some one asked him whether he did not prefer the piano to the violin.

"NON," he answered, very decidedly; "dat piano, he vairee smart; he
got plentee word, lak' de leetle yellow bird in de cage--'ow you call
heem--de cannarie. He spik' moch. Bot dat violon, he spik' more deep, to
de heart, lak' de Rossignol. He mak' me feel more glad, more sorree--dat
fo' w'at Ah lak' heem de bes'!"

Through all the occupations and pleasures of the summer Jacques kept as
near as he could to Serena. If he learned a new tune, by listening to
the piano--some simple, artful air of Mozart, some melancholy echo of
a nocturne of Chopin, some tender, passionate love-song of Schubert--it
was to her that he would play it first. If he could persuade her to a
boat-ride with him on the lake, Sunday evening, the week was complete.
He even learned to know the more shy and delicate forest-blossoms that
she preferred, and would come in from a day's guiding with a tiny bunch
of belated twin-flowers, or a few purple-fringed orchids, or a handful
of nodding stalks of the fragrant pyrola, for her.

So the summer passed, and the autumn, with its longer hunting
expeditions into the depth of the wilderness; and by the time winter
came around again, Fiddlin' Jack was well settled at Moody's as
a regular Adirondack guide of the old-fashioned type, but with a
difference. He improved in his English. Something of that missing
quality which Moody called ambition, and to which Hose Ransom gave the
name of imagination, seemed to awaken within him. He saved his wages. He
went into business for himself in a modest way, and made a good turn in
the manufacture of deerskin mittens and snow-shoes. By the spring he had
nearly three hundred dollars laid by, and bought a piece of land from
Ransom on the bank of the river just above the village.

The second summer of guiding brought him in enough to commence building
a little house. It was of logs, neatly squared at the corners; and there
was a door exactly in the middle of the facade, with a square window
at either side, and another at each end of the house, according to the
common style of architecture at Bytown.

But it was in the roof that the touch of distinction appeared. For this,
Jacques had modelled after his memory of an old Canadian roof. There was
a delicate concave sweep in it, as it sloped downward from the peak, and
the eaves projected pleasantly over the front door, making a strip of
shade wherein it would be good to rest when the afternoon sun shone hot.

He took great pride in this effort of the builder's art. One day at the
beginning of May, when the house was nearly finished, he asked old Moody
and Serena to stop on their way home from the village and see what he
had done. He showed them the kitchen, and the living-room, with the
bed-room partitioned off from it, and sharing half of its side window.
Here was a place where a door could be cut at the back, and a shed built
for a summer kitchen--for the coolness, you understand. And here were
two stoves--one for the cooking, and the other in the living-room for
the warming, both of the newest.

"An' look dat roof. Dat's lak' we make dem in Canada. De rain ron off
easy, and de sun not shine too strong at de door. Ain't dat nice? You
lak' dat roof, Ma'amselle Serene, hein?"

Thus the imagination of Jacques unfolded itself, and his ambition
appeared to be making plans for its accomplishment. I do not want any
one to suppose that there was a crisis in his affair of the heart. There
was none. Indeed, it is very doubtful whether anybody in the village,
even Serena herself, ever dreamed that there was such an affair. Up
to the point when the house was finished and furnished, it was to be a
secret between Jacques and his violin; and they found no difficulty in
keeping it.

Bytown was a Yankee village. Jacques was, after all, nothing but a
Frenchman. The native tone of religion, what there was of it, was
strongly Methodist. Jacques never went to church, and if he was
anything, was probably a Roman Catholic. Serena was something of a
sentimentalist, and a great reader of novels; but the international
love-story had not yet been invented, and the idea of getting married
to a foreigner never entered her head. I do not say that she suspected
nothing in the wild flowers, and the Sunday evening boat-rides, and the
music. She was a woman. I have said already that she liked Jacques very
much, and his violin pleased her to the heart. But the new building by
the river? I am sure she never even thought of it once, in the way that
he did.

Well, in the end of June, just after the furniture had come for the
house with the curved roof, Serena was married to Hose Ransom. He was a
young widower without children, and altogether the best fellow, as well
as the most prosperous, in the settlement. His house stood up on the
hill, across the road from the lot which Jacques had bought. It was
painted white, and it had a narrow front porch, with a scroll-saw fringe
around the edge of it; and there was a little garden fenced in with
white palings, in which Sweet Williams and pansies and blue lupines and
pink bleeding-hearts were planted.

The wedding was at the Sportsmen's Retreat, and Jacques was there, of
course. There was nothing of the disconsolate lover about him. The noun
he might have confessed to, in a confidential moment of intercourse with
his violin; but the adjective was not in his line.

The strongest impulse in his nature was to be a giver of entertaininent,
a source of joy in others, a recognized element of delight in the
little world where he moved. He had the artistic temperament in its
most primitive and naive form. Nothing pleased him so much as the act of
pleasing. Music was the means which Nature had given him to fulfil
this desire. He played, as you might say, out of a certain kind of
selfishness, because he enjoyed making other people happy. He was
selfish enough, in his way, to want the pleasure of making everybody
feel the same delight that he felt in the clear tones, the merry
cadences, the tender and caressing flow of his violin. That was
consolation. That was power. That was success.

And especially was he selfish enough to want to feel his ability to give
Serena a pleasure at her wedding--a pleasure that nobody else could give
her. When she asked him to play, he consented gladly. Never had he drawn
the bow across the strings with a more magical touch. The wedding guests
danced as if they were enchanted. The big bridegroom came up and clapped
him on the back, with the nearest approach to a gesture of affection
that backwoods etiquette allows between men.

"Jack, you're the boss fiddler o' this hull county. Have a drink now? I
guess you 're mighty dry."

"MERCI, NON," said Jacques. "I drink only de museek dis night. Eef I
drink two t'ings, I get dronk."

In between the dances, and while the supper was going on, he played
quieter tunes--ballads and songs that he knew Serena liked. After supper
came the final reel; and when that was wound up, with immense hilarity,
the company ran out to the side door of the tavern to shout a noisy
farewell to the bridal buggy, as it drove down the road toward the house
with the white palings. When they came back, the fiddler was gone. He
had slipped away to the little cabin with the curved roof.

All night long he sat there playing in the dark. Every tune that he had
ever known came back to him--grave and merry, light and sad. He played
them over and over again, passing round and round among them as a leaf
on a stream follows the eddies, now backward, now forward, and returning
most frequently to an echo of a certain theme from Chopin--you remember
the NOCTURNE IN G MINOR, the second one? He did not know who Chopin
was. Perhaps he did not even know the name of the music. But the air had
fallen upon his ear somewhere, and had stayed in his memory; and now it
seemed to say something to him that had an especial meaning.

At last he let the bow fall. He patted the brown wood of the violin
after his old fashion, loosened the strings a little, wrapped it in its
green baize cover, and hung it on the wall.

"Hang thou there, thou little violin," he murmured. "It is now that I
shall take the good care of thee, as never before; for thou art the wife
of Jacques Tremblay. And the wife of 'Osee Ransom, she is a friend to
us, both of us; and we will make the music for her many years, I
tell thee, many years--for her, and for her good man, and for the
children--yes?"

But Serena did not have many years to listen to the playing of
Jacques Tremblay: on the white porch, in the summer evenings, with
bleeding-hearts abloom in the garden; or by the winter fire, while the
pale blue moonlight lay on the snow without, and the yellow lamplight
filled the room with homely radiance. In the fourth year after her
marriage she died, and Jacques stood beside Hose at the funeral.

There was a child--a little boy--delicate and blue-eyed, the living
image of his mother. Jacques appointed himself general attendant, nurse
in extraordinary, and court musician to this child. He gave up his work
as a guide. It took him too much away from home. He was tired of it.
Besides, what did he want of so much money? He had his house. He could
gain enough for all his needs by making snow-shoes and the deerskin
mittens at home. Then he could be near little Billy. It was pleasanter
so.

When Hose was away on a long trip in the woods, Jacques would move up
to the white house and stay on guard. His fiddle learned how to sing the
prettiest slumber songs. Moreover, it could crow in the morning, just
like the cock; and it could make a noise like a mouse, and like the cat,
too; and there were more tunes inside of it than in any music-box in the
world.

As the boy grew older, the little cabin with the curved roof became
his favourite playground. It was near the river, and Fiddlin' Jack was
always ready to make a boat for him, or help him catch minnows in the
mill-dam. The child had a taste for music, too, and learned some of the
old Canadian songs, which he sang in a curious broken patois, while his
delighted teacher accompanied him on the violin. But it was a great day
when he was eight years old, and Jacques brought out a small fiddle, for
which he had secretly sent to Albany, and presented it to the boy.

"You see dat feedle, Billee? Dat's for you! You mek' your lesson on
dat. When you kin mek' de museek, den you play on de violon--lak' dis
one--listen!"

Then he drew the bow across the strings and dashed into a medley of the
jolliest airs imaginable.

The boy took to his instruction as kindly as could have been expected.
School interrupted it a good deal; and play with the other boys carried
him away often; but, after all, there was nothing that he liked much
better than to sit in the little cabin on a winter evening and pick out
a simple tune after his teacher. He must have had some talent for it,
too; for Jacques was very proud of his pupil, and prophesied great
things of him.

"You know dat little Billee of 'Ose Ransom," the fiddler would say to a
circle of people at the hotel, where he still went to play for parties;
"you know dat small Ransom boy? Well, I 'm tichin' heem play de feedle;
an' I tell you, one day he play better dan hees ticher. Ah, dat 's
gr-r-reat t'ing, de museek, ain't it? Mek' you laugh, mek' you cry, mek'
you dance! Now, you dance. Tek' your pardnerre. EN AVANT! Kip' step to
de museek!"




IV


Thirty years brought many changes to Bytown. The wild woodland
flavour evaporated out of the place almost entirely; and instead of an
independent centre of rustic life, it became an annex to great cities.
It was exploited as a summer resort, and discovered as a winter resort.
Three or four big hotels were planted there, and in their shadow a score
of boarding-houses alternately languished and flourished. The summer
cottage also appeared and multiplied; and with it came many of the
peculiar features which man elaborates in his struggle toward the finest
civilization--afternoon teas, and amateur theatricals, and claw-hammer
coats, and a casino, and even a few servants in livery.

The very name of Bytown was discarded as being too American and
commonplace. An Indian name was discovered, and considered much more
romantic and appropriate. You will look in vain for Bytown on the map
now. Nor will you find the old saw-mill there any longer, wasting a vast
water-power to turn its dripping wheel and cut up a few pine-logs into
fragrant boards. There is a big steam-mill a little farther up the
river, which rips out thousands of feet of lumber in a day; but there
are no more pine-logs, only sticks of spruce which the old lumbermen
would have thought hardly worth cutting. And down below the dam there is
a pulp-mill, to chew up the little trees and turn them into paper, and a
chair factory, and two or three industrial establishments, with quite a
little colony of French-Canadians employed in them as workmen.

Hose Ransom sold his place on the hill to one of the hotel companies,
and a huge caravansary occupied the site of the house with the white
palings. There were no more bleeding-hearts in the garden. There were
beds of flaring red geraniums, which looked as if they were painted; and
across the circle of smooth lawn in front of the piazza the name of the
hotel was printed in alleged ornamental plants letters two feet long,
immensely ugly. Hose had been elevated to the office of postmaster, and
lived in a Queen Antic cottage on the main street. Little Billy Ransom
had grown up into a very interesting young man, with a decided musical
genius, and a tenor voice, which being discovered by an enterprising
patron of genius, from Boston, Billy was sent away to Paris to learn to
sing. Some day you will hear of his debut in grand opera, as Monsieur
Guillaume Rancon.

But Fiddlin' Jack lived on in the little house with the curved roof,
beside the river, refusing all the good offers which were made to him
for his piece of land.

"NON," he said; "what for shall I sell dis house? I lak' her, she
lak' me. All dese walls got full from museek, jus' lak' de wood of dis
violon. He play bettair dan de new feedle, becos' I play heem so long.
I lak' to lissen to dat rivaire in de night. She sing from long taim'
ago--jus' de same song w'en I firs come here. W'at for I go away? W'at I
get? W'at you can gif' me lak' dat?"

He was still the favourite musician of the county-side, in great request
at parties and weddings; but he had extended the sphere of his influence
a little. He was not willing to go to church, though there were now
several to choose from; but a young minister of liberal views who had
come to take charge of the new Episcopal chapel had persuaded Jacques
into the Sunday-school, to lead the children's singing with his violin.
He did it so well that the school became the most popular in the
village. It was much pleasanter to sing than to listen to long
addresses.

Jacques grew old gracefully, but he certainly grew old rapidly. His
beard was white; his shoulders were stooping; he suffered a good deal
in damp days from rheumatism--fortunately not in his hands, but in his
legs. One spring there was a long spell of abominable weather, just
between freezing and thawing. He caught a heavy cold and took to his
bed. Hose came over to look after him.

For a few days the old fiddler kept up his courage, and would sit up in
the bed trying to play; then his strength and his spirit seemed to fail
together. He grew silent and indifferent. When Hose came in he would
find Jacques with his face turned to the wall, where there was a tiny
brass crucifix hanging below the violin, and his lips moving quietly.

"Don't ye want the fiddle, Jack? I 'd like ter hear some o' them
old-time tunes ag'in."

But the artifice failed. Jacques shook his head. His mind seemed to turn
back to the time of his first arrival in the village, and beyond it.
When he spoke at all, it was of something connected with this early
time.

"Dat was bad taim' when I near keel Bull Corey, hein?"

Hose nodded gravely.

"Dat was beeg storm, dat night when I come to Bytown. You remember dat?"

Yes, Hose remembered it very well. It was a real old-fashioned storm.

"Ah, but befo dose taim', dere was wuss taim' dan dat--in Canada. Nobody
don' know 'bout dat. I lak to tell you, 'Ose, but I can't. No, it is not
possible to tell dat, nevair!"

It came into Hose's mind that the case was serious. Jack was going to
die. He never went to church, but perhaps the Sunday-school might count
for something. He was only a Frenchman, after all, and Frenchmen had
their own ways of doing things. He certainly ought to see some kind of
a preacher before he went out of the wilderness. There was a Canadian
priest in town that week, who had come down to see about getting up a
church for the French people who worked in the mills. Perhaps Jack would
like to talk with him.

His face lighted up at the proposal. He asked to have the room tidied
up, and a clean shirt put on him, and the violin laid open in its case
on a table beside the bed, and a few other preparations made for the
visit. Then the visitor came, a tall, friendly, quiet-looking man about
Jacques's age, with a smooth face and a long black cassock. The door was
shut, and they were left alone together.

"I am comforted that you are come, mon pere," said the sick man, "for I
have the heavy heart. There is a secret that I have kept for many years.
Sometimes I had almost forgotten that it must be told at the last; but
now it is the time to speak. I have a sin to confess--a sin of the most
grievous, of the most unpardonable."

The listener soothed him with gracious words; spoke of the mercy that
waits for all the penitent; urged him to open his heart without delay.

"Well, then, mon pere, it is this that makes me fear to die. Long since,
in Canada, before I came to this place, I have killed a man. It was--"

The voice stopped. The little round clock on the window-sill ticked very
distinctly and rapidly, as if it were in a hurry.

"I will speak as short as I can. It was in the camp of 'Poleon Gautier,
on the river St. Maurice. The big Baptiste Lacombe, that crazy boy who
wants always to fight, he mocks me when I play, he snatches my violin,
he goes to break him on the stove. There is a knife in my belt. I
spring to Baptiste. I see no more what it is that I do. I cut him in
the neck--once, twice. The blood flies out. He falls down. He cries, 'I
die.' I grab my violin from the floor, quick; then I run to the woods.
No one can catch me. A blanket, the axe, some food, I get from a
hiding-place down the river. Then I travel, travel, travel through the
woods, how many days I know not, till I come here. No one knows me. I
give myself the name Tremblay. I make the music for them. With my violin
I live. I am happy. I forget. But it all returns to me--now--at the
last. I have murdered. Is there a forgiveness for me, mon pere?"

The priest's face had changed very swiftly at the mention of the camp
on the St. Maurice. As the story went on, he grew strangely excited.
His lips twitched. His hands trembled. At the end he sank on his knees,
close by the bed, and looked into the countenance of the sick man,
searching it as a forester searches in the undergrowth for a lost trail.
Then his eyes lighted up as he found it.

"My son," said he, clasping the old fiddler's hand in his own, "you are
Jacques Dellaire. And I--do you know me now?--I am Baptiste Lacombe.
See those two scars upon my neck. But it was not death. You have not
murdered. You have given the stroke that changed my heart. Your sin is
forgiven--AND MINE ALSO--by the mercy of God!"

The round clock ticked louder and louder. A level ray from the setting
sun--red gold--came in through the dusty window, and lay across the
clasped hands on the bed. A white-throated sparrow, the first of the
season, on his way to the woods beyond the St. Lawrence, whistled so
clearly and tenderly that it seemed as if he were repeating to these two
gray-haired exiles the name of their homeland. "Sweet--sweet--Canada,
Canada, Canada!" But there was a sweeter sound than that in the quiet
room.

It was the sound of the prayer which begins, in every language spoken by
men, with the name of that Unseen One who rules over life's chances,
and pities its discords, and tunes it back again into harmony. Yes,
this prayer of the little children who are only learning how to play
the first notes of life's music, turns to the great Master musician who
knows it all and who loves to bring a melody out of every instrument
that He has made; and it seems to lay the soul in His hands to play upon
as He will, while it calls Him, OUR FATHER!


Some day, perhaps, you will go to the busy place where Bytown used to
be; and if you do, you must take the street by the river to the white
wooden church of St. Jacques. It stands on the very spot where there was
once a cabin with a curved roof. There is a gilt cross on the top of
the church. The door is usually open, and the interior is quite gay with
vases of china and brass, and paper flowers of many colours; but if
you go through to the sacristy at the rear, you will see a brown violin
hanging on the wall.

Pere Baptiste, if he is there, will take it down and show it to you. He
calls it a remarkable instrument--one of the best, of the most sweet.

But he will not let any one play upon it. He says it is a relic.




II. THE REWARD OF VIRTUE




I

When the good priest of St. Gerome christened Patrick Mullarkey, he lent
himself unconsciously to an innocent deception. To look at the name, you
would think, of course, it belonged to an Irishman; the very appearance
of it was equal to a certificate of membership in a Fenian society.

But in effect, from the turned-up toes of his bottes sauvages to
the ends of his black mustache, the proprietor of this name was a
Frenchman--Canadian French, you understand, and therefore even more
proud and tenacious of his race than if he had been born in Normandy.
Somewhere in his family tree there must have been a graft from the
Green Isle. A wandering lumberman from County Kerry had drifted up the
Saguenay into the Lake St. John region, and married the daughter of a
habitant, and settled down to forget his own country and his father's
house. But every visible trace of this infusion of new blood had
vanished long ago, except the name; and the name itself was transformed
on the lips of the St. Geromians. If you had heard them speak it in
their pleasant droning accent,--"Patrique Moullarque,"--you would have
supposed that it was made in France. To have a guide with such a name as
that was as good as being abroad.

Even when they cut it short and called him "Patte," as they usually did,
it had a very foreign sound. Everything about him was in harmony with
it; he spoke and laughed and sang and thought and felt in French--the
French of two hundred years ago, the language of Samuel de Champlain and
the Sieur de Monts, touched with a strong woodland flavour. In short,
my guide, philosopher, and friend, Pat, did not have a drop of Irish
in him, unless, perhaps, it was a certain--well, you shall judge for
yourself, when you have heard this story of his virtue, and the way it
was rewarded.

It was on the shore of the Lac a la Belle Riviere, fifteen miles back
from St. Gerome, that I came into the story, and found myself, as
commonly happens in the real stories which life is always bringing out
in periodical form, somewhere about the middle of the plot. But Patrick
readily made me acquainted with what had gone before. Indeed, it is
one of life's greatest charms as a story-teller that there is never
any trouble about getting a brief resume of the argument, and even a
listener who arrives late is soon put into touch with the course of the
narrative.

We had hauled our canoes and camp-stuff over the terrible road that
leads to the lake, with much creaking and groaning of wagons, and
complaining of men, who declared that the mud grew deeper and the hills
steeper every year, and vowed their customary vow never to come that way
again. At last our tents were pitched in a green copse of balsam trees,
close beside the water. The delightful sense of peace and freedom
descended upon our souls. Prosper and Ovide were cutting wood for the
camp-fire; Francois was getting ready a brace of partridges for supper;
Patrick and I were unpacking the provisions, arranging them conveniently
for present use and future transportation.

"Here, Pat," said I, as my hand fell on a large square parcel--"here is
some superfine tobacco that I got in Quebec for you and the other men on
this trip. Not like the damp stuff you had last year--a little bad
smoke and too many bad words. This is tobacco to burn--something quite
particular, you understand. How does that please you?"

He had been rolling up a piece of salt pork in a cloth as I spoke, and
courteously wiped his fingers on the outside of the bundle before he
stretched out his hand to take the package of tobacco. Then he answered,
with his unfailing politeness, but more solemnly than usual:

"A thousand thanks to m'sieu'. But this year I shall not have need of
the good tobacco. It shall be for the others."

The reply was so unexpected that it almost took my breath away. For Pat,
the steady smoker, whose pipes were as invariable as the precession of
the equinoxes, to refuse his regular rations of the soothing weed was a
thing unheard of. Could he be growing proud in his old age? Had he some
secret supply of cigars concealed in his kit, which made him scorn the
golden Virginia leaf? I demanded an explanation.

"But no, m'sieu'," he replied; "it is not that, most assuredly. It
is something entirely different--something very serious. It is a
reformation that I commence. Does m'sieu' permit that I should inform
him of it?"

Of course I permitted, or rather, warmly encouraged, the fullest
possible unfolding of the tale; and while we sat among the bags and
boxes, and the sun settled gently down behind the sharp-pointed firs
across the lake, and the evening sky and the waveless lake glowed with a
thousand tints of deepening rose and amber, Patrick put me in possession
of the facts which had led to a moral revolution in his life.

"It was the Ma'm'selle Meelair, that young lady,--not very young, but
active like the youngest,--the one that I conducted down the Grande
Decharge to Chicoutimi last year, after you had gone away. She said that
she knew m'sieu' intimately. No doubt you have a good remembrance of
her?"

I admitted an acquaintance with the lady. She was the president of
several societies for ethical agitation--a long woman, with short hair
and eyeglasses and a great thirst for tea; not very good in a canoe, but
always wanting to run the rapids and go into the dangerous places, and
talking all the time. Yes; that must have been the one. She was not a
bosom friend of mine, to speak accurately, but I remembered her well.

"Well, then, m'sieu'," continued Patrick, "it was this demoiselle who
changed my mind about the smoking. But not in a moment, you understand;
it was a work of four days, and she spoke much.

"The first day it was at the Island House; we were trolling for
ouananiche, and she was not pleased, for she lost many of the fish. I
was smoking at the stern of the canoe, and she said that the tobacco was
a filthy weed, that it grew in the devil's garden, and that it smelled
bad, terribly bad, and that it made the air sick, and that even the pig
would not eat it."

I could imagine Patrick's dismay as he listened to this dissertation;
for in his way he was as sensitive as a woman, and he would rather have
been upset in his canoe than have exposed himself to the reproach of
offending any one of his patrons by unpleasant or unseemly conduct.

"What did you do then, Pat?" I asked.

"Certainly I put out the pipe--what could I do otherwise? But I thought
that what the demoiselle Meelair has said was very strange, and not
true--exactly; for I have often seen the tobacco grow, and it springs
up out of the ground like the wheat or the beans, and it has beautiful
leaves, broad and green, with sometimes a red flower at the top. Does
the good God cause the filthy weeds to grow like that? Are they not all
clean that He has made? The potato--it is not filthy. And the onion?
It has a strong smell; but the demoiselle Meelair she ate much of the
onion--when we were not at the Island House, but in the camp.

"And the smell of the tobacco--this is an affair of the taste. For me,
I love it much; it is like a spice. When I come home at night to the
camp-fire, where the boys are smoking, the smell of the pipes runs far
out into the woods to salute me. It says, 'Here we are, Patrique; come
in near to the fire.' The smell of the tobacco is more sweet than the
smell of the fish. The pig loves it not, assuredly; but what then? I am
not a pig. To me it is good, good, good. Don't you find it like that,
m'sieu'?"

I had to confess that in the affair of taste I sided with Patrick rather
than with the pig. "Continue," I said--"continue, my boy. Miss Miller
must have said more than that to reform you."

"Truly," replied Pat. "On the second day we were making the lunch at
midday on the island below the first rapids. I smoked the pipe on a
rock apart, after the collation. Mees Meelair comes to me, and says:
'Patrique, my man, do you comprehend that the tobacco is a poison?
You are committing the murder of yourself.' Then she tells me many
things--about the nicoline, I think she calls him; how he goes into the
blood and into the bones and into the hair, and how quickly he will kill
the cat. And she says, very strong, 'The men who smoke the tobacco shall
die!'"

"That must have frightened you well, Pat. I suppose you threw away your
pipe at once."

"But no, m'sieu'; this time I continue to smoke, for now it is Mees
Meelair who comes near the pipe voluntarily, and it is not my offence.
And I remember, while she is talking, the old bonhomme Michaud St.
Gerome. He is a capable man; when he was young he could carry a barrel
of flour a mile without rest, and now that he has seventy-three years he
yet keeps his force. And he smokes--it is astonishing how that old man
smokes! All the day, except when he sleeps. If the tobacco is a poison,
it is a poison of the slowest--like the tea or the coffee. For the cat
it is quick--yes; but for the man it is long; and I am still young--only
thirty-one.

"But the third day, m'sieu'--the third day was the worst. It was a day
of sadness, a day of the bad chance. The demoiselle Meelair was not
content but that we should leap the Rapide des Cedres in canoe. It was
rough, rough--all feather-white, and the big rock at the corner boiling
like a kettle. But it is the ignorant who have the most of boldness. The
demoiselle Meelair she was not solid in the canoe. She made a jump and a
loud scream. I did my possible, but the sea was too high. We took in of
the water about five buckets. We were very wet. After that we make the
camp; and while I sit by the fire to dry my clothes I smoke for comfort.

"Mees Meelair she comes to me once more. 'Patrique,' she says with a sad
voice, 'I am sorry that a nice man, so good, so brave, is married to a
thing so bad, so sinful!' At first I am mad when I hear this, because
I think she means Angelique, my wife; but immediately she goes on:
'You are married to the smoking. That is sinful; it is a wicked thing.
Christians do not smoke. There is none of the tobacco in heaven. The men
who use it cannot go there. Ah, Patrique, do you wish to go to the hell
with your pipe?'"

"That was a close question," I commented; "your Miss Miller is a plain
speaker. But what did you say when she asked you that?"

"I said, m'sieu'," replied Patrick, lifting his hand to his forehead,
"that I must go where the good God pleased to send me, and that I would
have much joy to go to the same place with our cure, the Pere Morel, who
is a great smoker. I am sure that the pipe of comfort is no sin to that
holy man when he returns, some cold night, from the visiting of the
sick--it is not sin, not more than the soft chair and the warm fire. It
harms no one, and it makes quietness of mind. For me, when I see m'sieu'
the cure sitting at the door of the presbytere, in the evening coolness,
smoking the tobacco, very peaceful, and when he says to me, 'Good day,
Patrique; will you have a pipeful?' I cannot think that is wicked--no!"

There was a warmth of sincerity in the honest fellow's utterance that
spoke well for the character of the cure of St. Gerome. The good word
of a plain fisherman or hunter is worth more than a degree of doctor of
divinity from a learned university.

I too had grateful memories of good men, faithful, charitable, wise,
devout,--men before whose virtues my heart stood uncovered and reverent,
men whose lives were sweet with self-sacrifice, and whose words were
like stars of guidance to many souls,--and I had often seen these men
solacing their toils and inviting pleasant, kindly thoughts with the
pipe of peace. I wondered whether Miss Miller ever had the good fortune
to meet any of these men. They were not members of the societies for
ethical agitation, but they were profitable men to know. Their very
presence was medicinal. It breathed patience and fidelity to duty, and a
large, quiet friendliness.

"Well, then," I asked, "what did she say finally to turn you? What was
her last argument? Come, Pat, you must make it a little shorter than she
did."

"In five words, m'sieu', it was this: 'The tobacco causes the poverty.'
The fourth day--you remind yourself of the long dead-water below the
Rapide Gervais? It was there. All the day she spoke to me of the money
that goes to the smoke. Two piastres the month. Twenty-four the year.
Three hundred--yes, with the interest, more than three hundred in ten
years! Two thousand piastres in the life of the man! But she comprehends
well the arithmetic, that demoiselle Meelair; it was enormous! The big
farmer Tremblay has not more money at the bank than that. Then she asks
me if I have been at Quebec? No. If I would love to go? Of course,
yes. For two years of the smoking we could go, the goodwife and me, to
Quebec, and see the grand city, and the shops, and the many people, and
the cathedral, and perhaps the theatre. And at the asylum of the orphans
we could seek one of the little found children to bring home with us, to
be our own; for m'sieu knows it is the sadness of our house that we have
no child. But it was not Mees Meelair who said that--no, she would not
understand that thought."

Patrick paused for a moment, and rubbed his chin reflectively. Then he
continued:

"And perhaps it seems strange to you also, m'sieu', that a poor man
should be so hungry for children. It is not so everywhere: not in
America, I hear. But it is so with us in Canada. I know not a man so
poor that he would not feel richer for a child. I know not a man so
happy that he would not feel happier with a child in the house. It is
the best thing that the good God gives to us; something to work for;
something to play with. It makes a man more gentle and more strong. And
a woman,--her heart is like an empty nest, if she has not a child. It
was the darkest day that ever came to Angelique and me when our little
baby flew away, four years ago. But perhaps if we have not one of our
own, there is another somewhere, a little child of nobody, that belongs
to us, for the sake of the love of children. Jean Boucher, my wife's
cousin, at St. Joseph d'Alma, has taken two from the asylum. Two,
m'sieu', I assure you for as soon as one was twelve years old, he said
he wanted a baby, and so he went back again and got another. That is
what I should like to do."

"But, Pat," said I, "it is an expensive business, this raising of
children. You should think twice about it."

"Pardon, m'sieu'," answered Patrick; "I think a hundred times and always
the same way. It costs little more for three, or four, or five, in the
house than for two. The only thing is the money for the journey to the
city, the choice, the arrangement with the nuns. For that one must save.
And so I have thrown away the pipe. I smoke no more. The money of the
tobacco is for Quebec and for the little found child. I have already
eighteen piastres and twenty sous in the old box of cigars on the
chimney-piece at the house. This year will bring more. The winter after
the next, if we have the good chance, we go to the city, the goodwife
and me, and we come home with the little boy--or maybe the little girl.
Does m'sieu' approve?"

"You are a man of virtue, Pat," said I; "and since you will not take
your share of the tobacco on this trip, it shall go to the other men;
but you shall have the money instead, to put into your box on the
mantel-piece."

After supper that evening I watched him with some curiosity to see what
he would do without his pipe. He seemed restless and uneasy. The other
men sat around the fire, smoking; but Patrick was down at the landing,
fussing over one of the canoes, which had been somewhat roughly handled
on the road coming in. Then he began to tighten the tent-ropes, and
hauled at them so vigorously that he loosened two of the stakes. Then
he whittled the blade of his paddle for a while, and cut it an inch too
short. Then he went into the men's tent, and in a few minutes the sound
of snoring told that he had sought refuge in sleep at eight o'clock,
without telling a single caribou story, or making any plans for the next
day's sport.




II

For several days we lingered on the Lake of the Beautiful River, trying
the fishing. We explored all the favourite meeting-places of the trout,
at the mouths of the streams and in the cool spring-holes, but we did
not have remarkable success. I am bound to say that Patrick was not
at his best that year as a fisherman. He was as ready to work, as
interested, as eager, as ever; but he lacked steadiness, persistence,
patience. Some tranquillizing influence seemed to have departed from
him. That placid confidence in the ultimate certainty of catching fish,
which is one of the chief elements of good luck, was wanting. He did not
appear to be able to sit still in the canoe. The mosquitoes troubled
him terribly. He was just as anxious as a man could be to have me take
plenty of the largest trout, but he was too much in a hurry. He even
went so far as to say that he did not think I cast the fly as well as I
did formerly, and that I was too slow in striking when the fish rose. He
was distinctly a weaker man without his pipe, but his virtuous resolve
held firm.

There was one place in particular that required very cautious angling.
It was a spring-hole at the mouth of the Riviere du Milieu--an open
space, about a hundred feet long and fifteen feet wide, in the midst
of the lily-pads, and surrounded on every side by clear, shallow water.
Here the great trout assembled at certain hours of the day; but it was
not easy to get them. You must come up delicately in the canoe, and make
fast to a stake at the side of the pool, and wait a long time for the
place to get quiet and the fish to recover from their fright and come
out from under the lily-pads. It had been our custom to calm and soothe
this expectant interval with incense of the Indian weed, friendly to
meditation and a foe of "Raw haste, half-sister to delay." But this year
Patrick could not endure the waiting. After five minutes he would say:

"BUT the fishing is bad this season! There are none of the big ones here
at all. Let us try another place. It will go better at the Riviere du
Cheval, perhaps."

There was only one thing that would really keep him quiet, and that
was a conversation about Quebec. The glories of that wonderful city
entranced his thoughts. He was already floating, in imagination, with
the vast throngs of people that filled its splendid streets, looking up
at the stately houses and churches with their glittering roofs of tin,
and staring his fill at the magnificent shop-windows, where all the
luxuries of the world were displayed. He had heard that there were more
than a hundred shops--separate shops for all kinds of separate things:
some for groceries, and some for shoes, and some for clothes, and some
for knives and axes, and some for guns, and many shops where they sold
only jewels--gold rings, and diamonds, and forks of pure silver. Was it
not so?

He pictured himself, side by side with his goodwife, in the salle a
manger of the Hotel Richelieu, ordering their dinner from a printed
bill of fare. Side by side they were walking on the Dufferin Terrace,
listening to the music of the military band. Side by side they were
watching the wonders of the play at the Theatre de l'Etoile du Nord.
Side by side they were kneeling before the gorgeous altar in the
cathedral. And then they were standing silent, side by side, in the
asylum of the orphans, looking at brown eyes and blue, at black hair and
yellow curls, at fat legs and rosy cheeks and laughing mouths, while the
Mother Superior showed off the little boys and girls for them to choose.
This affair of the choice was always a delightful difficulty, and here
his fancy loved to hang in suspense, vibrating between rival joys.

Once, at the Riviere du Milieu, after considerable discourse upon
Quebec, there was an interval of silence, during which I succeeded in
hooking and playing a larger trout than usual. As the fish came up to
the side of the canoe, Patrick netted him deftly, exclaiming with an
abstracted air, "It is a boy, after all. I like that best."

Our camp was shifted, the second week, to the Grand Lac des Cedres; and
there we had extraordinary fortune with the trout: partly, I conjecture,
because there was only one place to fish, and so Patrick's uneasy zeal
could find no excuse for keeping me in constant motion all around the
lake. But in the matter of weather we were not so happy. There is always
a conflict in the angler's mind about the weather--a struggle between
his desires as a man and his desires as a fisherman. This time our
prayers for a good fishing season were granted at the expense of our
suffering human nature. There was a conjunction in the zodiac of the
signs of Aquarius and Pisces. It rained as easily, as suddenly, as
penetratingly, as Miss Miller talked; but in between the showers the
trout were very hungry.

One day, when we were paddling home to our tents among the birch trees,
one of these unexpected storms came up; and Patrick, thoughtful of
my comfort as ever, insisted on giving me his coat to put around my
dripping shoulders. The paddling would serve instead of a coat for him,
he said; it would keep him warm to his bones. As I slipped the garment
over my back, something hard fell from one of the pockets into the
bottom of the canoe. It was a brier-wood pipe.

"Aha! Pat," I cried; "what is this? You said you had thrown all your
pipes away. How does this come in your pocket?"

"But, m'sieu'," he answered, "this is different. This is not the pipe
pure and simple. It is a souvenir. It is the one you gave me two years
ago on the Metabetchouan, when we got the big caribou. I could not
reject this. I keep it always for the remembrance."

At this moment my hand fell upon a small, square object in the other
pocket of the coat. I pulled it out. It was a cake of Virginia leaf.
Without a word, I held it up, and looked at Patrick. He began to explain
eagerly:

"Yes, certainly, it is the tobacco, m'sieu'; but it is not for the
smoke, as you suppose. It is for the virtue, for the self-victory. I
call this my little piece of temptation. See; the edges are not cut. I
smell it only; and when I think how it is good, then I speak to myself,
'But the little found child will be better!' It will last a long time,
this little piece of temptation; perhaps until we have the boy at our
house--or maybe the girl."

The conflict between the cake of Virginia leaf and Patrick's virtue must
have been severe during the last ten days of our expedition; for we
went down the Riviere des Ecorces, and that is a tough trip, and full
of occasions when consolation is needed. After a long, hard day's work
cutting out an abandoned portage through the woods, or tramping miles
over the incredibly shaggy hills to some outlying pond for a caribou,
and lugging the saddle and hind quarters back to the camp, the evening
pipe, after supper, seemed to comfort the men unspeakably. If their
tempers had grown a little short under stress of fatigue and hunger, now
they became cheerful and good-natured again. They sat on logs before
the camp-fire, their stockinged feet stretched out to the blaze, and the
puffs of smoke rose from their lips like tiny salutes to the comfortable
flame, or like incense burned upon the altar of gratitude and
contentment.

Patrick, I noticed about this time, liked to get on the leeward side of
as many pipes as possible, and as near as he could to the smokers. He
said that this kept away the mosquitoes. There he would sit, with the
smoke drifting full in his face, both hands in his pockets, talking
about Quebec, and debating the comparative merits of a boy or a girl as
an addition to his household.

But the great trial of his virtue was yet to come. The main object
of our trip down the River of Barks--the terminus ad quem of the
expedition, so to speak--was a bear. Now the bear as an object of the
chase, at least in Canada, is one of the most illusory of phantoms. The
manner of hunting is simple. It consists in walking about through the
woods, or paddling along a stream, until you meet a bear; then you try
to shoot him. This would seem to be, as the Rev. Mr. Leslie called his
book against the deists of the eighteenth century, "A Short and Easie
Method." But in point of fact there are two principal difficulties. The
first is that you never find the bear when and where you are looking for
him. The second is that the bear sometimes finds you when--but you shall
see how it happened to us.

We had hunted the whole length of the River of Barks with the utmost
pains and caution, never going out, even to pick blueberries, without
having the rifle at hand, loaded for the expected encounter. Not one
bear had we met. It seemed as if the whole ursine tribe must have
emigrated to Labrador.

At last we came to the mouth of the river, where it empties into Lake
Kenogami, in a comparatively civilized country, with several farm-houses
in full view on the opposite bank. It was not a promising place for the
chase; but the river ran down with a little fall and a lively, cheerful
rapid into the lake, and it was a capital spot for fishing. So we left
the rifle in the case, and took a canoe and a rod, and went down, on the
last afternoon, to stand on the point of rocks at the foot of the rapid,
and cast the fly.

We caught half a dozen good trout; but the sun was still hot, and we
concluded to wait awhile for the evening fishing. So we turned the canoe
bottom up among the bushes on the shore, stored the trout away in the
shade beneath it, and sat down in a convenient place among the stones
to have another chat about Quebec. We had just passed the jewelry shops,
and were preparing to go to the asylum of the orphans, when Patrick
put his hand on my shoulder with a convulsive grip, and pointed up the
stream.

There was a huge bear, like a very big, wicked, black sheep with a
pointed nose, making his way down the shore. He shambled along lazily
and unconcernedly, as if his bones were loosely tied together in a bag
of fur. It was the most indifferent and disconnected gait that I ever
saw. Nearer and nearer he sauntered, while we sat as still as if we had
been paralyzed. And the gun was in its case at the tent!

How the bear knew this I cannot tell; but know it he certainly did,
for he kept on until he reached the canoe, sniffed at it suspiciously,
thrust his sharp nose under it, and turned it over with a crash that
knocked two holes in the bottom, ate the fish, licked his chops, stared
at us for a few moments without the slightest appearance of gratitude,
made up his mind that he did not like our personal appearance, and then
loped leisurely up the mountain-side. We could hear him cracking the
underbrush long after he was lost to sight.

Patrick looked at me and sighed. I said nothing. The French language, as
far as I knew it, seemed trifling and inadequate. It was a moment when
nothing could do any good except the consolations of philosophy, or a
pipe. Patrick pulled the brier-wood from his pocket; then he took out
the cake of Virginia leaf, looked at it, smelled it, shook his head, and
put it back again. His face was as long as his arm. He stuck the cold
pipe into his mouth, and pulled away at it for a while in silence.
Then his countenance began to clear, his mouth relaxed, he broke into a
laugh.

"Sacred bear!" he cried, slapping his knee; "sacred beast of the world!
What a day of the good chance for her, HE! But she was glad, I suppose.
Perhaps she has some cubs, HE? BAJETTE!"




III

This was the end of our hunting and fishing for that year. We spent the
next two days in voyaging through a half-dozen small lakes and streams,
in a farming country, on our way home. I observed that Patrick kept his
souvenir pipe between his lips a good deal of the time, and puffed at
vacancy. It seemed to soothe him. In his conversation he dwelt with
peculiar satisfaction on the thought of the money in the cigar-box
on the mantel-piece at St. Gerome. Eighteen piastres and twenty sous
already! And with the addition to be made from the tobacco not smoked
during the past month, it would amount to more than twenty-three
piastres; and all as safe in the cigar-box as if it were in the bank
at Chicoutimi! That reflection seemed to fill the empty pipe with
fragrance. It was a Barmecide smoke; but the fumes of it were potent,
and their invisible wreaths framed the most enchanting visions of tall
towers, gray walls, glittering windows, crowds of people, regiments
of soldiers, and the laughing eyes of a little boy--or was it a little
girl?

When we came out of the mouth of La Belle Riviere, the broad blue
expanse of Lake St. John spread before us, calm and bright in the
radiance of the sinking sun. In a curve on the left, eight miles away,
sparkled the slender steeple of the church of St. Gerome. A thick column
of smoke rose from somewhere in its neighbourhood. "It is on the beach,"
said the men; "the boys of the village accustom themselves to burn the
rubbish there for a bonfire." But as our canoes danced lightly forward
over the waves and came nearer to the place, it was evident that the
smoke came from the village itself. It was a conflagration, but not a
general one; the houses were too scattered and the day too still for a
fire to spread. What could it be? Perhaps the blacksmith shop, perhaps
the bakery, perhaps the old tumble-down barn of the little Tremblay? It
was not a large fire, that was certain. But where was it precisely?

The question, becoming more and more anxious, was answered when we
arrived at the beach. A handful of boys, eager to be the bearers of
news, had spied us far off, and ran down to the shore to meet us.

"Patrique! Patrique!" they shouted in English, to make their importance
as great as possible in my eyes. "Come 'ome kveek; yo' 'ouse ees hall
burn'!"

"W'at!" cried Patrick. "MONJEE!" And he drove the canoe ashore, leaped
out, and ran up the bank toward the village as if he were mad. The other
men followed him, leaving me with the boys to unload the canoes and pull
them up on the sand, where the waves would not chafe them.

This took some time, and the boys helped me willingly. "Eet ees not need
to 'urry, m'sieu'," they assured me; "dat 'ouse to Patrique Moullarque
ees hall burn' seence t'ree hour. Not'ing lef' bot de hash."

As soon as possible, however, I piled up the stuff, covered it with one
of the tents, and leaving it in charge of the steadiest of the boys,
took the road to the village and the site of the Maison Mullarkey.

It had vanished completely: the walls of squared logs were gone; the
low, curved roof had fallen; the door-step with the morning-glory vines
climbing up beside it had sunken out of sight; nothing remained but
the dome of the clay oven at the back of the house, and a heap of
smouldering embers.

Patrick sat beside his wife on a flat stone that had formerly supported
the corner of the porch. His shoulder was close to Angelique's--so close
that it looked almost as if he must have had his arm around her a moment
before I came up. His passion and grief had calmed themselves down now,
and he was quite tranquil. In his left hand he held the cake of Virginia
leaf, in his right a knife. He was cutting off delicate slivers of the
tobacco, which he rolled together with a circular motion between his
palms. Then he pulled his pipe from his pocket and filled the bowl with
great deliberation.

"What a misfortune!" I cried. "The pretty house is gone. I am so sorry,
Patrick. And the box of money on the mantel-piece, that is gone, too, I
fear--all your savings. What a terrible misfortune! How did it happen?"

"I cannot tell," he answered rather slowly. "It is the good God. And he
has left me my Angelique. Also, m'sieu', you see"--here he went over to
the pile of ashes, and pulled out a fragment of charred wood with a
live coal at the end--"you see"--puff, puff--"he has given me"--puff,
puff--"a light for my pipe again"--puff, puff, puff!

The fragrant, friendly smoke was pouring out now in full volume. It
enwreathed his head like drifts of cloud around the rugged top of a
mountain at sunrise. I could see that his face was spreading into a
smile of ineffable contentment.

"My faith!" said I, "how can you be so cheerful? Your house is in ashes;
your money is burned up; the voyage to Quebec, the visit to the asylum,
the little orphan--how can you give it all up so easily?"

"Well," he replied, taking the pipe from his mouth, with fingers
curling around the bowl, as if they loved to feel that it was warm once
more--"well, then, it would be more hard, I suppose, to give it up not
easily. And then, for the house, we shall build a new one this fall; the
neighbours will help. And for the voyage to Quebec--without that we
may be happy. And as regards the little orphan, I will tell you
frankly"--here he went back to his seat upon the flat stone, and settled
himself with an air of great comfort beside his partner--"I tell you, in
confidence, Angelique demands that I prepare a particular furniture at
the new house. Yes, it is a cradle; but it is not for an orphan."




IV

It was late in the following summer when I came back again to St.
Gerome. The golden-rods and the asters were all in bloom along the
village street; and as I walked down it the broad golden sunlight of
the short afternoon seemed to glorify the open road and the plain square
houses with a careless, homely rapture of peace. The air was softly
fragrant with the odour of balm of Gilead. A yellow warbler sang from
a little clump of elder-bushes, tinkling out his contented song like a
chime of tiny bells, "Sweet--sweet--sweet--sweeter--sweeter--sweetest!"

There was the new house, a little farther back from the road than the
old one; and in the place where the heap of ashes had lain, a primitive
garden, with marigolds and lupines and zinnias all abloom. And there was
Patrick, sitting on the door-step, smoking his pipe in the cool of the
day. Yes; and there, on a many-coloured counterpane spread beside him,
an infant joy of the house of Mullarkey was sucking her thumb, while her
father was humming the words of an old slumber-song:


     Sainte Marguerite,
     Veillez ma petite!
     Endormez ma p'tite enfant
     Jusqu'a l'age de quinze ans!
     Quand elle aura quinze ans passe
     Il faudra la marier
     Avec un p'tit bonhomme
     Que viendra de Rome.


"Hola! Patrick," I cried; "good luck to you! Is it a girl or a boy?"

"SALUT! m'sieu'," he answered, jumping up and waving his pipe. "It is a
girl AND a boy!"

Sure enough, as I entered the door, I beheld Angelique rocking the other
half of the reward of virtue in the new cradle.




III. A BRAVE HEART

"That was truly his name, m'sieu'--Raoul Vaillantcoeur--a name of the
fine sound, is it not? You like that word,--a valiant heart,--it pleases
you, eh! The man who calls himself by such a name as that ought to be a
brave fellow, a veritable hero? Well, perhaps. But I know an Indian
who is called Le Blanc; that means white. And a white man who is called
Lenoir; that means black. It is very droll, this affair of the names. It
is like the lottery."

Silence for a few moments, broken only by the ripple of water under the
bow of the canoe, the persistent patter of the rain all around us,
and the SLISH, SLISH of the paddle with which Ferdinand, my Canadian
voyageur, was pushing the birch-bark down the lonely length of Lac
Moise. I knew that there was one of his stories on the way. But I must
keep still to get it. A single ill-advised comment, a word that would
raise a question of morals or social philosophy, might switch the
narrative off the track into a swamp of abstract discourse in which
Ferdinand would lose himself. Presently the voice behind me began again.

"But that word VAILLANT, m'sieu'; with us in Canada it does not mean
always the same as with you. Sometimes we use it for something that
sounds big, but does little; a gun that goes off with a terrible crack,
but shoots not straight nor far. When a man is like that he is FANFARON,
he shows off well, but--well, you shall judge for yourself, when you
hear what happened between this man Vaillantcoeur and his friend Prosper
Leclere at the building of the stone tower of the church at Abbeville.
You remind yourself of that grand church with the tall tower--yes? With
permission I am going to tell you what passed when that was made. And
you shall decide whether there was truly a brave heart in the story, or
not; and if it went with the name."

Thus the tale began, in the vast solitude of the northern forest, among
the granite peaks of the ancient Laurentian Mountains, on a lake that
knew no human habitation save the Indian's wigwam or the fisherman's
tent.

How it rained that day! The dark clouds had collapsed upon the hills in
shapeless folds. The waves of the lake were beaten flat by the lashing
strokes of the storm. Quivering sheets of watery gray were driven before
the wind; and broad curves of silver bullets danced before them as they
swept over the surface. All around the homeless shores the evergreen
trees seemed to hunch their backs and crowd closer together in
patient misery. Not a bird had the heart to sing; only the
loon--storm-lover--laughed his crazy challenge to the elements, and
mocked us with his long-drawn maniac scream.

It seemed as if we were a thousand miles from everywhere and everybody.
Cities, factories, libraries, colleges, law-courts, theatres,
palaces,--what had we dreamed of these things? They were far off, in
another world. We had slipped back into a primitive life. Ferdinand was
telling me the naked story of human love and human hate, even as it has
been told from the beginning.

I cannot tell it just as he did. There was a charm in his speech too
quick for the pen: a woodland savour not to be found in any ink for sale
in the shops. I must tell it in my way, as he told it in his.

But at all events, nothing that makes any difference shall go into the
translation unless it was in the original. This is Ferdinand's story. If
you care for the real thing, here it is.




I

There were two young men in Abbeville who were easily the cocks of the
woodland walk. Their standing rested on the fact that they were the
strongest men in the parish. Strength is the thing that counts, when
people live on the edge of the wilderness. These two were well known all
through the country between Lake St. John and Chicoutimi as men of great
capacity. Either of them could shoulder a barrel of flour and walk off
with it as lightly as a common man would carry a side of bacon. There
was not a half-pound of difference between them in ability. But there
was a great difference in their looks and in their way of doing things.

Raoul Vaillantcoeur was the biggest and the handsomest man in the
village; nearly six feet tall, straight as a fir tree, and black as
a bull-moose in December. He had natural force enough and to spare.
Whatever he did was done by sheer power of back and arm. He could send
a canoe up against the heaviest water, provided he did not get mad and
break his paddle--which he often did. He had more muscle than he knew
how to use.

Prosper Leclere did not have so much, but he knew better how to handle
it. He never broke his paddle--unless it happened to be a bad one, and
then he generally had another all ready in the canoe. He was at least
four inches shorter than Vaillantcoeur; broad shoulders, long arms,
light hair, gray eyes; not a handsome fellow, but pleasant-looking and
very quiet. What he did was done more than half with his head.

He was the kind of a man that never needs more than one match to light a
fire.

But Vaillantcoeur--well, if the wood was wet he might use a dozen, and
when the blaze was kindled, as like as not he would throw in the rest of
the box.

Now, these two men had been friends and were changed into rivals. At
least that was the way that one of them looked at it. And most of the
people in the parish seemed to think that was the right view. It was a
strange thing, and not altogether satisfactory to the public mind,
to have two strongest men in the village. The question of comparative
standing in the community ought to be raised and settled in the usual
way. Raoul was perfectly willing, and at times (commonly on Saturday
nights) very eager. But Prosper was not.

"No," he said, one March night, when he was boiling maple-sap in the
sugar-bush with little Ovide Rossignol (who had a lyric passion for
holding the coat while another man was fighting)--"no, for what shall I
fight with Raoul? As boys we have played together. Once, in the rapids
of the Belle Riviere, when I have fallen in the water, I think he has
saved my life. He was stronger, then, than me. I am always a friend to
him. If I beat him now, am I stronger? No, but weaker. And if he beats
me, what is the sense of that? Certainly I shall not like it. What is to
gain?"

Down in the store of old Girard, that night, Vaillantcoeur was holding
forth after a different fashion. He stood among the cracker-boxes and
flour-barrels, with a background of shelves laden with bright-coloured
calicoes, and a line of tin pails hanging overhead, and stated his view
of the case with vigour. He even pulled off his coat and rolled up his
shirt-sleeve to show the knotty arguments with which he proposed to
clinch his opinion.

"That Leclere," said he, "that little Prosper Leclere! He thinks himself
one of the strongest--a fine fellow! But I tell you he is a coward.
If he is clever? Yes. But he is a poltroon. He knows well that I can
flatten him out like a crepe in the frying-pan. But he is afraid. He has
not as much courage as the musk-rat. You stamp on the bank. He dives. He
swims away. Bah!"

"How about that time he cut loose the jam of logs in the Rapide des
Cedres?" said old Girard from his corner.

Vaillantcoeur's black eyes sparkled and he twirled his mustache
fiercely. "SAPRIE!" he cried, "that was nothing! Any man with an axe can
cut a log. But to fight--that is another affair. That demands the brave
heart. The strong man who will not fight is a coward. Some day I will
put him through the mill--you shall see what that small Leclere is made
of. SACREDAM!"

Of course, affairs had not come to this pass all at once. It was a long
history, beginning with the time when the two boys had played together,
and Raoul was twice as strong as the other, and was very proud of it.
Prosper did not care; it was all right so long as they had a good time.
But then Prosper began to do things better and better. Raoul did not
understand it; he was jealous. Why should he not always be the leader?
He had more force. Why should Prosper get ahead? Why should he have
better luck at the fishing and the hunting and the farming? It was by
some trick. There was no justice in it.

Raoul was not afraid of anything but death; and whatever he wanted, he
thought he had a right to have. But he did not know very well how to get
it. He would start to chop a log just at the spot where there was a big
knot.

He was the kind of a man that sets hare-snares on a caribou-trail, and
then curses his luck because he catches nothing.

Besides, whatever he did, he was always thinking most about beating
somebody else. But Prosper eared most for doing the thing as well as
he could. If any one else could beat him--well, what difference did it
make? He would do better the next time.

If he had a log to chop, he looked it all over for a clear place before
he began. What he wanted was, not to make the chips fly, but to get the
wood split.

You are not to suppose that the one man was a saint and a hero, and
the other a fool and a ruffian. No; that sort of thing happens only in
books. People in Abbeville were not made on that plan. They were both
plain men. But there was a difference in their hearts; and out of that
difference grew all the trouble.

It was hard on Vaillantcoeur, of course, to see Leclere going ahead,
getting rich, clearing off the mortgage on his farm, laying up money
with the notary Bergeron, who acted as banker for the parish--it was
hard to look on at this, while he himself stood still, or even slipped
back a little, got into debt, had to sell a bit of the land that his
father left him. There must be some cheating about it.

But this was not the hardest morsel to swallow. The great thing that
stuck in his crop was the idea that the little Prosper, whom he could
have whipped so easily, and whom he had protected so loftily, when they
were boys, now stood just as high as he did as a capable man--perhaps
even higher. Why was it that when the Price Brothers, down at
Chicoutimi, had a good lumber-job up in the woods on the Belle Riviere,
they made Leclere the boss, instead of Vaillantcoeur? Why did the cure
Villeneuve choose Prosper, and not Raoul, to steady the strain of the
biggest pole when they were setting up the derrick for the building of
the new church?

It was rough, rough! The more Raoul thought of it, the rougher it
seemed. The fact that it was a man who had once been his protege, and
still insisted on being his best friend, did not make it any smoother.
Would you have liked it any better on that account? I am not telling
you how it ought to have been, I am telling you how it was. This isn't
Vaillantcoeur's account-book; it's his story. You must strike your
balances as you go along.

And all the time, you see, he felt sure that he was a stronger man and a
braver man than Prosper. He was hungry to prove it in the only way that
he could understand. The sense of rivalry grew into a passion of hatred,
and the hatred shaped itself into a blind, headstrong desire to fight.
Everything that Prosper did well, seemed like a challenge; every success
that he had was as hard to bear as an insult. All the more, because
Prosper seemed unconscious of it. He refused to take offence, went about
his work quietly and cheerfully, turned off hard words with a joke, went
out of his way to show himself friendly and good-natured. In reality, of
course, he knew well enough how matters stood. But he was resolved not
to show that he knew, if he could help it; and in any event, not to be
one of the two that are needed to make a quarrel.

He felt very strangely about it. There was a presentiment in his heart
that he did not dare to shake off. It seemed as if this conflict were
one that would threaten the happiness of his whole life. He still kept
his old feeling of attraction to Raoul, the memory of the many happy
days they had spent together; and though the friendship, of course,
could never again be what it had been, there was something of it left,
at least on Prosper's side. To struggle with this man, strike at his
face, try to maim and disfigure him, roll over and over on the ground
with him, like two dogs tearing each other,--the thought was hateful.
His gorge rose at it. He would never do it, unless to save his life.
Then? Well, then, God must be his judge.

So it was that these two men stood against each other in Abbeville. Just
as strongly as Raoul was set to get into a fight, just so strongly was
Prosper set to keep out of one. It was a trial of strength between two
passions,--the passion of friendship and the passion of fighting.

Two or three things happened to put an edge on Raoul's hunger for an
out-and-out fight.

The first was the affair at the shanty on Lac des Caps. The
wood-choppers, like sailors, have a way of putting a new man through a
few tricks to initiate him into the camp. Leclere was bossing the job,
with a gang of ten men from St. Raymond under him. Vaillantcoeur had
just driven a team in over the snow with a load of provisions, and
was lounging around the camp as if it belonged to him. It was Sunday
afternoon, the regular time for fun, but no one dared to take hold of
him. He looked too big. He expressed his opinion of the camp.

"No fun in this shanty, HE? I suppose that little Leclere he makes
you others work, and say your prayers, and then, for the rest, you can
sleep. HE! Well, I am going to make a little fun for you, my boys. Come,
Prosper, get your hat, if you are able to climb a tree."

He snatched the hat from the table by the stove and ran out into the
snow. In front of the shanty a good-sized birch, tall, smooth, very
straight, was still standing. He went up the trunk like a bear.

But there was a dead balsam that had fallen against the birch and lodged
on the lower branches. It was barely strong enough to bear the weight
of a light man. Up this slanting ladder Prosper ran quickly in his
moccasined feet, snatched the hat from Raoul's teeth as he swarmed up
the trunk, and ran down again. As he neared the ground, the balsam,
shaken from its lodgement, cracked and fell. Raoul was left up the tree,
perched among the branches, out of breath. Luck had set the scene for
the lumberman's favourite trick.

"Chop him down! chop him down" was the cry; and a trio of axes were
twanging against the birch tree, while the other men shouted and laughed
and pelted the tree with ice to keep the prisoner from climbing down.

Prosper neither shouted nor chopped, but he grinned a little as he
watched the tree quiver and shake, and heard the rain of "SACRES!" and
"MAUDITS!" that came out of the swaying top. He grinned--until he saw
that a half-dozen more blows would fell the birch right on the roof of
the shanty.

"Are you crazy?" he cried, as he picked up an axe; "you know nothing how
to chop. You kill a man. You smash the cabane. Let go!" He shoved one of
the boys away and sent a few mighty cuts into the side of the birch that
was farthest from the cabin; then two short cuts on the other side; the
tree shivered, staggered, cracked, and swept in a great arc toward the
deep snow-drift by the brook. As the top swung earthward, Raoul jumped
clear of the crashing branches and landed safely in the feather-bed of
snow, buried up to his neck. Nothing was to be seen of him but his head,
like some new kind of fire-work--sputtering bad words.

Well, this was the first thing that put an edge on Vaillantcoeur's
hunger to fight. No man likes to be chopped down by his friend, even
if the friend does it for the sake of saving him from being killed by a
fall on the shanty-roof. It is easy to forget that part of it. What you
remember is the grin.

The second thing that made it worse was the bad chance that both of
these men had to fall in love with the same girl. Of course there were
other girls in the village beside Marie Antoinette Girard--plenty of
them, and good girls, too. But somehow or other, when they were beside
her, neither Raoul nor Prosper cared to look at any of them, but only
at 'Toinette. Her eyes were so much darker and her cheeks so much more
red--bright as the berries of the mountain-ash in September. Her hair
hung down to her waist on Sunday in two long braids, brown and shiny
like a ripe hazelnut; and her voice when she laughed made the sound of
water tumbling over little stones.

No one knew which of the two lovers she liked best. At school it was
certainly Raoul, because he was bigger and bolder. When she came back
from her year in the convent at Roberval it was certainly Prosper,
because he could talk better and had read more books. He had a volume of
songs full of love and romance, and knew most of them by heart. But
this did not last forever. 'Toinette's manners had been polished at the
convent, but her ideas were still those of her own people. She never
thought that knowledge of books could take the place of strength, in
the real battle of life. She was a brave girl, and she felt sure in her
heart that the man of the most courage must be the best man after all.

For a while she appeared to persuade herself that it was Prosper, beyond
a doubt, and always took his part when the other girls laughed at him.
But this was not altogether a good sign. When a girl really loves,
she does not talk, she acts. The current of opinion and gossip in
the village was too strong for her. By the time of the affair of the
"chopping-down" at Lac des Caps, her heart was swinging to and fro like
a pendulum. One week she would walk home from mass with Raoul. The next
week she would loiter in the front yard on a Saturday evening and talk
over the gate with Prosper, until her father called her into the shop to
wait on customers.

It was in one of these talks that the pendulum seemed to make its last
swing and settle down to its resting-place. Prosper was telling her of
the good crops of sugar that he had made from his maple grove.

"The profit will be large--more than sixty piastres--and with that I
shall buy at Chicoutimi a new four-wheeler, of the finest, a veritable
wedding carriage--if you--if I--'Toinette? Shall we ride together?"

His left hand clasped hers as it lay on the gate. His right arm stole
over the low picket fence and went around the shoulder that leaned
against the gate-post. The road was quite empty, the night already dark.
He could feel her warm breath on his neck as she laughed.

"If you! If I! If what? Why so many ifs in this fine speech? Of whom
is the wedding for which this new carriage is to be bought? Do you know
what Raoul Vaillantcoeur has said? 'No more wedding in this parish till
I have thrown the little Prosper over my shoulder!'"

As she said this, laughing, she turned closer to the fence and looked
up, so that a curl on her forehead brushed against his cheek.

"BATECHE! Who told you he said that?"

"I heard him, myself."

"Where?"

"In the store, two nights ago. But it was not for the first time. He
said it when we came from the church together, it will be four weeks
to-morrow."

"What did you say to him?"

"I told him perhaps he was mistaken. The next wedding might be after the
little Prosper had measured the road with the back of the longest man in
Abbeville."

The laugh had gone out of her voice now. She was speaking eagerly, and
her bosom rose and fell with quick breaths. But Prosper's right arm
had dropped from her shoulder, and his hand gripped the fence as he
straightened up.

"'Toinette!" he cried, "that was bravely said. And I could do it. Yes, I
know I could do it. But, MON DIEU, what shall I say? Three years now, he
has pushed me, every one has pushed me, to fight. And you--but I cannot.
I am not capable of it."

The girl's hand lay in his as cold and still as a stone. She was silent
for a moment, and then asked, coldly, "Why not?"

"Why not? Because of the old friendship. Because he pulled me out of the
river long ago. Because I am still his friend. Because now he hates
me too much. Because it would be a black fight. Because shame and evil
would come of it, whoever won. That is what I fear, 'Toinette!"

Her hand slipped suddenly away from his. She stepped back from the gate.

"TIENS! You have fear, Monsieur Leclere! Truly I had not thought of
that. It is strange. For so strong a man it is a little stupid to be
afraid. Good-night. I hear my father calling me. Perhaps some one in the
store who wants to be served. You must tell me again what you are going
to do with the new carriage. Good-night!"

She was laughing again. But it was a different laughter. Prosper, at
the gate, did not think it sounded like the running of a brook over
the stones. No, it was more the noise of the dry branches that knock
together in the wind. He did not hear the sigh that came as she shut
the door of the house, nor see how slowly she walked through the passage
into the store.




II

There seemed to be a great many rainy Saturdays that spring; and in the
early summer the trade in Girard's store was so brisk that it appeared
to need all the force of the establishment to attend to it. The gate of
the front yard had no more strain put upon its hinges. It fell into
a stiff propriety of opening and shutting, at the touch of people who
understood that a gate was made merely to pass through, not to lean
upon.

That summer Vaillantcoeur had a new hat--a black and shiny beaver--and a
new red-silk cravat. They looked fine on Corpus Christi day, when he and
'Toinette walked together as fiancee's.

You would have thought he would have been content with that. Proud,
he certainly was. He stepped like the cure's big rooster with the
topknot--almost as far up in the air as he did along the ground; and he
held his chin high, as if he liked to look at things over his nose.

But he was not satisfied all the way through. He thought more of beating
Prosper than of getting 'Toinette. And he was not quite sure that he had
beaten him yet.

Perhaps the girl still liked Prosper a little. Perhaps she still thought
of his romances, and his chansons, and his fine, smooth words, and
missed them. Perhaps she was too silent and dull sometimes, when she
walked with Raoul; and sometimes she laughed too loud when he talked,
more at him than with him. Perhaps those St. Raymond fellows still
remembered the way his head stuck out of that cursed snow-drift, and
joked about it, and said how clever and quick the little Prosper was.
Perhaps--ah, MAUDIT! a thousand times perhaps! And only one way to
settle them, the old way, the sure way, and all the better now because
'Toinette must be on his side. She must understand for sure that the
bravest man in the parish had chosen her.

That was the summer of the building of the grand stone tower of the
church. The men of Abbeville did it themselves, with their own hands,
for the glory of God. They were keen about that, and the cure was the
keenest of them all. No sharing of that glory with workmen from Quebec,
if you please! Abbeville was only forty years old, but they already
understood the glory of God quite as well there as at Quebec, without
doubt. They could build their own tower, perfectly, and they would.
Besides, it would cost less.

Vaillantcoeur was the chief carpenter. He attended to the affair of
beams and timbers. Leclere was the chief mason. He directed the affair
of dressing the stones and laying them. That required a very careful
head, you understand, for the tower must be straight. In the floor
a little crookedness did not matter; but in the wall--that might be
serious. People have been killed by a falling tower. Of course, if
they were going into church, they would be sure of heaven. But then
think--what a disgrace for Abbeville!

Every one was glad that Leclere bossed the raising of the tower. They
admitted that he might not be brave, but he was assuredly careful.
Vaillantcoeur alone grumbled, and said the work went too slowly, and
even swore that the sockets for the beams were too shallow, or else too
deep, it made no difference which. That BETE Prosper made trouble always
by his poor work. But the friction never came to a blaze; for the cure
was pottering about the tower every day and all day long, and a few
words from him would make a quarrel go off in smoke.

"Softly, my boys!" he would say; "work smooth and you work fast. The
logs in the river run well when they run all the same way. But when two
logs cross each other, on the same rock--psst! a jam! The whole drive is
hung up! Do not run crossways, my children."

The walls rose steadily, straight as a steamboat pipe--ten, twenty,
thirty, forty feet; it was time to put in the two cross-girders, lay
the floor of the belfry, finish off the stonework, and begin the pointed
wooden spire. The cure had gone to Quebec that very day to buy the
shining plates of tin for the roof, and a beautiful cross of gilt for
the pinnacle.

Leclere was in front of the tower putting on his overalls. Vaillantcoeur
came up, swearing mad. Three or four other workmen were standing about.

"Look here, you Leclere," said he, "I tried one of the cross-girders
yesterday afternoon and it wouldn't go. The templet on the north is
crooked--crooked as your teeth. We had to let the girder down again. I
suppose we must trim it off some way, to get a level bearing, and make
the tower weak, just to match your sacre bad work, eh?"

"Well," said Prosper, pleasant and quiet enough, "I'm sorry for that,
Raoul. Perhaps I could put that templet straight, or perhaps the girder
might be a little warped and twisted, eh? What? Suppose we measure it."

Sure enough, they found the long timber was not half seasoned and had
corkscrewed itself out of shape at least three inches. Vaillantcoeur sat
on the sill of the doorway and did not even look at them while they were
measuring. When they called out to him what they had found, he strode
over to them.

"It's a dam' lie," he said, sullenly. "Prosper Leclere, you slipped the
string. None of your sacre cheating! I have enough of it already. Will
you fight, you cursed sneak?"

Prosper's face went gray, like the mortar in the trough. His fists
clenched and the cords on his neck stood out as if they were ropes. He
breathed hard. But he only said three words:

"No! Not here."

"Not here? Why not? There is room. The cure is away. Why not here?"

"It is the house of LE BON DIEU. Can we build it in hate?"

"POLISSON! You make an excuse. Then come to Girard's, and fight there."

Again Prosper held in for a moment, and spoke three words:

"No! Not now."

"Not now? But when, you heart of a hare? Will you sneak out of it until
you turn gray and die? When will you fight, little musk-rat?"

"When I have forgotten. When I am no more your friend."

Prosper picked up his trowel and went into the tower. Raoul bad-worded
him and every stone of his building from foundation to cornice, and then
went down the road to get a bottle of cognac.

An hour later he came back breathing out threatenings and slaughter,
strongly flavoured with raw spirits. Prosper was working quietly on the
top of the tower, at the side away from the road. He saw nothing until
Raoul, climbing up by the ladders on the inside, leaped on the platform
and rushed at him like a crazy lynx.

"Now!" he cried, "no hole to hide in here, rat! I'll squeeze the lies
out of you."

He gripped Prosper by the head, thrusting one thumb into his eye, and
pushing him backward on the scaffolding.

Blinded, half maddened by the pain, Prosper thought of nothing but
to get free. He swung his long arm upward and landed a heavy blow on
Raoul's face that dislocated the jaw; then twisting himself downward and
sideways, he fell in toward the wall. Raoul plunged forward, stumbled,
let go his hold, and pitched out from the tower, arms spread, clutching
the air.

Forty feet straight down! A moment--or was it an eternity?--of horrible
silence. Then the body struck the rough stones at the foot of the tower
with a thick, soft dunt, and lay crumpled up among them, without a
groan, without a movement.

When the other men, who had hurried up the ladders in terror, found
Leclere, he was peering over the edge of the scaffold, wiping the blood
from his eyes, trying to see down.

"I have killed him," he muttered, "my friend! He is smashed to death. I
am a murderer. Let me go. I must throw myself down!"

They had hard work to hold him back. As they forced him down the ladders
he trembled like a poplar.

But Vaillantcoeur was not dead. No; it was incredible--to fall forty
feet and not be killed--they talk of it yet all through the valley of
the Lake St. John--it was a miracle! But Vaillantcoeur had broken only
a nose, a collar-bone, and two ribs--for one like him that was but a
bagatelle. A good doctor from Chicoutimi, a few months of nursing, and
he would be on his feet again, almost as good a man as he had ever been.

It was Leclere who put himself in charge of this.

"It is my affair," he said--"my fault! It was not a fair place to fight.
Why did I strike? I must attend to this bad work."

"MAIS, SACRE BLEU!" they answered, "how could you help it? He forced
you. You did not want to be killed. That would be a little too much."

"No," he persisted, "this is my affair. Girard, you know my money is
with the notary. There is plenty. Raoul has not enough, perhaps not any.
But he shall want nothing--you understand--nothing! It is my affair, all
that he needs--but you shall not tell him--no! That is all."

Prosper had his way. But he did not see Vaillantcoeur after he was
carried home and put to bed in his cabin. Even if he had tried to do so,
it would have been impossible. He could not see anybody. One of his eyes
was entirely destroyed. The inflammation spread to the other, and all
through the autumn he lay in his house, drifting along the edge of
blindness, while Raoul lay in his house slowly getting well.

The cure went from one house to the other, but he did not carry any
messages between them. If any were sent one way they were not received.
And the other way, none were sent. Raoul did not speak of Prosper; and
if one mentioned his name, Raoul shut his mouth and made no answer.

To the cure, of course, it was a distress and a misery. To have a hatred
like this unhealed, was a blot on the parish; it was a shame, as well
as a sin. At last--it was already winter, the day before Christmas--the
cure made up his mind that he would put forth one more great effort.

"Look you, my son," he said to Prosper, "I am going this afternoon to
Raoul Vaillantcoeur to make the reconciliation. You shall give me a word
to carry to him. He shall hear it this time, I promise you. Shall I tell
him what you have done for him, how you have cared for him?"

"No, never," said Prosper; "you shall not take that word from me. It is
nothing. It will make worse trouble. I will never send it."

"What then?" said the priest. "Shall I tell him that you forgive him?"

"No, not that," answered Prosper, "that would be a foolish word. What
would that mean? It is not I who can forgive. I was the one who struck
hardest. It was he that fell from the tower."

"Well, then, choose the word for yourself. What shall it be? Come, I
promise you that he shall hear it. I will take with me the notary, and
the good man Girard, and the little Marie Antoinette. You shall hear an
answer. What message?"

"Mon pere," said Prosper, slowly, "you shall tell him just this. I,
Prosper Leclere, ask Raoul Vaillantcoeur that he will forgive me for not
fighting with him on the ground when he demanded it."

Yes, the message was given in precisely those words. Marie Antoinette
stood within the door, Bergeron and Girard at the foot of the bed, and
the cure spoke very clearly and firmly. Vaillantcoeur rolled on his
pillow and turned his face away. Then he sat up in bed, grunting a
little with the pain in his shoulder, which was badly set. His black
eyes snapped like the eyes of a wolverine in a corner.

"Forgive?" he said, "no, never. He is a coward. I will never forgive!"


A little later in the afternoon, when the rose of sunset lay on the
snowy hills, some one knocked at the door of Leclere's house.

"ENTREZ!" he cried. "Who is there? I see not very well by this light.
Who is it?"

"It is me," said 'Toinette, her cheeks rosier than the snow outside,
"nobody but me. I have come to ask you to tell me the rest about that
new carriage--do you remember?"




III

The voice in the canoe behind me ceased. The rain let up. The SLISH,
SLISH of the paddle stopped. The canoe swung sideways to the breeze. I
heard the RAP, RAP, RAP of a pipe on the gunwale, and the quick scratch
of a match on the under side of the thwart.

"What are you doing, Ferdinand?"

"I go to light the pipe, m'sieu'."

"Is the story finished?"

"But yes--but no--I know not, m'sieu'. As you will."

"But what did old Girard say when his daughter broke her engagement and
married a man whose eyes were spoiled?"

"He said that Leclere could see well enough to work with him in the
store."

"And what did Vaillantcoeur say when he lost his girl?"

"He said it was a cursed shame that one could not fight a blind man."

"And what did 'Toinette say?"

"She said she had chosen the bravest heart in Abbeville."

"And Prosper--what did he say?"

"M'sieu', I know not. He said it only to 'Toinette."




IV. THE GENTLE LIFE

Do you remember that fair little wood of silver birches on the West
Branch of the Neversink, somewhat below the place where the Biscuit
Brook runs in? There is a mossy terrace raised a couple of feet
above the water of a long, still pool; and a very pleasant spot for a
friendship-fire on the shingly beach below you; and a plenty of painted
trilliums and yellow violets and white foam-flowers to adorn your
woodland banquet, if it be spread in the month of May, when Mistress
Nature is given over to embroidery.

It was there, at Contentment Corner, that Ned Mason had promised to
meet me on a certain day for the noontide lunch and smoke and talk, he
fishing down Biscuit Brook, and I down the West Branch, until we came
together at the rendezvous. But he was late that day--good old Ned! He
was occasionally behind time on a trout stream. For he went about his
fishing very seriously; and if it was fine, the sport was a natural
occasion of delay. But if it was poor, he made it an occasion to sit
down to meditate upon the cause of his failure, and tried to overcome it
with many subtly reasoned changes of the fly--which is a vain thing to
do, but well adapted to make one forgetful of the flight of time.

So I waited for him near an hour, and then ate my half of the sandwiches
and boiled eggs, smoked a solitary pipe, and fell into a light sleep at
the foot of the biggest birch tree, an old and trusty friend of mine.
It seemed like a very slight sound that roused me: the snapping of a dry
twig in the thicket, or a gentle splash in the water, differing in some
indefinable way from the steady murmur of the stream; something it was,
I knew not what, that made me aware of some one coming down the brook.
I raised myself quietly on one elbow and looked up through the trees to
the head of the pool. "Ned will think that I have gone down long ago,"
I said to myself; "I will just lie here and watch him fish through this
pool, and see how he manages to spend so much time about it."

But it was not Ned's rod that I saw poking out through the bushes at the
bend in the brook. It was such an affair as I had never seen before upon
a trout stream: a majestic weapon at least sixteen feet long, made in
two pieces, neatly spliced together in the middle, and all painted a
smooth, glistening, hopeful green. The line that hung from the tip of it
was also green, but of a paler, more transparent colour, quite thick and
stiff where it left the rod, but tapering down towards the end, as if it
were twisted of strands of horse-hair, reduced in number, until, at
the hook, there were but two hairs. And the hook--there was no disguise
about that--it was an unabashed bait-hook, and well baited, too. Gently
the line swayed to and fro above the foaming water at the head of the
pool; quietly the bait settled down in the foam and ran with the current
around the edge of the deep eddy under the opposite bank; suddenly the
line straightened and tautened; sharply the tip of the long green rod
sprang upward, and the fisherman stepped out from the bushes to play his
fish.

Where had I seen such a figure before? The dress was strange and
quaint--broad, low shoes, gray woollen stockings, short brown breeches
tied at the knee with ribbons, a loose brown coat belted at the waist
like a Norfolk jacket; a wide, rolling collar with a bit of lace at the
edge, and a soft felt hat with a shady brim. It was a costume that,
with all its oddity, seemed wonderfully fit and familiar. And the
face? Certainly it was the face of an old friend. Never had I seen a
countenance of more quietness and kindliness and twinkling good humour.

"Well met, sir, and a pleasant day to you," cried the angler, as his
eyes lighted on me. "Look you, I have hold of a good fish; I pray you
put that net under him, and touch not my line, for if you do, then we
break all. Well done, sir; I thank you. Now we have him safely landed.
Truly this is a lovely one; the best that I have taken in these waters.
See how the belly shines, here as yellow as a marsh-marigold, and there
as white as a foam-flower. Is not the hand of Divine Wisdom as skilful
in the colouring of a fish as in the painting of the manifold blossoms
that sweeten these wild forests?"

"Indeed it is," said I, "and this is the biggest trout that I have seen
caught in the upper waters of the Neversink. It is certainly eighteen
inches long, and should weigh close upon two pounds and a half."

"More than that," he answered, "if I mistake not. But I observe that you
call it a trout. To my mind, it seems more like a char, as do all the
fish that I have caught in your stream. Look here upon these curious
water-markings that run through the dark green of the back, and these
enamellings of blue and gold upon the side. Note, moreover, how bright
and how many are the red spots, and how each one of them is encircled
with a ring of purple. Truly it is a fish of rare beauty, and of high
esteem with persons of note. I would gladly know if it he as good to the
taste as I have heard it reputed."

"It is even better," I replied; "as you shall find, if you will but try
it."

Then a curious impulse came to me, to which I yielded with as little
hesitation or misgiving, at the time, as if it were the most natural
thing in the world.

"You seem a stranger in this part of the country, sir," said I; "but
unless I am mistaken you are no stranger to me. Did you not use to go
a-fishing in the New River, with honest Nat. and R. Roe, many years ago?
And did they not call you Izaak Walton?"

His eyes smiled pleasantly at me and a little curve of merriment played
around his lips. "It is a secret which I thought not to have been
discovered here," he said; "but since you have lit upon it, I will not
deny it."

Now how it came to pass that I was not astonished nor dismayed at this,
I cannot explain. But so it was; and the only feeling of which I
was conscious was a strong desire to detain this visitor as long
as possible, and have some talk with him. So I grasped at the only
expedient that flashed into my mind.

"Well, then, sir," I said, "you are most heartily welcome, and I trust
you will not despise the only hospitality I have to offer. If you will
sit down here among these birch trees in Contentment Corner, I will give
you half of a fisherman's luncheon, and will cook your char for you on
a board before an open wood-fire, if you are not in a hurry. Though I
belong to a nation which is reported to be curious, I will promise to
trouble you with no inquisitive questions; and if you will but talk to
me at your will, you shall find me a ready listener."

So we made ourselves comfortable on the shady bank, and while I busied
myself in splitting the fish and pinning it open on a bit of board that
I had found in a pile of driftwood, and setting it up before the fire to
broil, my new companion entertained me with the sweetest and friendliest
talk that I had ever heard.

"To speak without offence, sir," he began, "there was a word in your
discourse a moment ago that seemed strange to me. You spoke of being 'in
a hurry'; and that is an expression which is unfamiliar to my ears; but
if it mean the same as being in haste, then I must tell you that this
is a thing which, in my judgment, honest anglers should learn to forget,
and have no dealings with it. To be in haste is to be in anxiety and
distress of mind; it is to mistrust Providence, and to doubt that the
issue of all events is in wiser hands than ours; it is to disturb the
course of nature, and put overmuch confidence in the importance of our
own endeavours.

"For how much of the evil that is in the world cometh from this plaguy
habit of being in haste! The haste to get riches, the haste to
climb upon some pinnacle of worldly renown, the haste to resolve
mysteries--from these various kinds of haste are begotten no small
part of the miseries and afflictions whereby the children of men are
tormented: such as quarrels and strifes among those who would over-reach
one another in business; envyings and jealousies among those who
would outshine one another in rich apparel and costly equipage; bloody
rebellions and cruel wars among those who would obtain power over their
fellow-men; cloudy disputations and bitter controversies among those who
would fain leave no room for modest ignorance and lowly faith among the
secrets of religion; and by all these miseries of haste the heart grows
weary, and is made weak and dull, or else hard and angry, while it
dwelleth in the midst of them.

"But let me tell you that an angler's occupation is a good cure for
these evils, if for no other reason, because it gently dissuadeth us
from haste and leadeth us away from feverish anxieties into those ways
which are pleasantness and those paths which are peace. For an angler
cannot force his fortune by eagerness, nor better it by discontent. He
must wait upon the weather, and the height of the water, and the hunger
of the fish, and many other accidents of which he has no control. If
he would angle well, he must not be in haste. And if he be in haste,
he will do well to unlearn it by angling, for I think there is no surer
method.

"This fair tree that shadows us from the sun hath grown many years
in its place without more unhappiness than the loss of its leaves in
winter, which the succeeding season doth generously repair; and shall we
be less contented in the place where God hath planted us? or shall there
go less time to the making of a man than to the growth of a tree? This
stream floweth wimpling and laughing down to the great sea which it
knoweth not; yet it doth not fret because the future is hidden;
and doubtless it were wise in us to accept the mysteries of life as
cheerfully and go forward with a merry heart, considering that we know
enough to make us happy and keep us honest for to-day. A man should be
well content if he can see so far ahead of him as the next bend in the
stream. What lies beyond, let him trust in the hand of God.

"But as concerning riches, wherein should you and I be happier, this
pleasant afternoon of May, had we all the gold in Croesus his coffers?
Would the sun shine for us more bravely, or the flowers give forth a
sweeter breath, or yonder warbling vireo, hidden in her leafy choir,
send down more pure and musical descants, sweetly attuned by natural
magic to woo and win our thoughts from vanity and hot desires into a
harmony with the tranquil thoughts of God? And as for fame and power,
trust me, sir, I have seen too many men in my time that lived very
unhappily though their names were upon all lips, and died very sadly
though their power was felt in many lands; too many of these great
ones have I seen that spent their days in disquietude and ended them in
sorrow, to make me envy their conditions or hasten to rival them. Nor do
I think that, by all their perturbations and fightings and runnings to
and fro, the world hath been much bettered, or even greatly changed. The
colour and complexion of mortal life, in all things that are essential,
remain the same under Cromwell or under Charles. The goodness and mercy
of God are still over all His works, whether Presbytery or Episcopacy
be set up as His interpreter. Very quietly and peacefully have I lived
under several polities, civil and ecclesiastical, and under all there
was room enough to do my duty and love my friends and go a-fishing.
And let me tell you, sir, that in the state wherein I now find myself,
though there are many things of which I may not speak to you, yet one
thing is clear: if I had made haste in my mortal concerns, I should not
have saved time, but lost it; for all our affairs are under one sure
dominion which moveth them forward to their concordant end: wherefore
'HE THAT BELIEVETH SHALL NOT MAKE HASTE,' and, above all, not when he
goeth a-angling.

"But tell me, I pray you, is not this char cooked yet? Methinks the time
is somewhat overlong for the roasting. The fragrant smell of the cookery
gives me an eagerness to taste this new dish. Not that I am in haste,
but--

"Well, it is done; and well done, too! Marry, the flesh of this fish is
as red as rose-leaves, and as sweet as if he had fed on nothing else.
The flavour of smoke from the fire is but slight, and it takes nothing
from the perfection of the dish, but rather adds to it, being clean and
delicate. I like not these French cooks who make all dishes in disguise,
and set them forth with strange foreign savours, like a masquerade. Give
me my food in its native dress, even though it be a little dry. If we
had but a cup of sack, now, or a glass of good ale, and a pipeful of
tobacco?

"What! you have an abundance of the fragrant weed in your pouch? Sir, I
thank you very heartily! You entertain me like a prince. Not like King
James, be it understood, who despised tobacco and called it a 'lively
image and pattern of hell'; nor like the Czar of Russia who commanded
that all who used it should have their noses cut off; but like good
Queen Bess of glorious memory, who disdained not the incense of the
pipe, and some say she used one herself; though for my part I think the
custom of smoking one that is more fitting for men, whose frailty and
need of comfort are well known, than for that fairer sex whose innocent
and virgin spirits stand less in want of creature consolations.

"But come, let us not trouble our enjoyment with careful discrimination
of others' scruples. Your tobacco is rarely good; I'll warrant it comes
from that province of Virginia which was named for the Virgin Queen; and
while we smoke together, let me call you, for this hour, my Scholar;
and so I will give you four choice rules for the attainment of that
unhastened quietude of mind whereof we did lately discourse.

"First: you shall learn to desire nothing in the world so much but that
you can be happy without it.

"Second: you shall seek that which you desire only by such means as are
fair and lawful, and this will leave you without bitterness towards men
or shame before God.

"Third: you shall take pleasure in the time while you are seeking, even
though you obtain not immediately that which you seek; for the purpose
of a journey is not only to arrive at the goal, but also to find
enjoyment by the way.

"Fourth: when you attain that which you have desired, you shall think
more of the kindness of your fortune than of the greatness of your
skill. This will make you grateful, and ready to share with others
that which Providence hath bestowed upon you; and truly this is both
reasonable and profitable, for it is but little that any of us would
catch in this world were not our luck better than our deserts.

"And to these Four Rules I will add yet another--Fifth: when you smoke
your pipe with a good conscience, trouble not yourself because there are
men in the world who will find fault with you for so doing. If you wait
for a pleasure at which no sour-complexioned soul hath ever girded, you
will wait long, and go through life with a sad and anxious mind. But
I think that God is best pleased with us when we give little heed to
scoffers, and enjoy His gifts with thankfulness and an easy heart.

"Well, Scholar, I have almost tired myself, and, I fear, more than
almost tired you. But this pipe is nearly burned out, and the few short
whiffs that are left in it shall put a period to my too long discourse.
Let me tell you, then, that there be some men in the world who hold not
with these my opinions. They profess that a life of contention and
noise and public turmoil, is far higher than a life of quiet work and
meditation. And so far as they follow their own choice honestly and with
a pure mind, I doubt not that it is as good for them as mine is for me,
and I am well pleased that every man do enjoy his own opinion. But so
far as they have spoken ill of me and my opinions, I do hold it a thing
of little consequence, except that I am sorry that they have thereby
embittered their own hearts.

"For this is the punishment of men who malign and revile those that
differ from them in religion, or prefer another way of living; their
revilings, by so much as they spend their wit and labour to make them
shrewd and bitter, do draw all the sweet and wholesome sap out of their
lives and turn it into poison; and so they become vessels of mockery and
wrath, remembered chiefly for the evil things that they have said with
cleverness.

"For be sure of this, Scholar, the more a man giveth himself to hatred
in this world, the more will he find to hate. But let us rather give
ourselves to charity, and if we have enemies (and what honest man hath
them not?) let them be ours, since they must, but let us not be theirs,
since we know better.

"There was one Franck, a trooper of Cromwell's, who wrote ill of me,
saying that I neither understood the subjects whereof I discoursed nor
believed the things that I said, being both silly and pretentious. It
would have been a pity if it had been true. There was also one Leigh
Hunt, a maker of many books, who used one day a bottle of ink whereof
the gall was transfused into his blood, so that he wrote many hard words
of me, setting forth selfishness and cruelty and hypocrisy as if they
were qualities of my disposition. God knew, even then, whether these
things were true of me; and if they were not true, it would have been a
pity to have answered them; but it would have been still more a pity to
be angered by them. But since that time Master Hunt and I have met each
other; yes, and Master Franck, too; and we have come very happily to a
better understanding.

"Trust me, Scholar, it is the part of wisdom to spend little of your
time upon the things that vex and anger you, and much of your time upon
the things that bring you quietness and confidence and good cheer. A
friend made is better than an enemy punished. There is more of God in
the peaceable beauty of this little wood-violet than in all the angry
disputations of the sects. We are nearer heaven when we listen to the
birds than when we quarrel with our fellow-men. I am sure that none can
enter into the spirit of Christ, his evangel, save those who willingly
follow his invitation when he says, 'COME YE YOURSELVES APART INTO A
LONELY PLACE, AND REST A WHILE.' For since his blessed kingdom was first
established in the green fields, by the lakeside, with humble fishermen
for its subjects, the easiest way into it hath ever been through the
wicket-gate of a lowly and grateful fellowship with nature. He that
feels not the beauty and blessedness and peace of the woods and meadows
that God hath bedecked with flowers for him even while he is yet a
sinner, how shall he learn to enjoy the unfading bloom of the celestial
country if he ever become a saint?

"No, no, sir, he that departeth out of this world without perceiving
that it is fair and full of innocent sweetness hath done little honour
to the every-day miracles of divine beneficence; and though by mercy he
may obtain an entrance to heaven, it will be a strange place to him; and
though he have studied all that is written in men's books of divinity,
yet because he hath left the book of Nature unturned, he will have
much to learn and much to forget. Do you think that to be blind to the
beauties of earth prepareth the heart to behold the glories of heaven?
Nay, Scholar, I know that you are not of that opinion. But I can tell
you another thing which perhaps you knew not. The heart that is blest
with the glories of heaven ceaseth not to remember and to love the
beauties of this world. And of this love I am certain, because I feel
it, and glad because it is a great blessing.

"There are two sorts of seeds sown in our remembrance by what we call
the hand of fortune, the fruits of which do not wither, but grow sweeter
forever and ever. The first is the seed of innocent pleasures, received
in gratitude and enjoyed with good companions, of which pleasures we
never grow weary of thinking, because they have enriched our hearts. The
second is the seed of pure and gentle sorrows, borne in submission
and with faithful love, and these also we never forget, but we come to
cherish them with gladness instead of grief, because we see them changed
into everlasting joys. And how this may be I cannot tell you now, for
you would not understand me. But that it is so, believe me: for if you
believe, you shall one day see it yourself.

"But come, now, our friendly pipes are long since burned out. Hark, how
sweetly the tawny thrush in yonder thicket touches her silver harp for
the evening hymn! I will follow the stream downward, but do you tarry
here until the friend comes for whom you were waiting. I think we shall
all three meet one another, somewhere, after sunset."

I watched the gray hat and the old brown coat and long green rod
disappear among the trees around the curve of the stream. Then Ned's
voice sounded in my ears, and I saw him standing above me laughing.

"Hallo, old man," he said, "you're a sound sleeper! I hope you've had
good luck, and pleasant dreams."




V. A FRIEND OF JUSTICE




I

It was the black patch over his left eye that made all the trouble. In
reality he was of a disposition most peaceful and propitiating, a friend
of justice and fair dealing, strongly inclined to a domestic life, and
capable of extreme devotion. He had a vivid sense of righteousness, it
is true, and any violation of it was apt to heat his indignation to the
boiling-point. When this occurred he was strong in the back, stiff
in the neck, and fearless of consequences. But he was always open to
friendly overtures and ready to make peace with honour.

Singularly responsive to every touch of kindness, desirous of affection,
secretly hungry for caresses, he had a heart framed for love and
tranquillity. But nature saw fit to put a black patch over his left eye;
wherefore his days were passed in the midst of conflict and he lived the
strenuous life.

How this sinister mark came to him, he never knew. Indeed it is not
likely that he had any idea of the part that it played in his career.
The attitude that the world took toward him from the beginning, an
attitude of aggressive mistrust,--the role that he was expected and
practically forced to assume in the drama of existence, the role of
a hero of interminable strife,--must have seemed to him altogether
mysterious and somewhat absurd. But his part was fixed by the black
patch. It gave him an aspect so truculent and forbidding that all
the elements of warfare gathered around him as hornets around a sugar
barrel, and his appearance in public was like the raising of a flag for
battle.

"You see that Pichou," said MacIntosh, the Hudson's Bay agent at Mingan,
"you see yon big black-eye deevil? The savages call him Pichou because
he's ugly as a lynx--'LAID COMME UN PICHOU.' Best sledge-dog and the
gurliest tyke on the North Shore. Only two years old and he can lead
a team already. But, man, he's just daft for the fighting. Fought his
mother when he was a pup and lamed her for life. Fought two of his
brothers and nigh killed 'em both. Every dog in the place has a grudge
at him, and hell's loose as oft as he takes a walk. I'm loath to part
with him, but I'll be selling him gladly for fifty dollars to any man
that wants a good sledge-dog, eh?--and a bit collie-shangie every week."

Pichou had heard his name, and came trotting up to the corner of the
store where MacIntosh was talking with old Grant the chief factor, who
was on a tour of inspection along the North Shore, and Dan Scott,
the agent from Seven Islands, who had brought the chief down in his
chaloupe. Pichou did not understand what his master had been saying
about him: but he thought he was called, and he had a sense of duty;
and besides, he was wishful to show proper courtesy to well-dressed and
respectable strangers. He was a great dog, thirty inches high at the
shoulder; broad-chested, with straight, sinewy legs; and covered with
thick, wavy, cream-coloured hair from the tips of his short ears to the
end of his bushy tail--all except the left side of his face. That
was black from ear to nose--coal-black; and in the centre of this
storm-cloud his eye gleamed like fire.

What did Pichou know about that ominous sign? No one had ever told
him. He had no looking-glass. He ran up to the porch where the men
were sitting, as innocent as a Sunday-school scholar coming to the
superintendent's desk to receive a prize. But when old Grant, who had
grown pursy and nervous from long living on the fat of the land at
Ottawa, saw the black patch and the gleaming eye, he anticipated evil;
so he hitched one foot up on the porch, crying "Get out!" and with the
other foot he planted a kick on the side of the dog's head.

Pichou's nerve-centres had not been shaken by high living. They acted
with absolute precision and without a tremor. His sense of justice
was automatic, and his teeth were fixed through the leg of the chief
factor's boot, just below the calf.

For two minutes there was a small chaos in the post of the Honourable
Hudson's Bay Company at Mingan. Grant howled bloody murder; MacIntosh
swore in three languages and yelled for his dog-whip; three Indians and
two French-Canadians wielded sticks and fence-pickets. But order did not
arrive until Dan Scott knocked the burning embers from his big pipe on
the end of the dog's nose. Pichou gasped, let go his grip, shook
his head, and loped back to his quarters behind the barn, bruised,
blistered, and intolerably perplexed by the mystery of life.

As he lay on the sand, licking his wounds, he remembered many strange
things. First of all, there was the trouble with his mother.

She was a Labrador Husky, dirty yellowish gray, with bristling neck,
sharp fangs, and green eyes, like a wolf. Her name was Babette. She had
a fiendish temper, but no courage. His father was supposed to be a huge
black and white Newfoundland that came over in a schooner from Miquelon.
Perhaps it was from him that the black patch was inherited. And perhaps
there were other things in the inheritance, too, which came from this
nobler strain of blood Pichon's unwillingness to howl with the other
dogs when they made night hideous; his silent, dignified ways; his sense
of fair play; his love of the water; his longing for human society and
friendship.

But all this was beyond Pichou's horizon, though it was within his
nature. He remembered only that Babette had taken a hate for him, almost
from the first, and had always treated him worse than his all-yellow
brothers. She would have starved him if she could. Once when he was half
grown, she fell upon him for some small offence and tried to throttle
him. The rest of the pack looked on snarling and slavering. He caught
Babette by the fore-leg and broke the bone. She hobbled away, shrieking.
What else could he do? Must a dog let himself be killed by his mother?

As for his brothers--was it fair that two of them should fall foul of
him about the rabbit which he had tracked and caught and killed? He
would have shared it with them, if they had asked him, for they ran
behind him on the trail. But when they both set their teeth in his
neck, there was nothing to do but to lay them both out: which he did.
Afterward he was willing enough to make friends, but they bristled and
cursed whenever he came near them.

It was the same with everybody. If he went out for a walk on the beach,
Vigneau's dogs or Simard's dogs regarded it as an insult, and there
was a fight. Men picked up sticks, or showed him the butt-end of their
dog-whips, when he made friendly approaches. With the children it was
different; they seemed to like him a little; but never did he follow one
of them that a mother did not call from the house-door: "Pierre! Marie!
come away quick! That bad dog will bite you!" Once when he ran down to
the shore to watch the boat coming in from the mail-steamer, the
purser had refused to let the boat go to land, and called out, "M'sieu'
MacIntosh, you git no malle dis trip, eef you not call avay dat dam'
dog."

True, the Minganites seemed to take a certain kind of pride in his
reputation. They had brought Chouart's big brown dog, Gripette, down
from the Sheldrake to meet him; and after the meeting was over and
Gripette had been revived with a bucket of water, everybody, except
Chouart, appeared to be in good humour. The purser of the steamer had
gone to the trouble of introducing a famous BOULE-DOGGE from Quebec,
on the trip after that on which he had given such a hostile opinion of
Pichon. The bulldog's intentions were unmistakable; he expressed them
the moment he touched the beach; and when they carried him back to the
boat on a fish-barrow many flattering words were spoken about Pichou. He
was not insensible to them. But these tributes to his prowess were not
what he really wanted. His secret desire was for tokens of affection.
His position was honourable, but it was intolerably lonely and full of
trouble. He sought peace and he found fights.

While he meditated dimly on these things, patiently trying to get the
ashes of Dan Scott's pipe out of his nose, his heart was cast down
and his spirit was disquieted within him. Was ever a decent dog so
mishandled before? Kicked for nothing by a fat stranger, and then beaten
by his own master!

In the dining-room of the Post, Grant was slowly and reluctantly
allowing himself to be convinced that his injuries were not fatal.
During this process considerable Scotch whiskey was consumed and there
was much conversation about the viciousness of dogs. Grant insisted that
Pichou was mad and had a devil. MacIntosh admitted the devil, but firmly
denied the madness. The question was, whether the dog should be killed
or not; and over this point there was like to be more bloodshed, until
Dan Scott made his contribution to the argument: "If you shoot him, how
can you tell whether he is mad or not? I'll give thirty dollars for him
and take him home."

"If you do," said Grant, "you'll sail alone, and I'll wait for the
steamer. Never a step will I go in the boat with the crazy brute that
bit me."

"Suit yourself," said Dan Scott. "You kicked before he bit."

At daybreak he whistled the dog down to the chaloupe, hoisted sail, and
bore away for Seven Islands. There was a secret bond of sympathy between
the two companions on that hundred-mile voyage in an open boat. Neither
of them realized what it was, but still it was there.

Dan Scott knew what it meant to stand alone, to face a small hostile
world, to have a surfeit of fighting. The station of Seven Islands
was the hardest in all the district of the ancient POSTES DU ROI.
The Indians were surly and crafty. They knew all the tricks of the
fur-trade. They killed out of season, and understood how to make a
rusty pelt look black. The former agent had accommodated himself to his
customers. He had no objection to shutting one of his eyes, so long as
the other could see a chance of doing a stroke of business for himself.
He also had a convenient weakness in the sense of smell, when there was
an old stock of pork to work off on the savages. But all of Dan Scott's
senses were strong, especially his sense of justice, and he came into
the Post resolved to play a straight game with both hands, toward the
Indians and toward the Honourable H. B. Company. The immediate results
were reproofs from Ottawa and revilings from Seven Islands. Furthermore
the free traders were against him because he objected to their selling
rum to the savages.

It must be confessed that Dan Scott had a way with him that looked
pugnacious. He was quick in his motions and carried his shoulders well
thrown back. His voice was heavy. He used short words and few of them.
His eyebrow's were thick and they met over his nose. Then there was
a broad white scar at one corner of his mouth. His appearance was
not prepossessing, but at heart he was a philanthropist and a
sentimentalist. He thirsted for gratitude and affection on a just basis.
He had studied for eighteen months in the medical school at Montreal,
and his chief delight was to practise gratuitously among the sick and
wounded of the neighbourhood. His ambition for Seven Islands was to
make it a northern suburb of Paradise, and for himself to become a
full-fledged physician. Up to this time it seemed as if he would have to
break more bones than he could set; and the closest connection of Seven
Islands appeared to be with Purgatory.

First, there had been a question of suzerainty between Dan Scott and the
local representative of the Astor family, a big half-breed descendant
of a fur-trader, who was the virtual chief of the Indians hunting on
the Ste. Marguerite: settled by knock-down arguments. Then there was a
controversy with Napoleon Bouchard about the right to put a fish-house
on a certain part of the beach: settled with a stick, after Napoleon had
drawn a knife. Then there was a running warfare with Virgile and Ovide
Boulianne, the free traders, who were his rivals in dealing with the
Indians for their peltry: still unsettled. After this fashion the record
of his relations with his fellow-citizens at Seven Islands was made
up. He had their respect, but not their affection. He was the only
Protestant, the only English-speaker, the most intelligent man, as well
as the hardest hitter in the place, and he was very lonely. Perhaps it
was this that made him take a fancy to Pichou. Their positions in the
world were not unlike. He was not the first man who has wanted sympathy
and found it in a dog.

Alone together, in the same boat, they made friends with each other
easily. At first the remembrance of the hot pipe left a little suspicion
in Pichou's mind; but this was removed by a handsome apology in the
shape of a chunk of bread and a slice of meat from Dan Scott's lunch.
After this they got on together finely. It was the first time in his
life that Pichou had ever spent twenty-four hours away from other dogs;
it was also the first time he had ever been treated like a gentleman.
All that was best in him responded to the treatment. He could not have
been more quiet and steady in the boat if he had been brought up to a
seafaring life. When Dan Scott called him and patted him on the head,
the dog looked up in the man's face as if he had found his God. And
the man, looking down into the eye that was not disfigured by the black
patch, saw something that he had been seeking for a long time.

All day the wind was fair and strong from the southeast. The chaloupe
ran swiftly along the coast past the broad mouth of the River
Saint-Jean, with its cluster of white cottages past the hill-encircled
bay of the River Magpie, with its big fish-houses past the fire-swept
cliffs of Riviere-au-Tonnerre, and the turbulent, rocky shores of the
Sheldrake: past the silver cascade of the Riviere-aux-Graines, and the
mist of the hidden fall of the Riviere Manitou: past the long, desolate
ridges of Cap Cormorant, where, at sunset, the wind began to droop away,
and the tide was contrary So the chaloupe felt its way cautiously toward
the corner of the coast where the little Riviere-a-la-Truite comes
tumbling in among the brown rocks, and found a haven for the night in
the mouth of the river.

There was only one human dwelling-place in sight As far as the eye
could sweep, range after range of uninhabitable hills covered with the
skeletons of dead forests; ledge after ledge of ice-worn granite thrust
out like fangs into the foaming waves of the gulf. Nature, with her
teeth bare and her lips scarred: this was the landscape. And in the
midst of it, on a low hill above the murmuring river, surrounded by the
blanched trunks of fallen trees, and the blackened debris of wood and
moss, a small, square, weather-beaten palisade of rough-hewn spruce, and
a patch of the bright green leaves and white flowers of the dwarf cornel
lavishing their beauty on a lonely grave. This was the only habitation
in sight--the last home of the Englishman, Jack Chisholm, whose story
has yet to be told.

In the shelter of this hill Dan Scott cooked his supper and shared it
with Pichou. When night was dark he rolled himself in his blanket,
and slept in the stern of the boat, with the dog at his side. Their
friendship was sealed.

The next morning the weather was squally and full of sudden anger. They
crept out with difficulty through the long rollers that barred the tiny
harbour, and beat their way along the coast. At Moisie they must run far
out into the gulf to avoid the treacherous shoals, and to pass beyond
the furious race of white-capped billows that poured from the great
river for miles into the sea. Then they turned and made for the group of
half-submerged mountains and scattered rocks that Nature, in some freak
of fury, had thrown into the throat of Seven Islands Bay. That was a
difficult passage. The black shores were swept by headlong tides. Tusks
of granite tore the waves. Baffled and perplexed, the wind flapped and
whirled among the cliffs. Through all this the little boat buffeted
bravely on till she reached the point of the Gran Boule. Then a strange
thing happened.

The water was lumpy; the evening was growing thick; a swirl of the
tide and a shift of the wind caught the chaloupe and swung her suddenly
around. The mainsail jibed, and before he knew how it happened Dan Scott
was overboard. He could swim but clumsily. The water blinded him, choked
him, dragged him down. Then he felt Pichou gripping him by the shoulder,
buoying him up, swimming mightily toward the chaloupe which hung
trembling in the wind a few yards away. At last they reached it and the
man climbed over the stern and pulled the dog after him. Dan Scott lay
in the bottom of the boat, shivering, dazed, until he felt the dog's
cold nose and warm breath against his cheek. He flung his arm around
Pichon's neck.

"They said you were mad! God, if more men were mad like you!"




II


Pichou's work at Seven Islands was cut out for him on a generous scale.
It is true that at first he had no regular canine labour to perform,
for it was summer. Seven months of the year, on the North Shore, a
sledge-dog's occupation is gone. He is the idlest creature in the
universe.

But Pichou, being a new-comer, had to win his footing in the community;
and that was no light task. With the humans it was comparatively easy.
At the outset they mistrusted him on account of his looks. Virgile
Boulianne asked: "Why did you buy such an ugly dog?" Ovide, who was
the wit of the family, said: "I suppose M'sieu' Scott got a present for
taking him."

"It's a good dog," said Dan Scott. "Treat him well and he'll treat you
well. Kick him and I kick you."

Then he told what had happened off the point of Gran' Boule. The
village decided to accept Pichou at his master's valuation. Moderate
friendliness, with precautions, was shown toward him by everybody,
except Napoleon Bouchard, whose distrust was permanent and took the
form of a stick. He was a fat, fussy man; fat people seemed to have no
affinity for Pichou.

But while the relations with the humans of Seven Islands were soon
established on a fair footing, with the canines Pichou had a very
different affair. They were not willing to accept any recommendations
as to character. They judged for themselves; and they judged by
appearances; and their judgment was utterly hostile to Pichou.

They decided that he was a proud dog, a fierce dog, a bad dog, a
fighter. He must do one of two things: stay at home in the yard of the
Honourable H. B. Company, which is a thing that no self-respecting dog
would do in the summer-time, when cod-fish heads are strewn along the
beach; or fight his way from one end of the village to the other, which
Pichou promptly did, leaving enemies behind every fence. Huskies never
forget a grudge. They are malignant to the core. Hatred is the wine of
cowardly hearts. This is as true of dogs as it is of men.

Then Pichou, having settled his foreign relations, turned his attention
to matters at home. There were four other dogs in Dan Scott's team. They
did not want Pichou for a leader, and he knew it. They were bitter
with jealousy. The black patch was loathsome to them. They treated
him disrespectfully, insultingly, grossly. Affairs came to a head
when Pecan, a rusty gray dog who had great ambitions and little sense,
disputed Pichou's tenure of a certain ham-bone. Dan Scott looked on
placidly while the dispute was terminated. Then he washed the blood and
sand from the gashes on Pecan's shoulder, and patted Pichou on the head.

"Good dog," he said. "You're the boss."

There was no further question about Pichou's leadership of the team. But
the obedience of his followers was unwilling and sullen. There was no
love in it. Imagine an English captain, with a Boer company, campaigning
in the Ashantee country, and you will have a fair idea of Pichou's
position at Seven Islands.

He did not shrink from its responsibilities. There were certain reforms
in the community which seemed to him of vital importance, and he put
them through.

First of all, he made up his mind that there ought to be peace and order
on the village street. In the yards of the houses that were strung along
it there should be home rule, and every dog should deal with trespassers
as he saw fit. Also on the beach, and around the fish-shanties, and
under the racks where the cod were drying, the right of the strong jaw
should prevail, and differences of opinion should be adjusted in
the old-fashioned way. But on the sandy road, bordered with a broken
board-walk, which ran between the houses and the beach, courtesy and
propriety must be observed. Visitors walked there. Children played
there. It was the general promenade. It must be kept peaceful and
decent. This was the First Law of the Dogs of Seven Islands. If two dogs
quarrel on the street they must go elsewhere to settle it. It was highly
unpopular, but Pichou enforced it with his teeth.

The Second Law was equally unpopular: No stealing from the Honourable H.
B. Company. If a man bought bacon or corned-beef or any other delicacy,
and stored it an insecure place, or if he left fish on the beach over
night, his dogs might act according to their inclination. Though Pichou
did not understand how honest dogs could steal from their own master,
he was willing to admit that this was their affair. His affair was
that nobody should steal anything from the Post. It cost him many night
watches, and some large battles to carry it out, but he did it. In the
course of time it came to pass that the other dogs kept away from the
Post altogether, to avoid temptations; and his own team spent most of
their free time wandering about to escape discipline.

The Third Law was this. Strange dogs must be decently treated as long
as they behave decently. This was contrary to all tradition, but
Pichou insisted upon it. If a strange dog wanted to fight he should be
accommodated with an antagonist of his own size. If he did not want to
fight he should be politely smelled and allowed to pass through.

This Law originated on a day when a miserable, long-legged, black cur,
a cross between a greyhound and a water-spaniel, strayed into Seven
Islands from heaven knows where--weary, desolate, and bedraggled. All
the dogs in the place attacked the homeless beggar. There was a howling
fracas on the beach; and when Pichou arrived, the trembling cur was
standing up to the neck in the water, facing a semicircle of snarling,
snapping bullies who dared not venture out any farther. Pichou had no
fear of the water. He swam out to the stranger, paid the smelling
salute as well as possible under the circumstances, encouraged the poor
creature to come ashore, warned off the other dogs, and trotted by the
wanderer's side for miles down the beach until they disappeared around
the point. What reward Pichou got for this polite escort, I do not know.
But I saw him do the gallant deed; and I suppose this was the origin
of the well-known and much-resisted Law of Strangers' Rights in Seven
Islands.

The most recalcitrant subjects with whom Pichou had to deal in all these
matters were the team of Ovide Boulianne. There were five of them, and
up to this time they had been the best team in the village. They had one
virtue: under the whip they could whirl a sledge over the snow farther
and faster than a horse could trot in a day. But they had innumerable
vices. Their leader, Carcajou, had a fleece like a merino ram. But under
this coat of innocence he carried a heart so black that he would bite
while he was wagging his tail. This smooth devil, and his four followers
like unto himself, had sworn relentless hatred to Pichou, and they made
his life difficult.

But his great and sufficient consolation for all toils and troubles was
the friendship with his master. In the long summer evenings, when Dan
Scott was making up his accounts in the store, or studying his pocket
cyclopaedia of medicine in the living-room of the Post, with its
low beams and mysterious green-painted cupboards, Pichou would lie
contentedly at his feet. In the frosty autumnal mornings, when the brant
were flocking in the marshes at the head of the bay, they would go out
hunting together in a skiff. And who could lie so still as Pichou when
the game was approaching? Or who could spring so quickly and joyously to
retrieve a wounded bird? But best of all were the long walks on Sunday
afternoons, on the yellow beach that stretched away toward the Moisie,
or through the fir-forest behind the Pointe des Chasseurs. Then master
and dog had fellowship together in silence. To the dumb companion it was
like walking with his God in the garden in the cool of the day.

When winter came, and snow fell, and waters froze, Pichou's serious
duties began. The long, slim COMETIQUE, with its curving prow, and its
runners of whalebone, was put in order. The harness of caribou-hide
was repaired and strengthened. The dogs, even the most vicious of them,
rejoiced at the prospect of doing the one thing that they could do best.
Each one strained at his trace as if he would drag the sledge alone.
Then the long tandem was straightened out, Dan Scott took his place
on the low seat, cracked his whip, shouted "POUITTE! POUITTE!" and the
equipage darted along the snowy track like a fifty-foot arrow.

Pichou was in the lead, and he showed his metal from the start. No need
of the terrible FOUET to lash him forward or to guide his course. A
word was enough. "Hoc! Hoc! Hoc!" and he swung to the right, avoiding an
air-hole. "Re-re! Re-re!" and he veered to the left, dodging a heap of
broken ice. Past the mouth of the Ste. Marguerite, twelve miles;
past Les Jambons, twelve miles more; past the River of Rocks and La
Pentecote, fifteen miles more; into the little hamlet of Dead Men's
Point, behind the Isle of the Wise Virgin, whither the amateur doctor
had been summoned by telegraph to attend a patient with a broken
arm--forty-three miles for the first day's run! Not bad. Then the dogs
got their food for the day, one dried fish apiece; and at noon the next
day, reckless of bleeding feet, they flew back over the same track, and
broke their fast at Seven Islands before eight o'clock. The ration was
the same, a single fish; always the same, except when it was varied by
a cube of ancient, evil-smelling, potent whale's flesh, which a dog can
swallow at a single gulp. Yet the dogs of the North Shore are never
so full of vigour, courage, and joy of life as when the sledges are
running. It is in summer, when food is plenty and work slack, that they
sicken and die.

Pichou's leadership of his team became famous. Under his discipline
the other dogs developed speed and steadiness. One day they made the
distance to the Godbout in a single journey, a wonderful run of over
eighty miles. But they loved their leader no better, though they
followed him faster. And as for the other teams, especially Carcajou's,
they were still firm in their deadly hatred for the dog with the black
patch.




III

It was in the second winter after Pichou's coming to Seven Islands
that the great trial of his courage arrived. Late in February an Indian
runner on snowshoes staggered into the village. He brought news from the
hunting-parties that were wintering far up on the Ste. Marguerite--good
news and bad. First, they had already made a good hunting: for the
pelletrie, that is to say. They had killed many otter, some fisher and
beaver, and four silver foxes--a marvel of fortune. But then, for the
food, the chase was bad, very bad--no caribou, no hare, no ptarmigan,
nothing for many days. Provisions were very low. There were six families
together. Then la grippe had taken hold of them. They were sick,
starving. They would probably die, at least most of the women and
children. It was a bad job.

Dan Scott had peculiar ideas of his duty toward the savages. He was
not romantic, but he liked to do the square thing. Besides, he had been
reading up on la grippe, and he had some new medicine for it, capsules
from Montreal, very powerful--quinine, phenacetine, and morphine. He was
as eager to try this new medicine as a boy is to fire off a new gun.
He loaded the Cometique with provisions and the medicine-chest with
capsules, harnessed his team, and started up the river. Thermometer
thirty degrees below zero; air like crystal; snow six feet deep on the
level.

The first day's journey was slow, for the going was soft, and the track,
at places, had to be broken out with snow-shoes. Camp was made at the
foot of the big fall--a hole in snow, a bed of boughs, a hot fire and a
blanket stretched on a couple of sticks to reflect the heat, the dogs on
the other side of the fire, and Pichou close to his master.

In the morning there was the steep hill beside the fall to climb,
alternately soft and slippery, now a slope of glass and now a
treacherous drift of yielding feathers; it was a road set on end. But
Pichou flattened his back and strained his loins and dug his toes into
the snow and would not give back an inch. When the rest of the team
balked the long whip slashed across their backs and recalled them
to their duty. At last their leader topped the ridge, and the others
struggled after him. Before them stretched the great dead-water of the
river, a straight white path to No-man's-land. The snow was smooth and
level, and the crust was hard enough to bear. Pichou settled down to his
work at a glorious pace. He seemed to know that he must do his best,
and that something important depended on the quickness of his legs. On
through the glittering solitude, on through the death-like silence, sped
the COMETIQUE, between the interminable walls of the forest, past the
mouths of nameless rivers, under the shadow of grim mountains. At noon
Dan Scott boiled the kettle, and ate his bread and bacon. But there was
nothing for the dogs, not even for Pichou; for discipline is discipline,
and the best of sledge-dogs will not run well after he has been fed.

Then forward again, along the lifeless road, slowly over rapids, where
the ice was rough and broken, swiftly over still waters, where the way
was level, until they came to the foot of the last lake, and camped for
the night. The Indians were but a few miles away, at the head of the
lake, and it would be easy to reach them in the morning.

But there was another camp on the Ste. Marguerite that night, and it was
nearer to Dan Scott than the Indians were. Ovide Boulianne had followed
him up the river, close on his track, which made the going easier.

"Does that sacre bourgeois suppose that I allow him all that pelletrie
to himself and the Compagnie? Four silver fox, besides otter and beaver?
NON, MERCI! I take some provision, and some whiskey. I go to make trade
also." Thus spoke the shrewd Ovide, proving that commerce is no less
daring, no less resolute, than philanthropy. The only difference is
in the motive, and that is not always visible. Ovide camped the second
night at a bend of the river, a mile below the foot of the lake. Between
him and Dan Scott there was a hill covered with a dense thicket of
spruce.

By what magic did Carcajou know that Pichou, his old enemy, was so near
him in that vast wilderness of white death? By what mysterious language
did he communicate his knowledge to his companions and stir the sleeping
hatred in their hearts and mature the conspiracy of revenge?

Pichou, sleeping by the fire, was awakened by the fall of a lump of snow
from the branch of a shaken evergreen. That was nothing. But there were
other sounds in the forest, faint, stealthy, inaudible to an ear less
keen than his. He crept out of the shelter and looked into the wood.
He could see shadowy forms, stealing among the trees, gliding down the
hill. Five of them. Wolves, doubtless! He must guard the provisions. By
this time the rest of his team were awake. Their eyes glittered. They
stirred uneasily. But they did not move from the dying fire. It was no
concern of theirs what their leader chose to do out of hours. In the
traces they would follow him, but there was no loyalty in their hearts.
Pichou stood alone by the sledge, waiting for the wolves.

But these were no wolves. They were assassins. Like a company of
soldiers, they lined up together and rushed silently down the slope.
Like lightning they leaped upon the solitary dog and struck him down. In
an instant, before Dan Scott could throw off his blanket and seize the
loaded butt of his whip, Pichou's throat and breast were torn to rags,
his life-blood poured upon the snow, and his murderers were slinking
away, slavering and muttering through the forest.

Dan Scott knelt beside his best friend. At a glance he saw that the
injury was fatal. "Well done, Pichou!" he murmured, "you fought a good
fight."

And the dog, by a brave effort, lifted the head with the black patch on
it, for the last time, licked his master', hand, and then dropped back
upon the snow--contented, happy, dead.

There is but one drawback to a dog's friendship. It does not last long
enough.


End of the story? Well, if you care for the other people in it, you
shall hear what became of them. Dan Scott went on to the head of the
lake and found the Indians, and fed them and gave them his medicine, and
all of them got well except two, and they continued to hunt along
the Ste. Marguerite every winter and trade with the Honourable H. B.
Company. Not with Dan Scott, however, for before that year was ended
he resigned his post, and went to Montreal to finish his course in
medicine; and now he is a respected physician in Ontario. Married; three
children; useful; prosperous. But before he left Seven Islands he went
up the Ste. Marguerite in the summer, by canoe, and made a grave for
Pichou's bones, under a blossoming ash tree, among the ferns and wild
flowers. He put a cross over it.

"Being French," said he, "I suppose he was a Catholic. But I'll swear he
was a Christian."




VI. THE WHITE BLOT




I

The real location of a city house depends upon the pictures which hang
upon its walls. They are its neighbourhood and its outlook. They confer
upon it that touch of life and character, that power to beget love and
bind friendship, which a country house receives from its surrounding
landscape, the garden that embraces it, the stream that runs near it,
and the shaded paths that lead to and from its door.

By this magic of pictures my narrow, upright slice of living-space in
one of the brown-stone strata on the eastward slope of Manhattan Island
is transferred to an open and agreeable site. It has windows that look
toward the woods and the sunset, watergates by which a little boat is
always waiting, and secret passageways leading into fair places that
are frequented by persons of distinction and charm. No darkness of night
obscures these outlets; no neighbour's house shuts off the view; no
drifted snow of winter makes them impassable. They are always free, and
through them I go out and in upon my adventures.

One of these picture-wanderings has always appeared to me so singular
that I would like, if it were possible, to put it into words.

It was Pierrepont who first introduced me to the picture--Pierrepont the
good-natured: of whom one of his friends said that he was like Mahomet's
Bridge of Paradise, because he was so hard to cross: to which another
added that there was also a resemblance in the fact that he led to a
region of beautiful illusions which he never entered. He is one of
those enthusiastic souls who are always discovering a new writer, a new
painter, a new view from some old wharf by the river, a new place to
obtain picturesque dinners at a grotesque price. He swung out of his
office, with his long-legged, easy stride, and nearly ran me down, as I
was plodding up-town through the languor of a late spring afternoon,
on one of those duty-walks which conscience offers as a sacrifice to
digestion.

"Why, what is the matter with you?" he cried as he linked his arm
through mine, "you look outdone, tired all the way through to your
backbone. Have you been reading the 'Anatomy of Melancholy,' or
something by one of the new British female novelists? You will have la
grippe in your mind if you don't look out. But I know what you need.
Come with me, and I will do you good."

So saying, he drew me out of clanging Broadway into one of the side
streets that run toward the placid region of Washington Square. "No,
no," I answered, feeling, even in the act of resistance, the pleasure of
his cheerful guidance, "you are altogether wrong. I don't need a dinner
at your new-found Bulgarian table-d'hote--seven courses for seventy-five
cents, and the wine thrown out; nor some of those wonderful Mexican
cheroots warranted to eradicate the tobacco-habit; nor a draught of your
South American melon sherbet that cures all pains, except these which it
causes. None of these things will help me. The doctor suggests that
they do not suit my temperament. Let us go home together and have a
shower-bath and a dinner of herbs, with just a reminiscence of the
stalled ox--and a bout at backgammon to wind up the evening. That will
be the most comfortable prescription."

"But you mistake me," said he; "I am not thinking of any creature
comforts for you. I am prescribing for your mind. There is a picture
that I want you to see; not a coloured photograph, nor an exercise in
anatomical drawing; but a real picture that will rest the eyes of your
heart. Come away with me to Morgenstern's gallery, and be healed."

As we turned into the lower end of Fifth Avenue, it seemed as if I
were being gently floated along between the modest apartment-houses and
old-fashioned dwellings, and prim, respectable churches, on the smooth
current of Pierrepont's talk about his new-found picture. How often a
man has cause to return thanks for the enthusiasms of his friends! They
are the little fountains that run down from the hills to refresh the
mental desert of the despondent.

"You remember Falconer," continued Pierrepont, "Temple Falconer, that
modest, quiet, proud fellow who came out of the South a couple of years
ago and carried off the landscape prize at the Academy last year, and
then disappeared? He had no intimate friends here, and no one knew what
had become of him. But now this picture appears, to show what he has
been doing. It is an evening scene, a revelation of the beauty of
sadness, an idea expressed in colours--or rather, a real impression of
Nature that awakens an ideal feeling in the heart. It does not define
everything and say nothing, like so many paintings. It tells no story,
but I know it fits into one. There is not a figure in it, and yet it
is alive with sentiment; it suggests thoughts which cannot be put
into words. Don't you love the pictures that have that power of
suggestion--quiet and strong, like Homer Martin's 'Light-house' up at
the Century, with its sheltered bay heaving softly under the pallid
greenish sky of evening, and the calm, steadfast glow of the lantern
brightening into readiness for all the perils of night and coming storm?
How much more powerful that is than all the conventional pictures of
light-houses on inaccessible cliffs, with white foam streaming from them
like the ends of a schoolboy's comforter in a gale of wind! I tell you
the real painters are the fellows who love pure nature because it is
so human. They don't need to exaggerate, and they don't dare to be
affected. They are not afraid of the reality, and they are not ashamed
of the sentiment. They don't paint everything that they see, but they
see everything that they paint. And this picture makes me sure that
Falconer is one of them."

By this time we had arrived at the door of the house where Morgenstern
lives and moves and makes his profits, and were admitted to the shrine
of the Commercial Apollo and the Muses in Trade.

It has often seemed to me as if that little house were a silent epitome
of modern art criticism, an automatic indicator, or perhaps regulator,
of the aesthetic taste of New York. On the first floor, surrounded by
all the newest fashions in antiquities and BRIC-A-BRAC, you will see the
art of to-day--the works of painters who are precisely in the focus of
advertisement, and whose names call out an instant round of applause in
the auction-room. On the floors above, in degrees of obscurity deepening
toward the attic, you will find the art of yesterday--the pictures which
have passed out of the glare of popularity without yet arriving at
the mellow radiance of old masters. In the basement, concealed in huge
packing-cases, and marked "PARIS--FRAGILE,"--you will find the art of
to-morrow; the paintings of the men in regard to whose names, styles,
and personal traits, the foreign correspondents and prophetic critics
in the newspapers, are now diffusing in the public mind that twilight of
familiarity and ignorance which precedes the sunrise of marketable fame.

The affable and sagacious Morgenstern was already well acquainted with
the waywardness of Pierrepont's admiration, and with my own persistent
disregard of current quotations in the valuation of works of art. He
regarded us, I suppose, very much as Robin Hood would have looked upon
a pair of plain yeomen who had strayed into his lair. The knights of
capital, and coal barons, and rich merchants were his natural prey, but
toward this poor but honest couple it would be worthy only of a Gentile
robber to show anything but courteous and fair dealing.

He expressed no surprise when he heard what we wanted to see, but smiled
tolerantly and led the way, not into the well-defined realm of the past,
the present, or the future, but into a region of uncertain fortunes, a
limbo of acknowledged but unrewarded merits, a large back room devoted
to the works of American painters. Here we found Falconer's picture;
and the dealer, with that instinctive tact which is the best part of his
business capital, left us alone to look at it.

It showed the mouth of a little river: a secluded lagoon, where the
shallow tides rose and fell with vague lassitude, following the impulse
of prevailing winds more than the strong attraction of the moon. But now
the unsailed harbour was quite still, in the pause of the evening;
and the smooth undulations were caressed by a hundred opalescent hues,
growing deeper toward the west, where the river came in. Converging
lines of trees stood dark against the sky; a cleft in the woods marked
the course of the stream, above which the reluctant splendours of an
autumnal day were dying in ashes of roses, while three tiny clouds,
poised high in air, burned red with the last glimpse of the departed
sun.

On the right was a reedy point running out into the bay, and behind it,
on a slight rise of ground, an antique house with tall white pillars. It
was but dimly outlined in the gathering shadows; yet one could
imagine its stately, formal aspect, its precise garden with beds of
old-fashioned flowers and straight paths bordered with box, and a
little arbour overgrown with honeysuckle. I know not by what subtlety of
delicate and indescribable touches--a slight inclination in one of the
pillars, a broken line which might indicate an unhinged gate, a drooping
resignation in the foliage of the yellowing trees, a tone of sadness
in the blending of subdued colours--the painter had suggested that the
place was deserted. But the truth was unmistakable. An air of loneliness
and pensive sorrow breathed from the picture; a sigh of longing and
regret. It was haunted by sad, sweet memories of some untold story of
human life.

In the corner Falconer had put his signature, T. F., "LARMONE," 189-,
and on the border of the picture he had faintly traced some words, which
we made out at last--

     "A spirit haunts the year's last hours."

Pierrepont took up the quotation and completed it--

     "A spirit haunts the year's last hours,
      Dwelling amid these yellowing bowers:
      To himself he talks;
      For at eventide, listening earnestly,
      At his work you may hear him sob and sigh,
      In the walks;
      Earthward he boweth the heavy stalks
      Of the mouldering flowers:
      Heavily hangs the broad sunflower
      Over its grave i' the earth so chilly;
      Heavily hangs the hollyhock,
      Heavily hangs the tiger-lily."

"That is very pretty poetry, gentlemen," said Morgenstern, who had come
in behind us, "but is it not a little vague? You like it, but you cannot
tell exactly what it means. I find the same fault in the picture from
my point of view. There is nothing in it to make a paragraph about, no
anecdote, no experiment in technique. It is impossible to persuade the
public to admire a picture unless you can tell them precisely the points
on which they must fix their admiration. And that is why, although the
painting is a good one, I should be willing to sell it at a low price."

He named a sum of money in three figures, so small that Pierrepont, who
often buys pictures by proxy, could not conceal his surprise.

"Certainly I should consider that a good bargain, simply for
investment," said he. "Falconer's name alone ought to be worth more than
that, ten years from now. He is a rising man."

"No, Mr. Pierrepont," replied the dealer, "the picture is worth what
I ask for it, for I would not commit the impertinence of offering a
present to you or your friend; but it is worth no more. Falconer's name
will not increase in value. The catalogue of his works is too short for
fame to take much notice of it; and this is the last. Did you not hear
of his death last fall? I do not wonder, for it happened at some place
down on Long Island--a name that I never saw before, and have forgotten
now. There was not even an obituary in the newspapers."

"And besides," he continued, after a pause, "I must not conceal from
you that the painting has a blemish. It is not always visible, since you
have failed to detect it; but it is more noticeable in some lights than
in others; and, do what I will, I cannot remove it. This alone would
prevent the painting from being a good investment. Its market value will
never rise."

He turned the canvas sideways to the light, and the defect became
apparent.

It was a dim, oblong, white blot in the middle distance; a nebulous
blur in the painting, as if there had been some chemical impurity in the
pigment causing it to fade, or rather as if a long drop of some acid, or
perhaps a splash of salt water, had fallen upon the canvas while it was
wet, and bleached it. I knew little of the possible causes of such a
blot, but enough to see that it could not be erased without painting
over it, perhaps not even then. And yet it seemed rather to enhance than
to weaken the attraction which the picture had for me.

"Your candour does you credit, Mr. Morgenstern," said I, "but you know
me well enough to be sure that what you have said will hardly discourage
me. For I have never been an admirer of 'cabinet finish' in works of
art. Nor have I been in the habit of buying them, as a Circassian father
trains his daughters, with an eye to the market. They come into my house
for my own pleasure, and when the time arrives that I can see them
no longer, it will not matter much to me what price they bring in the
auction-room. This landscape pleases me so thoroughly that, if you will
let us take it with us this evening, I will send you a check for the
amount in the morning."

So we carried off the painting in a cab; and all the way home I was in
the pleasant excitement of a man who is about to make an addition to his
house; while Pierrepont was conscious of the glow of virtue which comes
of having done a favour to a friend and justified your own critical
judgment at one stroke.

After dinner we hung the painting over the chimney-piece in the room
called the study (because it was consecrated to idleness), and sat there
far into the night, talking of the few times we had met Falconer at the
club, and of his reticent manner, which was broken by curious flashes of
impersonal confidence when he spoke not of himself but of his art. From
this we drifted into memories of good comrades who had walked beside us
but a few days in the path of life, and then disappeared, yet left us
feeling as if we cared more for them than for the men whom we see every
day; and of young geniuses who had never reached the goal; and of many
other glimpses of "the light that failed," until the lamp was low and it
was time to say good-night.




II

For several months I continued to advance in intimacy with my picture.
It grew more familiar, more suggestive; the truth and beauty of it
came home to me constantly. Yet there was something in it not quite
apprehended; a sense of strangeness; a reserve which I had not yet
penetrated.

One night in August I found myself practically alone, so far as human
intercourse was concerned, in the populous, weary city. A couple of
hours of writing had produced nothing that would bear the test of
sunlight, so I anticipated judgment by tearing up the spoiled sheets of
paper, and threw myself upon the couch before the empty fireplace. It
was a dense, sultry night, with electricity thickening the air, and a
trouble of distant thunder rolling far away on the rim of the cloudy
sky--one of those nights of restless dulness, when you wait and long for
something to happen, and yet feel despondently that nothing ever will
happen again. I passed through a region of aimless thoughts into one
of migratory and unfinished dreams, and dropped from that into an empty
gulf of sleep.

How late it was when I drifted back toward the shore of consciousness,
I cannot tell. But the student-lamp on the table had burned out, and
the light of the gibbous moon was creeping in through the open windows.
Slowly the pale illumination crept up the eastern wall, like a tide
rising as the moon declined. Now it reached the mantel-shelf and
overflowed the bronze heads of Homer and the Indian Bacchus and the
Egyptian image of Isis with the infant Horus. Now it touched the frame
of the picture and lapped over the edge. Now it rose to the shadowy
house and the dim garden, in the midst of which I saw the white blot
more distinctly than ever before.

It seemed now to have taken a new shape, like the slender form of a
woman, robed in flowing white. And as I watched it through half-closed
eyes, the figure appeared to move and tremble and wave to and fro, as if
it were a ghost.

A haunted picture! Why should it not be so? A haunted ruin, a haunted
forest, a haunted ship,--all these have been seen, or imagined, and
reported, and there are learned societies for investigating such things.
Why should not a picture have a ghost in it?

My mind, in that curiously vivid state which lies between waking and
sleeping, went through the form of careful reasoning over the question.
If there may be some subtle connection between a house and the spirits
of the people who have once lived in it,--and wise men have believed
this,--why should there be any impassable gulf between a picture and
the vanished lives out of which it has grown? All the human thought
and feeling which have passed into it through the patient toil of art,
remain forever embodied there. A picture is the most living and personal
thing that a man can leave behind him. When we look at it we see what he
saw, hour after hour, day after day, and we see it through his mood
and impression, coloured by his emotion, tinged with his personality.
Surely, if the spirits of the dead are not extinguished, but only veiled
and hidden, and if it were possible by any means that their presence
could flash for a moment through the veil, it would be most natural that
they should come back again to hover around the work into which their
experience and passion had been woven. Here, if anywhere, they would
"Revisit the pale glimpses of the moon." Here, if anywhere, we might
catch fleeting sight, as in a glass darkly, of the visions that passed
before them while they worked.

This much of my train of reasoning along the edge of the dark, I
remember sharply. But after this, all was confused and misty. The shore
of consciousness receded. I floated out again on the ocean of forgotten
dreams. When I woke, it was with a quick start, as if my ship had been
made fast, silently and suddenly, at the wharf of reality, and the bell
rang for me to step ashore.

But the vision of the white blot remained clear and distinct. And the
question that it had brought to me, the chain of thoughts that had
linked themselves to it, lingered through the morning, and made me feel
sure that there was an untold secret in Falconer's life and that the
clew to it must be sought in the history of his last picture.

But how to trace the connection? Every one who had known Falconer,
however slightly, was out of town. There was no clew to follow. Even the
name "Larmone" gave me no help; for I could not find it on any map
of Long Island. It was probably the fanciful title of some old
country-place, familiar only to the people who had lived there.

But the very remoteness of the problem, its lack of contact with the
practical world, fascinated me. It was like something that had drifted
away in the fog, on a sea of unknown and fluctuating currents. The only
possible way to find it was to commit yourself to the same wandering
tides and drift after it, trusting to a propitious fortune that you
might be carried in the same direction; and after a long, blind,
unhurrying chase, one day you might feel a faint touch, a jar, a thrill
along the side of your boat, and, peering through the fog, lay your hand
at last, without surprise, upon the very object of your quest.




III

As it happened, the means for such a quest were at my disposal. I
was part owner of a boat which had been built for hunting and fishing
cruises on the shallow waters of the Great South Bay. It was a
deliberate, but not inconvenient, craft, well named the Patience; and my
turn for using it had come. Black Zekiel, the captain, crew, and cook,
was the very man that I would have chosen for such an expedition. He
combined the indolent good-humour of the negro with the taciturnity of
the Indian, and knew every shoal and channel of the tortuous waters. He
asked nothing better than to set out on a voyage without a port; sailing
aimlessly eastward day after day, through the long chain of landlocked
bays, with the sea plunging behind the sand-dunes on our right, and the
shores of Long Island sleeping on our left; anchoring every evening in
some little cove or estuary, where Zekiel could sit on the cabin roof,
smoking his corn-cob pipe, and meditating on the vanity and comfort of
life, while I pushed off through the mellow dusk to explore every creek
and bend of the shore, in my light canoe.

There was nothing to hasten our voyage. The three weeks' vacation was
all but gone, when the Patience groped her way through a narrow, crooked
channel in a wide salt-meadow, and entered the last of the series
of bays. A few houses straggled down a point of land; the village of
Quantock lay a little farther back. Beyond that was a belt of woods
reaching to the water; and from these the south-country road emerged to
cross the upper end of the bay on a low causeway with a narrow bridge
of planks at the central point. Here was our Ultima Thule. Not even
the Patience could thread the eye of this needle, or float through the
shallow marsh-canal farther to the east.

We anchored just in front of the bridge, and as I pushed the canoe
beneath it, after supper, I felt the indefinable sensation of having
passed that way before. I knew beforehand what the little boat would
drift into. The broad saffron light of evening fading over a still
lagoon; two converging lines of pine trees running back into the sunset;
a grassy point upon the right; and behind that a neglected garden, a
tangled bower of honeysuckle, a straight path bordered with box, leading
to a deserted house with a high, white-pillared porch--yes, it was
Larmone.

In the morning I went up to the village to see if I could find trace of
my artist's visit to the place. There was no difficulty in the search,
for he had been there often. The people had plenty of recollections of
him, but no real memory, for it seemed as if none of them had really
known him.

"Queer kinder fellow," said a wrinkled old bayman with whom I walked
up the sandy road, "I seen him a good deal round here, but 'twan't like
havin' any 'quaintance with him. He allus kep' himself to himself,
pooty much. Used ter stay round 'Squire Ladoo's place most o' the
time--keepin' comp'ny with the gal I guess. Larmone? Yaas, that's what
THEY called it, but we don't go much on fancy names down here. No, the
painter didn' 'zactly live there, but it 'mounted to the same thing.
Las' summer they was all away, house shet up, painter hangin' round all
the time, 's if he looked fur 'em to come back any minnit. Purfessed to
be paintin', but I don' see's he did much. Lived up to Mort Halsey's;
died there too; year ago this fall. Guess Mis' Halsey can tell ye most
of any one 'bout him."

At the boarding-house (with wide, low verandas, now forsaken by the
summer boarders), which did duty for a village inn, I found Mrs.
Halsey; a notable housewife, with a strong taste for ancestry, and an
uncultivated world of romance still brightening her soft brown eyes. She
knew all the threads in the story that I was following; and the interest
with which she spoke made it evident that she had often woven them
together in the winter evenings on patterns of her own.

Judge Ledoux had come to Quantock from the South during the war, and
built a house there like the one he used to live in. There were three
things he hated: slavery and war and society. But he always loved the
South more than the North, and lived like a foreigner, polite enough,
but very retired. His wife died after a few years, and left him alone
with a little girl. Claire grew up as pretty as a picture, but very shy
and delicate. About two years ago Mr. Falconer had come down from
the city; he stayed at Larmone first, and then he came to the
boarding-house, but he was over at the Ledoux' house almost all the
time. He was a Southerner too, and a relative of the family; a real
gentleman, and very proud though he was poor. It seemed strange that
he should not live with them, but perhaps he felt more free over here.
Every one thought he must be engaged to Claire, but he was not the kind
of a man that you could ask questions about himself. A year ago last
winter he had gone up to the city and taken all his things with him. He
had never stayed away so long before. In the spring the Ledoux had gone
to Europe; Claire seemed to be falling into a decline; her sight seemed
to be failing, and her father said she must see a famous doctor and have
a change of air.

"Mr. Falconer came back in May," continued the good lady, "as if he
expected to find them. But the house was shut up and nobody knew just
where they were. He seemed to be all taken aback; it was queer if
he didn't know about it, intimate as he had been; but he never said
anything, and made no inquiries; just seemed to be waiting, as if there
was nothing else for him to do. We would have told him in a minute, if
we had anything to tell. But all we could do was to guess there must
have been some kind of a quarrel between him and the Judge, and if there
was, he must know best about it himself.

"All summer long he kept going over to the house and wandering around
in the garden. In the fall he began to paint a picture, but it was very
slow painting; he would go over in the afternoon and come back long
after dark, damp with the dew and fog. He kept growing paler and weaker
and more silent. Some days he did not speak more than a dozen words,
but always kind and pleasant. He was just dwindling away; and when the
picture was almost done a fever took hold of him. The doctor said it was
malaria, but it seemed to me more like a trouble in the throat, a kind
of dumb misery. And one night, in the third quarter of the moon, just
after the tide turned to run out, he raised up in the bed and tried to
speak, but he was gone.

"We tried to find out his relations, but there didn't seem to be any,
except the Ledoux, and they were out of reach. So we sent the picture
up to our cousin in Brooklyn, and it sold for about enough to pay Mr.
Falconer's summer's board and the cost of his funeral. There was nothing
else that he left of any value, except a few books; perhaps you would
like to look at them, if you were his friend?

"I never saw any one that I seemed to know so little and like so well.
It was a disappointment in love, of course, and they all said that he
died of a broken heart; but I think it was because his heart was too
full, and wouldn't break.

"And oh!--I forgot to tell you; a week after he was gone there was a
notice in the paper that Claire Ledoux had died suddenly, on the last
of August, at some place in Switzerland. Her father is still away
travelling. And so the whole story is broken off and will never be
finished. Will you look at the books?"

Nothing is more pathetic, to my mind, than to take up the books of one
who is dead. Here is his name, with perhaps a note of the place where
the volume was bought or read, and the marks on the pages that he liked
best. Here are the passages that gave him pleasure, and the thoughts
that entered into his life and formed it; they became part of him, but
where has he carried them now?

Falconer's little library was an unstudied choice, and gave a hint
of his character. There was a New Testament in French, with his name
written in a slender, woman's hand; three or four volumes of stories,
Cable's "Old Creole Days," Allen's "Kentucky Cardinal," Page's "In
Old Virginia," and the like; "Henry Esmond" and Amiel's "Journal" and
Lamartine's "Raphael"; and a few volumes of poetry, among them one of
Sidney Lanier's, and one of Tennyson's earlier poems.

There was also a little morocco-bound book of manuscript notes. This I
begged permission to carry away with me, hoping to find in it something
which would throw light upon my picture, perhaps even some message to
be carried, some hint or suggestion of something which the writer would
fain have had done for him, and which I promised myself faithfully
to perform, as a test of an imagined friendship--imagined not in the
future, but in the impossible past.

I read the book in this spirit, searching its pages carefully, through
the long afternoon, in the solitary cabin of my boat. There was nothing
at first but an ordinary diary; a record of the work and self-denials of
a poor student of art. Then came the date of his first visit to Larmone,
and an expression of the pleasure of being with his own people again
after a lonely life, and some chronicle of his occupations there,
studies for pictures, and idle days that were summed up in a phrase: "On
the bay," or "In the woods."

After this the regular succession of dates was broken, and there
followed a few scraps of verse, irregular and unfinished, bound together
by the thread of a name--"Claire among her Roses," "A Ride through
the Pines with Claire," "An Old Song of Claire's" "The Blue Flower in
Claire's Eyes." It was not poetry, but such an unconscious tribute to
the power and beauty of poetry as unfolds itself almost inevitably from
youthful love, as naturally as the blossoms unfold from the apple trees
in May. If you pick them they are worthless. They charm only in their
own time and place.

A date told of his change from Larmone to the village, and this was
written below it: "Too heavy a sense of obligation destroys freedom, and
only a free man can dare to love."

Then came a number of fragments indicating trouble of mind
and hesitation; the sensitiveness of the artist, the delicate,
self-tormenting scruples of the lonely idealist, the morbid pride of the
young poor man, contending with an impetuous passion and forcing it to
surrender, or at least to compromise.

"What right has a man to demand everything and offer nothing in return
except an ambition and a hope? Love must come as a giver, not as a
beggar."

"A knight should not ask to wear his lady's colours until he has won his
spurs."

"King Cophetua and the beggar-maid--very fine! but the other
way--humiliating!"

"A woman may take everything from a man, wealth and fame and
position. But there is only one thing that a man may accept from a
woman--something that she alone can give--happiness."

"Self-respect is less than love, but it is the trellis that holds love
up from the ground; break it down, and all the flowers are in the dust,
the fruit is spoiled."

"And yet"--so the man's thought shone through everywhere--"I think she
must know that I love her, and why I cannot speak."

One entry was written in a clearer, stronger hand: "An end of
hesitation. The longest way is the shortest. I am going to the city to
work for the Academy prize, to think of nothing else until I win it, and
then come back with it to Claire, to tell her that I have a future,
and that it is hers. If I spoke of it now it would be like claiming the
reward before I had done the work. I have told her only that I am
going to prove myself an artist, AND TO LIVE FOR WHAT I LOVE BEST. She
understood, I am sure, for she would not lift her eyes to me, but her
hand trembled as she gave me the blue flower from her belt."

The date of his return to Larmone was marked, but the page was blank, as
the day had been.

Some pages of dull self-reproach and questioning and bewildered regret
followed.

"Is it possible that she has gone away, without a word, without a sign,
after what has passed between us? It is not fair. Surely I had some
claim."

"But what claim, after all? I asked for nothing. And was it not pride
that kept me silent, taking it for granted that if I asked, she would
give?"

"It was a mistake; she did not understand, nor care."

"It was my fault; I might at least have told her that I loved her,
though she could not have answered me."

"It is too late now. To-night, while I was finishing the picture, I saw
her in the garden. Her spirit, all in white, with a blue flower in her
belt. I knew she was dead across the sea. I tried to call to her, but my
voice made no sound. She seemed not to see me. She moved like one in a
dream, straight on, and vanished. Is there no one who can tell her? Must
she never know that I loved her?"

The last thing in the book was a printed scrap of paper that lay between
the leaves:


      IRREVOCABLE

     "Would the gods might give
      Another field for human strife;
      Man must live one life
      Ere he learns to live.
      Ah, friend, in thy deep grave,
      What now can change; what now can save?"


So there was a message after all, but it could never be carried; a task
for a friend, but it was impossible. What better thing could I do
with the poor little book than bury it in the garden in the shadow of
Larmone? The story of a silent fault, hidden in silence. How many of
life's deepest tragedies are only that: no great transgression, no shock
of conflict, no sudden catastrophe with its answering thrill of courage
and resistance: only a mistake made in the darkness, and under the
guidance of what seemed a true and noble motive; a failure to see the
right path at the right moment, and a long wandering beyond it; a word
left unspoken until the ears that should have heard it are sealed, and
the tongue that should have spoken it is dumb.

The soft sea-fog clothed the night with clinging darkness; the faded
leaves hung slack and motionless from the trees, waiting for their fall;
the tense notes of the surf beyond the sand-dunes vibrated through the
damp air like chords from some mighty VIOLONO; large, warm drops wept
from the arbour while I sat in the garden, holding the poor little book,
and thinking of the white blot in the record of a life that was too
proud to bend to the happiness that was meant for it.

There are men like that: not many perhaps, but a few; and they are the
ones who suffer most keenly in this world of half-understanding and
clouded knowledge. There is a pride, honourable and sensitive, that
imperils the realization of love, puts it under a spell of silence and
reserve, makes it sterile of blossoms and impotent of fruits. For what
is it, after all, but a subtle, spiritual worship of self? And what was
Falconer's resolve not to tell this girl that he loved her until he
had won fame and position, but a secret, unconscious setting of himself
above her? For surely, if love is supreme, it does not need to wait for
anything else to lend it worth and dignity. The very sweetness and power
of it lie in the confession of one life as dependent upon another for
its fulfilment. It is made strong in its very weakness. It is the only
thing, after all, that can break the prison bars and set the heart free
from itself. The pride that hinders it, enslaves it. Love's first duty
is to be true to itself, in word and deed. Then, having spoken truth and
acted verity, it may call on honour to keep it pure and steadfast.

If Falconer had trusted Claire, and showed her his heart without
reserve, would she not have understood him and helped him? It was the
pride of independence, the passion of self-reliance that drew him
away from her and divided his heart from hers in a dumb isolation. But
Claire,--was not she also in fault? Might she not have known, should not
she have taken for granted, the truth which must have been so easy to
read in Falconer's face, though he never put it into words? And yet
with her there was something very different from the pride that kept him
silent. The virgin reserve of a young girl's heart is more sacred than
any pride of self. It is the maiden instinct which makes the woman
always the shrine, and never the pilgrim. She is not the seeker, but the
one sought. She dares not take anything for granted. She has the right
to wait for the voice, the word, the avowal. Then, and not till then, if
the pilgrim be the chosen one, the shrine may open to receive him.

Not all women believe this; but those who do are the ones best worth
seeking and winning. And Claire was one of them. It seemed to me, as I
mused, half dreaming, on the unfinished story of these two lives that
had missed each other in the darkness, that I could see her figure
moving through the garden, beyond where the pallid bloom of the tall
cosmos-flower bent to the fitful breeze. Her robe was like the waving of
the mist. Her face was fair, and very fair, for all its sadness: a blue
flower, faint as a shadow on the snow, trembled at her waist, as she
paced to and fro along the path.

I murmured to myself, "Yet he loved her: and she loved him. Can pride be
stronger than love?"

Perhaps, after all, the lingering and belated confession which Falconer
had written in his diary might in some way come to her. Perhaps if it
were left here in the bower of honeysuckles where they had so often sat
together, it might be a sign and omen of the meeting of these two souls
that had lost each other in the dark of the world. Perhaps,--ah, who
can tell that it is not so?--for those who truly love, with all their
errors, with all their faults, there is no "irrevocable"--there is
"another field."

As I turned from the garden, the tense note of the surf vibrated through
the night. The pattering drops of dew rustled as they fell from the
leaves of the honeysuckle. But underneath these sounds it seemed as if
I heard a deep voice saying "Claire!" and a woman's lips whispering
"Temple!"




VII. A YEAR OF NOBILITY




I

ENTER THE MARQUIS

The Marquis sat by the camp-fire peeling potatoes.

To look at him, you never would have taken him for a marquis. His
costume was a pair of corduroy trousers; a blue flannel shirt, patched
at elbows with gray; lumberman's boots, flat-footed, shapeless, with
loose leather legs strapped just below the knee, and wrinkled like the
hide of an ancient rhinoceros; and a soft brown hat with several holes
in the crown, as if it had done duty, at some time in its history, as an
impromptu target in a shooting-match. A red woollen scarf twisted about
his loins gave a touch of colour and picturesqueness.

It was not exactly a court dress, but it sat well on the powerful sinewy
figure of the man. He never gave a thought to his looks, but peeled his
potatoes with a dexterity which betrayed a past-master of the humble
art, and threw the skins into the fire.

"Look you, m'sieu'," he said to young Winthrop Alden, who sat on a
fallen tree near him, mending the fly-rod which he had broken in the
morning's fishing, "look you, it is an affair of the most strange, yet
of the most certain. We have known always that ours was a good family.
The name tells it. The Lamottes are of la haute classe in France. But
here, in Canada, we are poor. Yet the good blood dies not with the
poverty. It is buried, hidden, but it remains the same. It is like these
pataques. You plant good ones for seed: you get a good crop. You plant
bad ones: you get a bad crop. But we did not know about the title in our
family. No. We thought ours was a side-branch, an off-shoot. It was a
great surprise to us. But it is certain,--beyond a doubt."

Jean Lamotte's deep voice was quiet and steady. It had the tone of
assured conviction. His bright blue eyes above his ruddy mustache and
bronzed cheeks, were clear and tranquil as those of a child.

Alden was immensely interested and amused. He was a member of the Boston
branch of the Society for Ancestral Culture, and he recognized the
favourite tenet of his sect,--the doctrine that "blood will tell." He
was also a Harvard man, knowing almost everything and believing hardly
anything. Heredity was one of the few unquestioned articles of his
creed. But the form in which this familiar confession of faith came to
him, on the banks of the Grande Decharge, from the lips of a somewhat
ragged and distinctly illiterate Canadian guide, was grotesque enough
to satisfy the most modern taste for new sensations. He listened with an
air of gravity, and a delighted sense of the humour of the situation.

"How did you find it out?" he asked.

"Well, then," continued Jean, "I will tell you how the news came to me.
It was at St. Gedeon, one Sunday last March. The snow was good and hard,
and I drove in, ten miles on the lake, from our house opposite Grosse
Ile. After mass, a man, evidently of the city, comes to me in the stable
while I feed the horse, and salutes me.

"'Is this Jean Lamotte?'

"'At your service, m'sieu'.'

"'Son of Francois Louis Lamotte?'

"'Of no other. But he is dead, God give him repose.'

"'I been looking for you all through Charlevoix and Chicoutimi.'

"'Here you find me then, and good-day to you,' says I, a little short,
for I was beginning to be shy of him.

"'Chut, chut,' says he, very friendly. 'I suppose you have time to talk
a bit. How would you like to be a marquis and have a castle in France
with a hundred thousand dollars?'

"For a moment I think I will lick him; then I laugh. 'Very well indeed,'
says I, 'and also a handful of stars for buckshot, and the new moon for
a canoe.'

"'But no,' answers the man. 'I am earnest, Monsieur Lamotte. I want to
talk a long talk with you. Do you permit that I accompany you to your
residence?'

"Residence! You know that little farm-house of logs where my mother
lives,--you saw it last summer. But of course it is a pretty good house.
It is clean. It is warm. So I bring the man home in the sleigh. All that
evening he tells the story. How our name Lamotte is really De la Motte
de la Luciere. How there belongs to that name an estate and a title
in France, now thirty years with no one to claim it. How he, being an
AVOCAT, has remarked the likeness of the names. How he has tracked the
family through Montmorency and Quebec, in all the parish books. How he
finds my great-grandfather's great-grandfather, Etienne de La Motte who
came to Canada two hundred years ago, a younger son of the Marquis de la
Luciere. How he has the papers, many of them, with red seals on them. I
saw them. 'Of course,' says he, 'there are others of the family
here to share the property. It must be divided. But it is
large--enormous--millions of francs. And the largest share is yours,
and the title, and a castle--a castle larger than Price's saw-mill at
Chicoutimi; with carpets, and electric lights, and coloured pictures on
the wall, like the hotel at Roberval.'

"When my mother heard about that she was pleased. But me--when I heard
that I was a marquis, I knew it was true."

Jean's blue eyes were wide open now, and sparkling brightly. He had
put down the pan of potatoes. He was holding his head up and talking
eagerly.

Alden turned away his face to light his pipe, and hide a smile. "Did he
get--any money--out of you?"--came slowly between the puffs of smoke.

"Money!" answered Jean, "of course there must be money to carry on an
affair of this kind. There was seventy dollars that I had cleaned up on
the lumber-job last winter, and the mother had forty dollars from the
cow she sold in the fall. A hundred and ten dollars,--we gave him that.
He has gone to France to make the claim for us. Next spring he comes
back, and I give him a hundred dollars more; when I get my property five
thousand dollars more. It is little enough. A marquis must not be mean."

Alden swore softly in English, under his breath. A rustic comedy, a joke
on human nature, always pleased him; but beneath his cynical varnish
he had a very honest heart, and he hated cruelty and injustice. He knew
what a little money meant in the backwoods; what hard and bitter toil it
cost to rake it together; what sacrifices and privations must follow
its loss. If the smooth prospector of unclaimed estates in France had
arrived at the camp on the Grande Decharge at that moment, Alden would
have introduced him to the most unhappy hour of his life.

But with Jean Lamotte it was by no means so easy to deal. Alden
perceived at once that ridicule would be worse than useless. The man was
far too much in earnest. A jest about a marquis with holes in his hat!
Yes, Jean would laugh at that very merrily; for he was a true VOYAGEUR.
But a jest about the reality of the marquis! That struck him as almost
profane. It was a fixed idea with him. Argument could not shake it.
He had seen the papers. He knew it was true. All the strength of his
vigorous and healthy manhood seemed to have gone into it suddenly, as if
this was the news for which he had been waiting, unconsciously, since he
was born.

It was not in the least morbid, visionary, abstract. It was concrete,
actual, and so far as Alden could see, wholesome. It did not make Jean
despise his present life. On the contrary, it appeared to lend a zest
to it, as an interesting episode in the career of a nobleman. He was not
restless; he was not discontented. His whole nature was at once elated
and calmed. He was not at all feverish to get away from his familiar
existence, from the woods and the waters he knew so well, from the large
liberty of the unpeopled forest, the joyous rush of the great river, the
splendid breadth of the open sky. Unconsciously these things had gone
into his blood. Dimly he felt the premonitions of homesickness for them
all. But he was lifted up to remember that the blood into which these
things had entered was blue blood, and that though he lived in the
wilderness he really belonged to la haute classe. A breath of romance,
a spirit of chivalry from the days when the high-spirited courtiers of
Louis XIV sought their fortune in the New World, seemed to pass into
him. He spoke of it all with a kind of proud simplicity.

"It appears curious to m'sieu', no doubt, but it has been so in Canada
from the beginning. There were many nobles here in the old time.
Frontenac,--he was a duke or a prince. Denonville,--he was a grand
seigneur. La Salle, Vaudreuil,--these are all noble, counts or barons. I
know not the difference, but the cure has told me the names. And the old
Jacques Cartier, the father of all, when he went home to France, I have
heard that the King made him a lord and gave him a castle. Why not? He
was a capable man, a brave man; he could sail a big ship, he could run
the rapids of the great river in his canoe. He could hunt the bear, the
lynx, the carcajou. I suppose all these men,--marquises and counts and
barons,--I suppose they all lived hard, and slept on the ground, and
used the axe and the paddle when they came to the woods. It is not the
fine coat that makes the noble. It is the good blood, the adventure, the
brave heart."

"Magnificent!" thought Alden. "It is the real thing, a bit of the
seventeenth century lost in the forest for two hundred years. It is like
finding an old rapier beside an Indian trail. I suppose the fellow
may be the descendant of some gay young lieutenant of the regiment
Carignan-Salieres, who came out with De Tracy, or Courcelles. An amour
with the daughter of a habitant,--a name taken at random,--who can
unravel the skein? But here's the old thread of chivalry running through
all the tangles, tarnished but unbroken."

This was what he said to himself. What he said to Jean was, "Well,
Jean, you and I have been together in the woods for two summers now, and
marquis or no marquis, I hope this is not going to make any difference
between us."

"But certainly NOT!" answered Jean. "I am well content with m'sieu', as
I hope m'sieu' is content with me. While I am AU BOIS, I ask no better
than to be your guide. Besides, I must earn those other hundred dollars,
for the payment in the spring."

Alden tried to make him promise to give nothing more to the lawyer
until he had something sure to show for his money. But Jean was
politely non-committal on that point. It was evident that he felt the
impossibility of meanness in a marquis. Why should he be sparing or
cautious? That was for the merchant, not for the noble. A hundred, two
hundred, three hundred dollars: What was that to an estate and a title?
Nothing risk, nothing gain! He must live up to his role. Meantime he was
ready to prove that he was the best guide on the Grande Decharge.

And so he was. There was not a man in all the Lake St. John country who
knew the woods and waters as well as he did. Far up the great rivers
Peribonca and Misstassini he had pushed his birch canoe, exploring the
network of lakes and streams along the desolate Height of Land. He knew
the Grand Brule, where the bears roam in September on the fire-scarred
hills among the wide, unharvested fields of blueberries. He knew the
hidden ponds and slow-creeping little rivers where the beavers build
their dams, and raise their silent water-cities, like Venice lost in the
woods. He knew the vast barrens, covered with stiff silvery moss, where
the caribou fed in the winter. On the Decharge itself,--that tumultuous
flood, never failing, never freezing, by which the great lake pours all
its gathered waters in foam and fury down to the deep, still gorge of
the Saguenay,--there Jean was at home. There was not a curl or eddy
in the wild course of the river that he did not understand. The quiet
little channels by which one could drop down behind the islands while
the main stream made an impassable fall; the precise height of the water
at which it was safe to run the Rapide Gervais; the point of rock on the
brink of the Grande Chute where the canoe must whirl swiftly in to the
shore if you did not wish to go over the cataract; the exact force of
the tourniquet that sucked downward at one edge of the rapid, and of the
bouillon that boiled upward at the other edge, as if the bottom of the
river were heaving, and the narrow line of the FILET D'EAU along which
the birch-bark might shoot in safety; the treachery of the smooth, oily
curves where the brown water swept past the edge of the cliff, silent,
gloomy, menacing; the hidden pathway through the foam where the canoe
could run out securely and reach a favourite haunt of the ouananiche,
the fish that loves the wildest water,--all these secrets were known to
Jean. He read the river like a book. He loved it. He also respected it.
He knew it too well to take liberties with it.

The camp, that June, was beside the Rapide des Cedres. A great ledge
stretched across the river; the water came down in three leaps, brown
above, golden at the edge, white where it fell. Below, on the left bank,
there was a little cove behind a high point of rocks, a curving beach
of white sand, a gentle slope of ground, a tent half hidden among the
birches and balsams. Down the river, the main channel narrowed and
deepened. High banks hemmed it in on the left, iron-coasted islands on
the right. It was a sullen, powerful, dangerous stream. Beyond that, in
mid-river, the Ile Maligne reared its wicked head, scarred, bristling
with skeletons of dead trees. On either side of it, the river broke away
into a long fury of rapids and falls in which no boat could live.

It was there, on the point of the island, that the most famous fishing
in the river was found; and there Alden was determined to cast his fly
before he went home. Ten days they had waited at the Cedars for the
water to fall enough to make the passage to the island safe. At last
Alden grew impatient. It was a superb morning,--sky like an immense blue
gentian, air full of fragrance from a million bells of pink Linnaea,
sunshine flattering the great river,--a morning when danger and death
seemed incredible.

"To-day we are going to the island, Jean; the water must be low enough
now."

"Not yet, m'sieu', I am sorry, but it is not yet."

Alden laughed rather unpleasantly. "I believe you are afraid. I thought
you were a good canoeman--"

"I am that," said Jean, quietly, "and therefore,--well, it is the bad
canoeman who is never afraid."

"But last September you took your monsieur to the island and gave him
fine fishing. Why won't you do it for me? I believe you want to keep me
away from this place and save it for him."

Jean's face flushed. "M'sieu' has no reason to say that of me. I beg
that he will not repeat it."

Alden laughed again. He was somewhat irritated at Jean for taking the
thing so seriously, for being so obstinate. On such a morning it was
absurd. At least it would do no harm to make an effort to reach the
island. If it proved impossible they could give it up. "All right,
Jean," he said, "I'll take it back. You are only timid, that's all.
Francois here will go down with me. We can manage the canoe together.
Jean can stay at home and keep the camp. Eh, Francois?"

Francois, the second guide, was a mush of vanity and good nature, with
just sense enough to obey Jean's orders, and just jealousy enough to
make him jump at a chance to show his independence. He would like very
well to be first man for a day,--perhaps for the next trip, if he had
good luck. He grinned and nodded his head--"All ready, m'sieu'; I guess
we can do it."

But while he was holding the canoe steady for Alden to step out to his
place in the bow, Jean came down and pushed him aside. "Go to bed, dam'
fool," he muttered, shoved the canoe out into the river, and jumped
lightly to his own place in the stern.

Alden smiled to himself and said nothing for a while. When they were a
mile or two down the river he remarked, "So I see you changed your mind,
Jean. Do you think better of the river now?"

"No, m'sieu', I think the same."

"Well then?"

"Because I must share the luck with you whether it is good or bad. It is
no shame to have fear. The shame is not to face it. But one thing I ask
of you--"

"And that is?"

"Kneel as low in the canoe as you can, paddle steady, and do not dodge
when a wave comes."

Alden was half inclined to turn back, and give it up. But pride made it
difficult to say the word. Besides the fishing was sure to be superb;
not a line had been wet there since last year. It was worth a little
risk. The danger could not be so very great after all. How fair the
river ran,--a current of living topaz between banks of emerald! What but
good luck could come on such a day?

The canoe was gliding down the last smooth stretch. Alden lifted his
head, as they turned the corner, and for the first time saw the passage
close before him. His face went white, and he set his teeth.

The left-hand branch of the river, cleft by the rocky point of the
island, dropped at once into a tumult of yellow foam and raved downward
along the northern shore. The right-hand branch swerved away to the
east, running with swift, silent fury. On the lower edge of this
desperate race of brown billows, a huge whirlpool formed and dissolved
every two or three minutes, now eddying round in a wide backwater into a
rocky bay on the end of the island, now swept away by the rush of waves
into the white rage of the rapids below.

There was the secret pathway. The trick was, to dart across the
right-hand current at the proper moment, catch the rim of the whirlpool
as it swung backward, and let it sweep you around to the end of the
island. It was easy enough at low water. But now?

The smooth waves went crowding and shouldering down the slope as if they
were running to a fight. The river rose and swelled with quick, uneven
passion. The whirlpool was in its place one minute; the next, it was
blotted out; everything rushed madly downward--and below was hell.

Jean checked the boat for a moment, quivering in the strong
current, waiting for the TOURNIQUET to form again. Five seconds--ten
seconds--"Now!" he cried.

The canoe shot obliquely into the stream, driven by strong, quick
strokes of the paddles. It seemed almost to leap from wave to wave. All
was going well. The edge of the whirlpool was near. Then came the crest
of a larger wave,--slap--into the boat. Alden shrank involuntarily from
the cold water, and missed his stroke. An eddy caught the bow and shoved
it out. The whirlpool receded, dissolved. The whole river rushed down
upon the canoe and carried it away like a leaf.

Who says that thought is swift and clear in a moment like that? Who
talks about the whole of a man's life passing before him in a flash of
light? A flash of darkness! Thought is paralyzed, dumb. "What a fool!"
"Good-bye!" "If--" That is about all it can say. And if the moment
is prolonged, it says the same thing over again, stunned, bewildered,
impotent. Then?--The rocking waves; the sinking boat; the roar of the
fall; the swift overturn; the icy, blinding, strangling water--God!

Jean was flung shoreward. Instinctively he struck out, with the current
and half across it, toward a point of rock. His foot touched bottom.
He drew himself up and looked back. The canoe was sweeping past, bottom
upward, Alden underneath it.

Jean thrust himself out into the stream again, still going with the
current, but now away from shore. He gripped the canoe, flinging his
arm over the stern. Then he got hold of the thwart and tried to turn it
over. Too heavy! Groping underneath he caught Alden by the shoulder and
pulled him out. They would have gone down together but for the boat.

"Hold on tight," gasped Jean, "put your arm over the canoe--the other
side!"

Alden, half dazed, obeyed him. The torrent carried the dancing, slippery
bark past another point. Just below it, there was a little eddy.

"Now," cried Jean; "the back-water--strike for the land!"

They touched the black, gliddery rocks. They staggered out of the
water; waist-deep, knee-deep, ankle-deep; falling and rising again. They
crawled up on the warm moss....

The first thing that Alden noticed was the line of bright red spots on
the wing of a cedar-bird fluttering silently through the branches of the
tree above him. He lay still and watched it, wondering that he had never
before observed those brilliant sparks of colour on the little brown
bird. Then he wondered what made his legs ache so. Then he saw Jean,
dripping wet, sitting on a stone and looking down the river.

He got up painfully and went over to him. He put his hand on the man's
shoulder.

"Jean, you saved my life--I thank you, Marquis!"

"M'sieu'," said Jean, springing up, "I beg you not to mention it. It was
nothing. A narrow shave,--but LA BONNE CHANCE! And after all, you were
right,--we got to the island! But now how to get off?"




II

AN ALLIANCE OF RIVALS

Yes, of course they got off--the next day. At the foot of the island,
two miles below, there is a place where the water runs quieter, and a
BATEAU can cross from the main shore. Francois was frightened when the
others did not come back in the evening. He made his way around to St.
Joseph d'Alma, and got a boat to come up and look for their bodies. He
found them on the shore, alive and very hungry. But all that has nothing
to do with the story.

Nor does it make any difference how Alden spent the rest of his summer
in the woods, what kind of fishing he had, or what moved him to leave
five hundred dollars with Jean when he went away. That is all padding:
leave it out. The first point of interest is what Jean did with the
money. A suit of clothes, a new stove, and a set of kitchen utensils for
the log house opposite Grosse Ile, a trip to Quebec, a little game of
"Blof Americain" in the back room of the Hotel du Nord,--that was the
end of the money.

This is not a Sunday-school story. Jean was no saint. Even as a hero he
had his weak points. But after his own fashion he was a pretty good
kind of a marquis. He took his headache the next morning as a matter of
course, and his empty pocket as a trick of fortune. With the nobility,
he knew very well, such things often happen; but the nobility do not
complain about it. They go ahead, as if it was a bagatelle.

Before the week was out Jean was on his way to a lumber-shanty on the
St. Maurice River, to cook for a crew of thirty men all winter.

The cook's position in camp is curious,--half menial, half superior. It
is no place for a feeble man. But a cook who is strong in the back and
quick with his fists can make his office much respected. Wages, forty
dollars a month; duties, to keep the pea-soup kettle always hot and the
bread-pan always full, to stand the jokes of the camp up to a
certain point, and after that to whip two or three of the most active
humourists.

Jean performed all his duties to perfect satisfaction. Naturally most of
the jokes turned upon his great expectations. With two of the
principal jokers he had exchanged the usual and conclusive form of
repartee,--flattened them out literally. The ordinary BADINAGE he did
not mind in the least; it rather pleased him.

But about the first of January a new hand came into the camp,--a big,
black-haired fellow from Three Rivers, Pierre Lamotte DIT Theophile.
With him it was different. There seemed to be something serious in his
jests about "the marquis." It was not fun; it was mockery; always on the
edge of anger. He acted as if he would be glad to make Jean ridiculous
in any way.

Finally the matter came to a head. Something happened to the soup one
Sunday morning--tobacco probably. Certainly it was very bad, only fit
to throw away; and the whole camp was mad. It was not really Pierre
who played the trick; but it was he who sneered that the camp would be
better off if the cook knew less about castles and more about cooking.
Jean answered that what the camp needed was to get rid of a badreux who
thought it was a joke to poison the soup. Pierre took this as a personal
allusion and requested him to discuss the question outside. But before
the discussion began he made some general remarks about the character
and pretensions of Jean.

"A marquis!" said he. "This bagoulard gives himself out for a marquis!
He is nothing of the kind,--a rank humbug. There is a title in the
family, an estate in France, it is true. But it is mine. I have seen
the papers. I have paid money to the lawyer. I am waiting now for him
to arrange the matter. This man knows nothing about it. He is a fraud. I
will fight him now and settle the matter."

If a bucket of ice-water had been thrown over Jean he could not have
cooled off more suddenly. He was dazed. Another marquis? This was
a complication he had never dreamed of. It overwhelmed him like an
avalanche. He must have time to dig himself out of this difficulty.

"But stop," he cried; "you go too fast. This is more serious than a
pot of soup. I must hear about this. Let us talk first, Pierre, and
afterwards--"

The camp was delighted. It was a fine comedy,--two fools instead of one.
The men pricked up their ears and clamoured for a full explanation, a
debate in open court.

But that was not Jean's way. He had made no secret of his expectations,
but he did not care to confide all the details of his family history to
a crowd of fellows who would probably not understand and would certainly
laugh. Pierre was wrong of course, but at least he was in earnest. That
was something.

"This affair is between Pierre and me," said Jean. "We shall speak of it
by ourselves."

In the snow-muffled forest, that afternoon, where the great tree-trunks
rose like pillars of black granite from a marble floor, and the branches
of spruce and fir wove a dark green roof above their heads, these two
stray shoots of a noble stock tried to untangle their family history.
It was little that they knew about it. They could get back to their
grandfathers, but beyond that the trail was rather blind. Where they
crossed neither Jean nor Pierre could tell. In fact, both of their minds
had been empty vessels for the plausible lawyer to fill, and he had
filled them with various and windy stuff. There were discrepancies and
contradictions, denials and disputes, flashes of anger and clouds of
suspicion.

But through all the voluble talk, somehow or other, the two men were
drawing closer together. Pierre felt Jean's force of character, his air
of natural leadership, his bonhommie. He thought, "It was a shame for
that lawyer to trick such a fine fellow with the story that he was
the heir of the family." Jean, for his part, was impressed by Pierre's
simplicity and firmness of conviction. He thought, "What a mean thing
for that lawyer to fool such an innocent as this into supposing himself
the inheritor of the title." What never occurred to either of them was
the idea that the lawyer had deceived them both. That was not to be
dreamed of. To admit such a thought would have seemed to them like
throwing away something of great value which they had just found. The
family name, the papers, the links of the genealogy which had been
so convincingly set forth,--all this had made an impression on their
imagination, stronger than any logical argument. But which was the
marquis? That was the question.

"Look here," said Jean at last, "of what value is it that we fight? We
are cousins. You think I am wrong. I think you are wrong. But one of us
must be right. Who can tell? There will certainly be something for both
of us. Blood is stronger than currant juice. Let us work together and
help each other. You come home with me when this job is done. The
lawyer returns to St. Gedeon in the spring. He will know. We can see
him together. If he has fooled you, you can do what you like to him.
When--PARDON, I mean if--I get the title, I will do the fair thing by
you. You shall do the same by me. Is it a bargain?"

On this basis the compact was made. The camp was much amazed, not to say
disgusted, because there was no fight. Well-meaning efforts were made at
intervals through the winter to bring on a crisis. But nothing came of
it. The rival claimants had pooled their stock. They acknowledged the
tie of blood, and ignored the clash of interests. Together they
faced the fire of jokes and stood off the crowd; Pierre frowning and
belligerent, Jean smiling and scornful. Practically, they bossed the
camp. They were the only men who always shaved on Sunday morning. This
was regarded as foppish.

The popular disappointment deepened into a general sense of injury. In
March, when the cut of timber was finished and the logs were all hauled
to the edge of the river, to lie there until the ice should break and
the "drive" begin, the time arrived for the camp to close. The last
night, under the inspiration drawn from sundry bottles which had been
smuggled in to celebrate the occasion, a plan was concocted in the
stables to humble "the nobility" with a grand display of humour. Jean
was to be crowned as marquis with a bridle and blinders:

Pierre was to be anointed as count, with a dipperful of harness-oil;
after that the fun would be impromptu.

The impromptu part of the programme began earlier than it was
advertised. Some whisper of the plan had leaked through the chinks
of the wall between the shanty and the stable. When the crowd came
shambling into the cabin, snickering and nudging one another, Jean and
Pierre were standing by the stove at the upper end of the long table.

"Down with the canaille!" shouted Jean.

"Clean out the gang!" responded Pierre.

Brandishing long-handled frying-pans, they charged down the sides of the
table. The mob wavered, turned, and were lost! Helter-skelter they
fled, tumbling over one another in their haste to escape. The lamp
was smashed. The benches were upset. In the smoky hall a furious din
arose,--as if Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale were once more hewing their
way through the castle of Carteloise. Fear fell upon the multitude, and
they cried aloud grievously in their dismay. The blows of the weapons
echoed mightily in the darkness, and the two knights laid about them
grimly and with great joy. The door was too narrow for the flight. Some
of the men crept under the lowest berths; others hid beneath the table.
Two, endeavouring to escape by the windows, stuck fast, exposing a
broad and undefended mark to the pursuers. Here the last strokes of the
conflict were delivered.

"One for the marquis!" cried Jean, bringing down his weapon with a
sounding whack.

"Two for the count!" cried Pierre, making his pan crack like the blow of
a beaver's tail when he dives.

Then they went out into the snowy night, and sat down together on the
sill of the stable-door, and laughed until the tears ran down their
cheeks.

"My faith!" said Jean. "That was like the ancient time. It is from the
good wood that strong paddles are made,--eh, cousin?" And after that
there was a friendship between the two men that could not have been cut
with the sharpest axe in Quebec.




III

A HAPPY ENDING WHICH IS ALSO A BEGINNING

The plan of going back to St. Gedeon, to wait for the return of the
lawyer, was not carried out. Several of the little gods that use their
own indiscretion in arranging the pieces on the puzzle-map of life,
interfered with it.

The first to meddle was that highly irresponsible deity with the bow
and arrows, who has no respect for rank or age, but reserves all his
attention for sex.

When the camp on the St. Maurice dissolved, Jean went down with Pierre
to Three Rivers for a short visit. There was a snug house on a high bank
above the river, a couple of miles from the town. A wife and an armful
of children gave assurance that the race of La Motte de la Luciere
should not die out on this side of the ocean.

There was also a little sister-in-law, Alma Grenou. If you had seen her
you would not have wondered at what happened. Eyes like a deer, face
like a mayflower, voice like the "D" string in a 'cello,--she was the
picture of Drummond's girl in "The Habitant":


     "She's nicer girl on whole Comte, an' jus' got eighteen year--
        Black eye, black hair, and cheek rosee dat's lak wan Fameuse
        on de fall;
      But don't spik much,--not of dat kin',--I can't say she love
        me at all."


With her Jean plunged into love. It was not a gradual approach, like
gliding down a smooth stream. It was not a swift descent, like running a
lively rapid. It was a veritable plunge, like going over a chute. He did
not know precisely what had happened to him at first; but he knew very
soon what to do about it.

The return to Lake St. John was postponed till a more convenient season:
after the snow had melted and the ice had broken up--probably the lawyer
would not make his visit before that. If he arrived sooner, he would
come back again; he wanted his money, that was certain. Besides, what
was more likely than that he should come also to see Pierre? He had
promised to do so. At all events, they would wait at Three Rivers for a
while.

The first week Jean told Alma that she was the prettiest girl he had
ever seen. She tossed her head and expressed a conviction that he was
joking. She suggested that he was in the habit of saying the same thing
to every girl.

The second week he made a long stride in his wooing. He took her out
sleighing on the last remnant of the snow,--very thin and bumpy,--and
utilized the occasion to put his arm around her waist. She cried
"Laisse-moi tranquille, Jean!" boxed his ears, and said she thought he
must be out of his mind.

The following Saturday afternoon he craftily came behind her in the
stable as she was milking the cow, and bent her head back and kissed
her on the face. She began to cry, and said he had taken an unfair
advantage, while her hands were busy. She hated him.

"Well, then," said he, still holding her warm shoulders, "if you hate
me, I am going home tomorrow."

The sobs calmed down quickly. She bent herself forward so that he could
see the rosy nape of her neck with the curling tendrils of brown hair
around it.

"But," she said, "but, Jean,--do you love me for sure?"

After that the path was level, easy, and very quickly travelled. On
Sunday afternoon the priest was notified that his services would be
needed for a wedding, the first week in May. Pierre's consent was
genial and hilarious. The marriage suited him exactly. It was a family
alliance. It made everything move smooth and certain. The property would
be kept together.

But the other little interfering gods had not yet been heard from. One
of them, who had special charge of what remained of the soul of the
dealer in unclaimed estates, put it into his head to go to Three Rivers
first, instead of to St. Gedeon.

He had a good many clients in different parts of the country,--temporary
clients, of course,--and it occurred to him that he might as well
extract another fifty dollars from Pierre Lamotte DIT Theophile, before
going on a longer journey. On his way down from Montreal he stopped in
several small towns and slept in beds of various quality.

Another of the little deities (the one that presides over unclean
villages; decidedly a false god, but sufficiently powerful) arranged a
surprise for the travelling lawyer. It came out at Three Rivers.

He arrived about nightfall, and slept at the hotel, feeling curiously
depressed. The next morning he was worse; but he was a resolute and
industrious dog, after his own fashion. So he hired a buggy and drove
out through the mud to Pierre's place. They heard the wagon stop at the
gate, and went out to see who it was.

The man was hardly recognizable: face pale, lips blue, eyes dull, teeth
chattering.

"Get me out of this," he muttered. "I am dying. God's sake, be quick!"

They helped him to the house, and he immediately went into a convulsion.
From this he passed into a raging fever. Pierre took the buggy and drove
posthaste to town for a doctor.

The doctor's opinion was evidently serious, but his remarks were
non-committal.

"Keep him in this room. Give him ten drops of this in water every hour.
One of these powders if he becomes violent. One of you must stay with
him all the time. Only one, you understand. The rest keep away. I will
come back in the morning."

In the morning the doctor's face was yet more grave. He examined the
patient carefully. Then he turned to Jean, who had acted as nurse.

"I thought so," said he; "you must all be vaccinated immediately. There
is still time, I hope. But what to do with this gentleman, God knows. We
can't send him back to the town. He has the small-pox."

That was a pretty prelude to a wedding festival. They were all at their
wit's end. While the doctor scratched their arms, they discussed the
situation, excitedly and with desperation. Jean was the first to stop
chattering and begin to think.

"There is that old cabane of Poulin's up the road. It is empty these
three years. But there is a good spring of water. One could patch the
roof at one end and put up a stove."

"Good!" said the doctor. "But some one to take care of him? It will be a
long job, and a bad one."

"I am going to do that," said Jean; "it is my place. This gentleman
cannot be left to die in the road. Le bon Dieu did not send him here for
that. The head of the family"--here he stopped a moment and looked at
Pierre, who was silent--"must take the heavy end of the job, and I am
ready for it."

"Good!" said the doctor again. But Alma was crying in the corner of the
room.

Four weeks, five weeks, six weeks the vigil in the cabane lasted. The
last patches of snow disappeared from the fields one night, as if winter
had picked up its rags and vanished. The willows along the brook turned
yellow; the grass greened around the spring. Scarlet buds flamed on the
swamp maples. A tender mist of foliage spread over the woodlands. The
chokecherries burst into a glory of white blossoms. The bluebirds came
back, fluting love-songs; and the robins, carolling ballads of joy; and
the blackbirds, creaking merrily.

The priest came once and saw the sick man, but everything was going
well. It was not necessary to run any extra risks. Every week after that
he came and leaned on the fence, talking with Jean in the doorway. When
he went away he always lifted three fingers--so--you know the sign? It
is a very pleasant one, and it did Jean's heart good.

Pierre kept the cabane well supplied with provisions, leaving them just
inside of the gate. But with the milk it was necessary to be a little
careful; so the can was kept in a place by itself, under the out-of-door
oven, in the shade. And beside this can Jean would find, every day,
something particular,--a blossom of the red geranium that bloomed in the
farmhouse window, a piece of cake with plums in it, a bunch of trailing
arbutus,--once it was a little bit of blue ribbon, tied in a certain
square knot--so--perhaps you know that sign too? That did Jean's heart
good also.

But what kind of conversation was there in the cabane when the sick
man's delirium had passed and he knew what had happened to him? Not much
at first, for the man was too weak. After he began to get stronger, he
was thinking a great deal, fighting with himself. In the end he came out
pretty well--for a lawyer of his kind. Perhaps he was desirous to leave
the man whom he had deceived, and who had nursed him back from death,
some fragment, as much as possible, of the dream that brightened his
life. Perhaps he was only anxious to save as much as he could of his own
reputation. At all events, this is what he did.

He told Jean a long story, part truth, part lie, about his
investigations. The estate and the title were in the family; that was
certain. Jean was the probable heir, if there was any heir; that was
almost sure. The part about Pierre had been a--well, a mistake. But
the trouble with the whole affair was this. A law made in the days of
Napoleon limited the time for which an estate could remain unclaimed. A
certain number of years, and then the government took everything. That
number of years had just passed. By the old law Jean was probably a
marquis with a castle. By the new law?--Frankly, he could not advise
a client to incur any more expense. In fact, he intended to return the
amount already paid. A hundred and ten dollars, was it not? Yes, and
fifty dollars for the six weeks of nursing. VOILA, a draft on Montreal,
a hundred and sixty dollars,--as good as gold! And beside that, there
was the incalculable debt for this great kindness to a sick man, for
which he would always be M. de la Motte's grateful debtor!

The lawyer's pock-marked face--the scars still red and angry--lit
up with a curious mixed light of shrewdness and gratitude. Jean was
somewhat moved. His castle was in ruins. But he remained noble--by the
old law; that was something!

A few days later the doctor pronounced it safe to move the patient. He
came with a carriage to fetch him. Jean, well fumigated and dressed in a
new suit of clothes, walked down the road beside them to the farm-house
gate. There Alma met him with both hands. His eyes embraced her. The
air of June was radiant about them. The fragrance of the woods breathed
itself over the broad valley. A song sparrow poured his heart out from
a blossoming lilac. The world was large, and free, and very good. And
between the lovers there was nothing but a little gate.

"I understand," said the doctor, smiling, as he tightened up the reins,
"I understand that there is a title in your family, M. de la Motte, in
effect that you are a marquis?"

"It is true," said Jean, turning his head, "at least so I think."

"So do I," said the doctor "But you had better go in, MONSIEUR LE
MARQUIS--you keep MADAME LA MARQUISE waiting."




VIII. THE KEEPER OF THE LIGHT

At long distance, looking over the blue waters of the Gulf of St.
Lawrence in clear weather, you might think that you saw a lonely
sea-gull, snow-white, perching motionless on a cobble of gray rock.
Then, as your boat drifted in, following the languid tide and the soft
southern breeze, you would perceive that the cobble of rock was a rugged
hill with a few bushes and stunted trees growing in the crevices,
and that the gleaming speck near the summit must be some kind of a
building--if you were on the coast of Italy or Spain you would say a
villa or a farm-house. Then, as you floated still farther north and
drew nearer to the coast, the desolate hill would detach itself from
the mainland and become a little mountain-isle, with a flock of smaller
islets clustering around it as a brood of wild ducks keep close to their
mother, and with deep water, nearly two miles wide, flowing between it
and the shore; while the shining speck on the seaward side stood out
clearly as a low, whitewashed dwelling with a sturdy round tower at one
end, crowned with a big eight-sided lantern--a solitary lighthouse.

That is the Isle of the Wise Virgin. Behind it the long blue Laurentian
Mountains, clothed with unbroken forest, rise in sombre ranges toward
the Height of Land. In front of it the waters of the gulf heave and
sparkle far away to where the dim peaks of St. Anne des Monts are traced
along the southern horizon. Sheltered a little, but not completely, by
the island breakwater of granite, lies the rocky beach of Dead Men's
Point, where an English navy was wrecked in a night of storm a hundred
years ago.

There are a score of wooden houses, a tiny, weather-beaten chapel, a
Hudson Bay Company's store, a row of platforms for drying fish, and a
varied assortment of boats and nets, strung along the beach now. Dead
Men's Point has developed into a centre of industry, with a life, a
tradition, a social character of its own. And in one of those houses, as
you sit at the door in the lingering June twilight, looking out across
the deep channel to where the lantern of the tower is just beginning
to glow with orange radiance above the shadow of the island--in that
far-away place, in that mystical hour, you should hear the story of the
light and its keeper.




I

When the lighthouse was built, many years ago, the island had another
name. It was called the Isle of Birds. Thousands of sea-fowl nested
there. The handful of people who lived on the shore robbed the nests
and slaughtered the birds, with considerable profit. It was perceived in
advance that the building of the lighthouse would interfere with
this, and with other things. Hence it was not altogether a popular
improvement. Marcel Thibault, the oldest inhabitant, was the leader of
the opposition.

"That lighthouse!" said he, "what good will it be for us? We know the
way in and out when it makes clear weather, by day or by night. But when
the sky gets swampy, when it makes fog, then we stay with ourselves at
home, or we run into La Trinite, or Pentecote. We know the way. What?
The stranger boats? B'EN! the stranger boats need not to come here,
if they know not the way. The more fish, the more seals, the more
everything will there be left for us. Just because of the stranger
boats, to build something that makes all the birds wild and spoils the
hunting--that is a fool's work. The good God made no stupid light on the
Isle of Birds. He saw no necessity of it."

"Besides," continued Thibault, puffing slowly at his pipe,
"besides--those stranger boats, sometimes they are lost, they come
ashore. It is sad! But who gets the things that are saved, all sorts
of things, good to put into our houses, good to eat, good to sell,
sometimes a boat that can be patched up almost like new--who gets these
things, eh? Doubtless those for whom the good God intended them. But who
shall get them when this sacre lighthouse is built, eh? Tell me that,
you Baptiste Fortin."

Fortin represented the party of progress in the little parliament of the
beach. He had come down from Quebec some years ago bringing with him a
wife and two little daughters, and a good many new notions about life.
He had good luck at the cod-fishing, and built a house with windows at
the side as well as in front. When his third girl, Nataline, was born,
he went so far as to paint the house red, and put on a kitchen, and
enclose a bit of ground for a yard. This marked him as a radical, an
innovator. It was expected that he would defend the building of the
lighthouse. And he did.

"Monsieur Thibault," he said, "you talk well, but you talk too late. It
is of a past age, your talk. A new time comes to the Cote Nord. We
begin to civilize ourselves. To hold back against the light would be
our shame. Tell me this, Marcel Thibault, what men are they that love
darkness?"

"TORRIEUX!" growled Thibault, "that is a little strong. You say my deeds
are evil?"

"No, no," answered Fortin; "I say not that, my friend, but I say this
lighthouse means good: good for us, and good for all who come to this
coast. It will bring more trade to us. It will bring a boat with the
mail, with newspapers, perhaps once, perhaps twice a month, all through
the summer. It will bring us into the great world. To lose that for the
sake of a few birds--CA SERA B'EN DE VALEUR! Besides, it is impossible.
The lighthouse is coming, certain."

Fortin was right, of course. But Thibault's position was not altogether
unnatural, nor unfamiliar. All over the world, for the past hundred
years, people have been kicking against the sharpness of the pricks that
drove them forward out of the old life, the wild life, the free life,
grown dear to them because it was so easy. There has been a terrible
interference with bird-nesting and other things. All over the world the
great Something that bridges rivers, and tunnels mountains, and fells
forests, and populates deserts, and opens up the hidden corners of the
earth, has been pushing steadily on; and the people who like things
to remain as they are have had to give up a great deal. There was no
exception made in favour of Dead Men's Point. The Isle of Birds lay in
the line of progress. The lighthouse arrived.

It was a very good house for that day. The keeper's dwelling had three
rooms and was solidly built. The tower was thirty feet high. The lantern
held a revolving light, with a four-wick Fresnel lamp, burning sperm
oil. There was one of Stevenson's new cages of dioptric prisms around
the flame, and once every minute it was turned by clockwork, flashing a
broad belt of radiance fifteen miles across the sea. All night long that
big bright eye was opening and shutting. "BAGUETTE!" said Thibault, "it
winks like a one-eyed Windigo."

The Department of Marine and Fisheries sent down an expert from Quebec
to keep the light in order and run it for the first summer. He
took Fortin as his assistant. By the end of August he reported to
headquarters that the light was all right, and that Fortin was qualified
to be appointed keeper. Before October was out the certificate of
appointment came back, and the expert packed his bag to go up the river.

"Now look here, Fortin," said he, "this is no fishing trip. Do you think
you are up to this job?"

"I suppose," said Fortin.

"Well now, do you remember all this business about the machinery that
turns the lenses? That 's the main thing. The bearings must be kept well
oiled, and the weight must never get out of order. The clock-face will
tell you when it is running right. If anything gets hitched up here's
the crank to keep it going until you can straighten the machine again.
It's easy enough to turn it. But you must never let it stop between dark
and daylight. The regular turn once a minute--that's the mark of this
light. If it shines steady it might as well be out. Yes, better! Any
vessel coming along here in a dirty night and seeing a fixed light would
take it for the Cap Loup-Marin and run ashore. This particular light has
got to revolve once a minute every night from April first to December
tenth, certain. Can you do it?"

"Certain," said Fortin.

"That's the way I like to hear a man talk! Now, you've got oil enough to
last you through till the tenth of December, when you close the light,
and to run on for a month in the spring after you open again. The ice
may be late in going out and perhaps the supply-boat can't get down
before the middle of April, or thereabouts. But she'll bring plenty of
oil when she comes, so you'll be all right."

"All right," said Fortin.

"Well, I've said it all, I guess. You understand what you've got to do?
Good-by and good luck. You're the keeper of the light now."

"Good luck," said Fortin, "I am going to keep it." The same day he shut
up the red house on the beach and moved to the white house on the island
with Marie-Anne, his wife, and the three girls, Alma, aged seventeen,
Azilda, aged fifteen, and Nataline, aged thirteen. He was the captain,
and Marie-Anne was the mate, and the three girls were the crew. They
were all as full of happy pride as if they had come into possession of a
great fortune.

It was the thirty-first day of October. A snow-shower had silvered the
island. The afternoon was clear and beautiful. As the sun sloped toward
the rose-coloured hills of the mainland the whole family stood out in
front of the lighthouse looking up at the tower.

"Regard him well, my children," said Baptiste; "God has given him to us
to keep, and to keep us. Thibault says he is a Windigo. B'EN! We shall
see that he is a friendly Windigo. Every minute all the night he
shall wink, just for kindness and good luck to all the world, till the
daylight."




II

On the ninth of November, at three o'clock in the afternoon, Baptiste
went into the tower to see that the clockwork was in order for the
night. He set the dial on the machine, put a few drops of oil on the
bearings of the cylinder, and started to wind up the weight.

It rose a few inches, gave a dull click, and then stopped dead. He
tugged a little harder, but it would not move. Then he tried to let it
down. He pushed at the lever that set the clockwork in motion.

He might as well have tried to make the island turn around by pushing at
one of the little spruce trees that clung to the rock.

Then it dawned fearfully upon him that something must be wrong.
Trembling with anxiety, he climbed up and peered in among the wheels.

The escapement wheel was cracked clean through, as if some one had
struck it with the head of an axe, and one of the pallets of the spindle
was stuck fast in the crack. He could knock it out easily enough, but
when the crack came around again, the pallet would catch and the clock
would stop once more. It was a fatal injury.

Baptiste turned white, then red, gripped his head in his hands, and ran
down the steps, out of the door, straight toward his canoe, which was
pulled up on the western side of the island.

"DAME!" he cried, "who has done this? Let me catch him! If that old
Thibault--"

As he leaped down the rocky slope the setting sun gleamed straight in
his eyes. It was poised like a ball of fire on the very edge of the
mountains. Five minutes more and it would be gone. Fifteen minutes more
and darkness would close in. Then the giant's eye must begin to glow,
and to wink precisely once a minute all night long. If not, what became
of the keeper's word, his faith, his honour?

No matter how the injury to the clockwork was done. No matter who was
to be blamed or punished for it. That could wait. The question now was
whether the light would fail or not. And it must be answered within a
quarter of an hour.

That red ray of the vanishing sun was like a blow in the face to
Baptiste. It stopped him short, dazed and bewildered. Then he came to
himself, wheeled, and ran up the rocks faster than he had come down.

"Marie-Anne! Alma!" he shouted, as he dashed past the door of the house,
"all of you! To me, in the tower!"

He was up in the lantern when they came running in, full of curiosity,
excited, asking twenty questions at once. Nataline climbed up the ladder
and put her head through the trap-door.

"What is it?" she panted. "What has hap--"

"Go down," answered her father, "go down all at once. Wait for me. I am
coming. I will explain."

The explanation was not altogether lucid and scientific. There were some
bad words mixed up with it.

Baptiste was still hot with anger and the unsatisfied desire to whip
somebody, he did not know whom, for something, he did not know what.
But angry as he was, he was still sane enough to hold his mind hard and
close to the main point. The crank must be adjusted; the machine must be
ready to turn before dark. While he worked he hastily made the situation
clear to his listeners.

That crank must be turned by hand, round and round all night, not too
slow, not too fast. The dial on the machine must mark time with
the clock on the wall. The light must flash once every minute until
daybreak. He would do as much of the labour as he could, but the wife
and the two older girls must help him. Nataline could go to bed.

At this Nataline's short upper lip trembled. She rubbed her eyes with
the sleeve of her dress, and began to weep silently.

"What is the matter with you?" said her mother, "bad child, have you
fear to sleep alone? A big girl like you!"

"No," she sobbed, "I have no fear, but I want some of the fun."

"Fun!" growled her father. "What fun? NOM D'UN CHIEN! She calls this
fun!" He looked at her for a moment, as she stood there, half defiant,
half despondent, with her red mouth quivering and her big brown eyes
sparkling fire; then he burst into a hearty laugh.

"Come here, my little wild-cat," he said, drawing her to him and kissing
her; "you are a good girl after all. I suppose you think this light is
part yours, eh?"

The girl nodded.

"B'EN! You shall have your share, fun and all. You shall make the tea
for us and bring us something to eat. Perhaps when Alma and 'Zilda
fatigue themselves they will permit a few turns of the crank to you. Are
you content? Run now and boil the kettle."

It was a very long night. No matter how easily a handle turns, after
a certain number of revolutions there is a stiffness about it. The
stiffness is not in the handle, but in the hand that pushes it.

Round and round, evenly, steadily, minute after minute, hour after hour,
shoving out, drawing in, circle after circle, no swerving, no stopping,
no varying the motion, turn after turn--fifty-five, fifty-six,
fifty-seven--what's the use of counting? Watch the dial; go to
sleep--no! for God's sake, no sleep! But how hard it is to keep awake!
How heavy the arm grows, how stiffly the muscles move, how the will
creaks and groans. BATISCAN! It is not easy for a human being to become
part of a machine.

Fortin himself took the longest spell at the crank, of course. He went
at his work with a rigid courage. His red-hot anger had cooled down into
a shape that was like a bar of forged steel. He meant to make that light
revolve if it killed him to do it. He was the captain of a company that
had run into an ambuscade. He was going to fight his way through if he
had to fight alone.

The wife and the two older girls followed him blindly and bravely, in
the habit of sheer obedience. They did not quite understand the meaning
of the task, the honour of victory, the shame of defeat. But Fortin said
it must be done, and he knew best. So they took their places in turn, as
he grew weary, and kept the light flashing.

And Nataline--well, there is no way of describing what Nataline did,
except to say that she played the fife.

She felt the contest just as her father did, not as deeply, perhaps, but
in the same spirit. She went into the fight with darkness like a little
soldier. And she played the fife.

When she came up from the kitchen with the smoking pail of tea, she
rapped on the door and called out to know whether the Windigo was at
home to-night.

She ran in and out of the place like a squirrel. She looked up at the
light and laughed. Then she ran in and reported. "He winks," she said,
"old one-eye winks beautifully. Keep him going. My turn now!"

She refused to be put off with a shorter spell than the other girls.
"No," she cried, "I can do it as well as you. You think you are so much
older. Well, what of that? The light is part mine; father said so. Let
me turn, va-t-en."

When the first glimmer of the little day came shivering along the
eastern horizon, Nataline was at the crank. The mother and the two older
girls were half asleep. Baptiste stepped out to look at the sky. "Come,"
he cried, returning. "We can stop now, it is growing gray in the east,
almost morning."

"But not yet," said Nataline; "we must wait for the first red. A few
more turns. Let's finish it up with a song."

She shook her head and piped up the refrain of the old Canadian chanson:


     "En roulant ma boule-le roulant
      En roulant ma bou-le."


And to that cheerful music the first night's battle was carried through
to victory.

The next day Fortin spent two hours in trying to repair the clockwork.
It was of no use. The broken part was indispensable and could not be
replaced.

At noon he went over to the mainland to tell of the disaster, and
perhaps to find out if any hostile hand was responsible for it. He found
out nothing. Every one denied all knowledge of the accident. Perhaps
there was a flaw in the wheel; perhaps it had broken itself. That was
possible. Fortin could not deny it; but the thing that hurt him most was
that he got so little sympathy. Nobody seemed to care whether the light
was kept burning or not. When he told them how the machine had been
turned all night by hand, they were astonished. "CRE-IE!" they cried,
"you must have had a great misery to do that." But that he proposed to
go on doing it for a month longer, until December tenth, and to begin
again on April first, and go on turning the light by hand for three
or four weeks more until the supply-boat came down and brought the
necessary tools to repair the machine--such an idea as this went beyond
their horizon.

"But you are crazy, Baptiste," they said, "you can never do it; you are
not capable."

"I would be crazy," he answered, "if I did not see what I must do. That
light is my charge. In all the world there is nothing else so great as
that for me and for my family--you understand? For us it is the chief
thing. It is my Ten Commandments. I shall keep it or be damned."

There was a silence after this remark. They were not very particular
about the use of language at Dead Men's Point, but this shocked them
a little. They thought that Fortin was swearing a shade too hard. In
reality he was never more reverent, never more soberly in earnest.

After a while he continued, "I want some one to help me with the work
on the island. We must be up all the nights now. By day we must get some
sleep. I want another man or a strong boy. Is there any who will come?
The Government will pay. Or if not, I will pay, moi-meme."

There was no response. All the men hung back. The lighthouse was still
unpopular, or at least it was on trial. Fortin's pluck and resolution
had undoubtedly impressed them a little. But they still hesitated to
commit themselves to his side.

"B'en," he said, "there is no one. Then we shall manage the affair en
famille. Bon soir, messieurs!"

He walked down to the beach with his head in the air, without looking
back. But before he had his canoe in the water he heard some one running
down behind him. It was Thibault's youngest son, Marcel, a well-grown
boy of sixteen, very much out of breath with running and shyness.

"Monsieur Fortin," he stammered, "will you--do you think--am I big
enough?"

Baptiste looked him in the face for a moment. Then his eyes twinkled.

"Certain," he answered, "you are bigger than your father. But what will
he say to this?"

"He says," blurted out Marcel--"well, he says that he will say nothing
if I do not ask him."

So the little Marcel was enlisted in the crew on the island. For thirty
nights those six people--a man, and a boy, and four women (Nataline was
not going to submit to any distinctions on the score of age, you may be
sure)--for a full month they turned their flashing lantern by hand from
dusk to day-break.

The fog, the frost, the hail, the snow beleaguered their tower. Hunger
and cold, sleeplessness and weariness, pain and discouragement, held
rendezvous in that dismal, cramped little room. Many a night Nataline's
fife of fun played a feeble, wheezy note. But it played. And the crank
went round. And every bit of glass in the lantern was as clear as
polished crystal. And the big lamp was full of oil. And the great eye
of the friendly giant winked without ceasing, through fierce storm and
placid moonlight.

When the tenth of December came, the light went to sleep for the winter,
and the keepers took their way across the ice to the mainland. They had
won the battle, not only on the island, fighting against the elements,
but also at Dead Men's Point, against public opinion. The inhabitants
began to understand that the lighthouse meant something--a law, an
order, a principle.

Men cannot help feeling respect for a thing when they see others willing
to fight or to suffer for it.

When the time arrived to kindle the light again in the spring, Fortin
could have had any one that he wanted to help him. But no; he chose the
little Marcel again; the boy wanted to go, and he had earned the right.
Besides, he and Nataline had struck up a close friendship on the island,
cemented during the winter by various hunting excursions after hares and
ptarmigan. Marcel was a skilful setter of snares. But Nataline was not
content until she had won consent to borrow her father's CARABINE. They
hunted in partnership. One day they had shot a fox. That is, Nataline
had shot it, though Marcel had seen it first and tracked it. Now they
wanted to try for a seal on the point of the island when the ice went
out. It was quite essential that Marcel should go.

"Besides," said Baptiste to his wife, confidentially, "a boy costs less
than a man. Why should we waste money? Marcel is best."

A peasant-hero is seldom averse to economy in small things, like money.

But there was not much play in the spring session with the light on the
island. It was a bitter job. December had been lamb-like compared with
April. First, the southeast wind kept the ice driving in along the
shore. Then the northwest wind came hurtling down from the Arctic
wilderness like a pack of wolves. There was a snow-storm of four days
and nights that made the whole world--earth and sky and sea--look like a
crazy white chaos. And through it all, that weary, dogged crank must be
kept turning--turning from dark to daylight.

It seemed as if the supply-boat would never come. At last they saw it,
one fair afternoon, April the twenty-ninth, creeping slowly down the
coast. They were just getting ready for another night's work.

Fortin ran out of the tower, took off his hat, and began to say his
prayers. The wife and the two elder girls stood in the kitchen door,
crossing themselves, with tears in their eyes. Marcel and Nataline were
coming up from the point of the island, where they had been watching for
their seal. She was singing


     "Mon pere n'avait fille que moi,
      Encore sur la mer il m'envoi-e-eh!"


When she saw the boat she stopped short for a minute.

"Well," she said, "they find us awake, n'est-c'pas? And if they don't
come faster than that we'll have another chance to show them how we make
the light wink, eh?"

Then she went on with her song--

     "Sautez, mignonne, Cecilia.
      Ah, ah, ah, ah, Cecilia!"




III

You did not suppose that was the end of the story, did you?

No, an out-of-doors story does not end like that, broken off in the
middle, with a bit of a song. It goes on to something definite, like a
wedding or a funeral.

You have not heard, yet, how near the light came to failing, and how the
keeper saved it and something else too. Nataline's story is not told; it
is only begun. This first part is only the introduction, just to let you
see what kind of a girl she was, and how her life was made. If you want
to hear the conclusion, we must hurry along a little faster or we shall
never get to it.

Nataline grew up like a young birch tree--stately and strong, good to
look at. She was beautiful in her place; she fitted it exactly. Her
bronzed face with an under-tinge of red; her low, black eyebrows; her
clear eyes like the brown waters of a woodland stream; her dark, curly
hair with little tendrils always blowing loose around the pillar of her
neck; her broad breast and sloping shoulders; her firm, fearless step;
her voice, rich and vibrant; her straight, steady looks--but there,
who can describe a thing like that? I tell you she was a girl to love
out-of-doors.

There was nothing that she could not do. She could cook; she could swing
an axe; she could paddle a canoe; she could fish; she could shoot; and,
best of all, she could run the lighthouse. Her father's devotion to it
had gone into her blood. It was the centre of her life, her law of God.
There was nothing about it that she did not understand and love. From
the first of April to the tenth of December the flashing of that light
was like the beating of her heart--steady, even, unfaltering. She kept
time to it as unconsciously as the tides follow the moon. She lived by
it and for it.

There were no more accidents to the clockwork after the first one was
repaired. It ran on regularly, year after year.

Alma and Azilda were married and went away to live, one on the South
Shore, the other at Quebec. Nataline was her father's right-hand man. As
the rheumatism took hold of him and lamed his shoulders and wrists, more
and more of the work fell upon her. She was proud of it.

At last it came to pass, one day in January, that Baptiste died. He was
not gathered to his fathers, for they were buried far away beside the
Montmorenci, and on the rocky coast of Brittany. But the men dug through
the snow behind the tiny chapel at Dead Men's Point, and made a grave
for Baptiste Fortin, and the young priest of the mission read the
funeral service over it.

It went without saying that Nataline was to be the keeper of the light,
at least until the supply-boat came down again in the spring and orders
arrived from the Government in Quebec. Why not? She was a woman, it is
true. But if a woman can do a thing as well as a man, why should she not
do it? Besides, Nataline could do this particular thing much better
than any man on the Point. Everybody approved of her as the heir of her
father, especially young Marcel Thibault.

What?

Yes, of course. You could not help guessing it. He was Nataline's lover.
They were to be married the next summer. They sat together in the best
room, while the old mother was rocking to and fro and knitting beside
the kitchen stove, and talked of what they were going to do. Once in a
while, when Nataline grieved for her father, she would let Marcel put
his arm around her and comfort her in the way that lovers know. But
their talk was mainly of the future, because they were young, and of the
light, because Nataline's life belonged to it.

Perhaps the Government would remember that year when it was kept going
by hand for two months, and give it to her to keep as long as she lived.
That would be only fair. Certainly, it was hers for the present. No one
had as good a right to it. She took possession without a doubt. At all
events, while she was the keeper the light should not fail.

But that winter was a bad one on the North Shore, and particularly at
Dead Men's Point. It was terribly bad. The summer before, the fishing
had been almost a dead failure. In June a wild storm had smashed all
the salmon nets and swept most of them away. In July they could find no
caplin for bait for the cod-fishing, and in August and September
they could find no cod. The few bushels of potatoes that some of the
inhabitants had planted, rotted in the ground. The people at the Point
went into the winter short of money and very short of food.

There were some supplies at the store, pork and flour and molasses,
and they could run through the year on credit and pay their debts the
following summer if the fish came back. But this resource also failed
them. In the last week of January the store caught fire and burned up.
Nothing was saved. The only hope now was the seal-hunting in February
and March and April. That at least would bring them meat and oil enough
to keep them from starvation.

But this hope failed, too. The winds blew strong from the north and
west, driving the ice far out into the gulf. The chase was long and
perilous. The seals were few and wild. Less than a dozen were killed in
all. By the last week in March Dead Men's Point stood face to face with
famine.

Then it was that old Thibault had an idea.

"There is sperm oil on the Island of Birds," said he, "in the
lighthouse, plenty of it, gallons of it. It is not very good to taste,
perhaps, but what of that? It will keep life in the body. The Esquimaux
drink it in the north, often. We must take the oil of the lighthouse to
keep us from starving until the supply-boat comes down."

"But how shall we get it?" asked the others. "It is locked up. Nataline
Fortin has the key. Will she give it?"

"Give it?" growled Thibault. "Name of a name! of course she will give
it. She must. Is not a life, the life of all of us, more than a light?"

A self-appointed committee of three, with Thibault at the head, waited
upon Nataline without delay, told her their plan, and asked for the
key. She thought it over silently for a few minutes, and then refused
point-blank.

"No," she said, "I will not give the key. That oil is for the lamp. If
you take it, the lamp will not be lighted on the first of April; it will
not be burning when the supply-boat comes. For me, that would be shame,
disgrace, worse than death. I am the keeper of the light. You shall not
have the oil."

They argued with her, pleaded with her, tried to browbeat her. She was
a rock. Her round under-jaw was set like a steel trap. Her lips
straightened into a white line. Her eyebrows drew together, and her eyes
grew black.

"No," she cried, "I tell you no, no, a thousand times no. All in this
house I will share with you. But not one drop of what belongs to the
light! Never."

Later in the afternoon the priest came to see her; a thin, pale young
man, bent with the hardships of his life, and with sad dreams in his
sunken eyes. He talked with her very gently and kindly.

"Think well, my daughter; think seriously what you do. Is it not our
first duty to save human life? Surely that must be according to the will
of God. Will you refuse to obey it?"

Nataline was trembling a little now. Her brows were unlocked. The tears
stood in her eyes and ran down her cheeks. She was twisting her hands
together.

"My father," she answered, "I desire to do the will of God. But how
shall I know it? Is it not His first command that we should love and
serve Him faithfully in the duty which He has given us? He gave me this
light to keep. My father kept it. He is dead. If I am unfaithful what
will he say to me? Besides, the supply-boat is coming soon--I have
thought of this--when it comes it will bring food. But if the light is
out, the boat may be lost. That would be the punishment for my sin. No,
MON PERE, we must trust God. He will keep the people. I will keep the
light."'

The priest looked at her long and steadily. A glow came into his face.
He put his hand on her shoulder. "You shall follow your conscience," he
said quietly. "Peace be with you, Nataline."

That evening just at dark Marcel came. She let him take her in his arms
and kiss her. She felt like a little child, tired and weak.

"Well," he whispered, "you have done bravely, sweetheart. You were right
not to give the key. That would have been a shame to you. But it is all
settled now. They will have the oil without your fault. To-night they
are going out to the lighthouse to break in and take what they want. You
need not know. There will be no blame--"

She straightened in his arms as if an electric shock had passed through
her. She sprang back, blazing with anger.

"What?" she cried, "me a thief by round-about,--with my hand behind my
back and my eyes shut? Never. Do you think I care only for the blame? I
tell you that is nothing. My light shall not be robbed, never, never!"

She came close to him and took him by the shoulders. Their eyes were on
a level. He was a strong man, but she was the stronger then.

"Marcel Thibault," she said, "do you love me?"

"My faith," he gasped, "I do. You know I do."

"Then listen," she continued; "this is what you are going to do. You are
going down to the shore at once to make ready the big canoe. I am going
to get food enough to last us for the month. It will be a hard pinch,
but it will do. Then we are going out to the island to-night, in less
than an hour. Day after to-morrow is the first of April. Then we shall
light the lantern, and it shall burn every night until the boat comes
down. You hear? Now go: and be quick and bring your gun."




IV

They pushed off in the black darkness, among the fragments of ice that
lay along the shore. They crossed the strait in silence, and hid their
canoe among the rocks on the island. They carried their stuff up to the
house and locked it in the kitchen. Then they unlocked the tower, and
went in, Marcel with his shot-gun, and Nataline with her father's old
carabine. They fastened the door again, and bolted it, and sat down in
the dark to wait.

Presently they heard the grating of the prow of the barge on the stones
below, the steps of men stumbling up the steep path, and voices mingled
in confused talk. The glimmer of a couple of lanterns went bobbing in
and out among the rocks and bushes. There was a little crowd of eight or
ten men, and they came on carelessly, chattering and laughing. Three of
them carried axes, and three others a heavy log of wood which they had
picked up on their way.

"The log is better than the axes," said one; "take it in your hands this
way, two of you on one side, another on the opposite side in the middle.
Then swing it back and forwards and let it go. The door will come down,
I tell you, like a sheet of paper. But wait till I give the word, then
swing hard. One--two--"

"Stop!" cried Nataline, throwing open the little window. "If you dare to
touch that door, I shoot."

She thrust out the barrel of the rifle, and Marcel's shot-gun appeared
beside it. The old rifle was not loaded, but who knew that? Besides,
both barrels of the shot-gun were full.

There was amazement in the crowd outside the tower, and consternation,
and then anger.

"Marcel," they shouted, "you there? MAUDIT POLISSON! Come out of that.
Let us in. You told us--"

"I know," answered Marcel, "but I was mistaken, that is all. I stand by
Mademoiselle Fortin. What she says is right. If any man tries to break
in here, we kill him. No more talk!"

The gang muttered; cursed; threatened; looked at the guns; and went off
to their boat.

"It is murder that you will do," one of them called out, "you are a
murderess, you Mademoiselle Fortin! you cause the people to die of
hunger!"

"Not I," she answered; "that is as the good God pleases. No matter. The
light shall burn."

They heard the babble of the men as they stumbled down the hill; the
grinding of the boat on the rocks as they shoved off; the rattle of the
oars in the rowlocks. After that the island was as still as a graveyard.

Then Nataline sat down on the floor in the dark, and put her face in
her hands, and cried. Marcel tried to comfort her. She took his hand and
pushed it gently away from her waist.

"No, Marcel," she said, "not now! Not that, please, Marcel! Come into
the house. I want to talk with you."

They went into the cold, dark kitchen, lit a candle and kindled a fire
in the stove. Nataline busied herself with a score of things. She put
away the poor little store of provisions, sent Marcel for a pail of
water, made some tea, spread the table, and sat down opposite to him.
For a time she kept her eyes turned away from him, while she talked
about all sorts of things. Then she fell silent for a little, still not
looking at him. She got up and moved about the room, arranged two or
three packages on the shelves, shut the damper of the stove, glancing at
Marcel's back out of the corners of her eyes. Then she came back to her
chair, pushed her cup aside, rested both elbows on the table and her
chin in her hands, and looked Marcel square in the face with her clear
brown eyes.

"My friend," she said, "are you an honest man, un brave garcon?"

For an instant he could say nothing. He was so puzzled. "Why yes,
Nataline," he answered, "yes, surely--I hope."

"Then let me speak to you without fear," she continued. "You do not
suppose that I am ignorant of what I have done this night. I am not a
baby. You are a man. I am a girl. We are shut up alone in this house for
two weeks, a month, God knows how long. You know what that means, what
people will say. I have risked all that a girl has most precious. I have
put my good name in your hands."

Marcel tried to speak, but she stopped him.

"Let me finish. It is not easy to say. I know you are honourable.
I trust you waking and sleeping. But I am a woman. There must be no
love-making. We have other work to do. The light must not fail. You will
not touch me, you will not embrace me--not once--till after the boat has
come. Then"--she smiled at him like a sunburned angel--"well, is it a
bargain?"

She put out one hand across the table. Marcel took it in both of his
own. He did not kiss it. He lifted it up in front of his face.

"I swear to you, Nataline, you shall be to me as the Blessed Virgin
herself."

The next day they put the light in order, and the following night they
kindled it. They still feared another attack from the mainland, and
thought it needful that one of them should be on guard all the time,
though the machine itself was working beautifully and needed little
watching. Nataline took the night duty; it was her own choice; she loved
the charge of the lamp. Marcel was on duty through the day. They were
together for three or four hours in the morning and in the evening.

It was not a desperate vigil like that affair with the broken clockwork
eight years before. There was no weary turning of the crank. There was
just enough work to do about the house and the tower to keep them busy.
The weather was fair. The worst thing was the short supply of food.
But though they were hungry, they were not starving. And Nataline still
played the fife. She jested, she sang, she told long fairy stories while
they sat in the kitchen. Marcel admitted that it was not at all a bad
arrangement.

But his thoughts turned very often to the arrival of the supply-boat.
He hoped it would not be late. The ice was well broken up already and
driven far out into the gulf. The boat ought to be able to run down the
shore in good time.

One evening as Nataline came down from her sleep she saw Marcel coming
up the rocks dragging a young seal behind him.

"Hurra!" he shouted, "here is plenty of meat. I shot it out at the end
of the island, about an hour ago."

But Nataline said that they did not need the seal. There was still food
enough in the larder. On shore there must be greater need. Marcel must
take the seal over to the mainland that night and leave it on the beach
near the priest's house. He grumbled a little, but he did it.

That was on the twenty-third of April. The clear sky held for three
days longer, calm, bright, halcyon weather. On the afternoon of the
twenty-seventh the clouds came down from the north, not a long furious
tempest, but a brief, sharp storm, with considerable wind and a
whirling, blinding fall of April snow. It was a bad night for boats at
sea, confusing, bewildering, a night when the lighthouse had to do its
best. Nataline was in the tower all night, tending the lamp, watching
the clockwork. Once it seemed to her that the lantern was so covered
with snow that light could not shine through. She got her long brush
and scraped the snow away. It was cold work, but she gloried in it. The
bright eye of the tower, winking, winking steadily through the storm
seemed to be the sign of her power in the world. It was hers. She kept
it shining.

When morning came the wind was still blowing fitfully off shore, but
the snow had almost ceased. Nataline stopped the clockwork, and was just
climbing up into the lantern to put out the lamp, when Marcel's voice
hailed her.

"Come down, Nataline, come down quick. Make haste!"

She turned and hurried out, not knowing what was to come; perhaps a
message of trouble from the mainland, perhaps a new assault on the
lighthouse.

As she came out of the tower, her brown eyes heavy from the night-watch,
her dark face pale from the cold, she saw Marcel standing on the rocky
knoll beside the house and pointing shoreward.

She ran up beside him and looked. There, in the deep water between the
island and the point, lay the supply-boat, rocking quietly on the waves.

It flashed upon her in a moment what it meant--the end of her fight,
relief for the village, victory! And the light that had guided the
little ship safe through the stormy night into the harbour was hers.

She turned and looked up at the lamp, still burning.

"I kept you!" she cried.

Then she turned to Marcel; the colour rose quickly in her cheeks, the
light sparkled in her eyes; she smiled, and held out both her hands,
whispering, "Now you shall keep me!"

There was a fine wedding on the last day of April, and from that time
the island took its new name,--the Isle of the Wise Virgin.

========================================
