========================================

RELIGIONS OF ANCIENT CHINA

by Herbert A. Giles




Professor of Chinese at the University of Cambridge,
Author of "Historic China," "A History of Chinese
Literature," "China and the Chinese," etc., etc.


First Published 1906 by Constable and Company Ltd., London.



     PREPARER'S NOTE

     This book was published as part of the series Religions: Ancient
     and Modern.

     The Psychological Origin and Nature of Religion, by J. H. Leuba.
     Judaism, by Israel Abraham.
     Celtic Religion, by Professor E. Anwye.
     Shinto: The Ancient Religion of Japan, by W. G. Aston, C.M.G.
     The Religion of Ancient Rome, by Cyril Bailey, M.A.
     Hinduism, by Dr. L. D. Barnett.
     The Religion of Ancient Palestine, by Stanley A. Cook.
     Animism, by Edward Clodd.
     Scandinavian Religion, by William A. Craigie.
     Early Buddhism, by Prof. T. W. Rhys Davids, LL.D.
     The Religions of Ancient China, by Prof. Giles, LL.D.
     Magic and Fetishism, by Dr. A. C. Haddon, F.R.S.
     The Religion of Ancient Greece, by Jane Harrison.
     The Religion of Ancient Egypt, by W. M. Flinders Petrie, F.R.S.
     Pantheism, by James Allanson Picton.
     The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, by Theophilus G. Pinches.
     Early Christianity (Paul to Origen), by S. B. Slack.
     The Mythologies of Ancient Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, M.A.
     The Mythology of Ancient Britain and Island, by Charles Squire.
     Islam, by Ameer Ali, Syed, M.A., C.I.E.
     Mithraism, by W. G. Pythian-Adams.

     The publishers were: Constable and Company Ltd, London; Open Court
     Company, Chicago. The 1918 edition was printed in Great Britain by
     Butler & Tanner, Frome and London.




RELIGIONS OF ANCIENT CHINA



CHAPTER I -- THE ANCIENT FAITH

Philosophical Theory of the Universe.--The problem of the universe has
never offered the slightest difficulty to Chinese philosophers. Before
the beginning of all things, there was Nothing. In the lapse of ages
Nothing coalesced into Unity, the Great Monad. After more ages, the
Great Monad separated into Duality, the Male and Female Principles in
nature; and then, by a process of biogenesis, the visible universe was
produced.

Popular Cosmogeny.--An addition, however, to this simple system had to
be made, in deference to, and on a plane with, the intelligence of the
masses. According to this, the Male and Female Principles were each
subdivided into Greater and Lesser, and then from the interaction of
these four agencies a being, named P'an Ku, came into existence. He
seems to have come into life endowed with perfect knowledge, and his
function was to set the economy of the universe in order. He is often
depicted as wielding a huge adze, and engaged in constructing the world.
With his death the details of creation began. His breath became the
wind; his voice, the thunder; his left eye, the sun; his right eye, the
moon; his blood flowed in rivers; his hair grew into trees and plants;
his flesh became the soil; his sweat descended as rain; while the
parasites which infested his body were the origin of the human race.

Recognition and Worship of Spirits.--Early Chinese writers tell us that
Fu Hsi, B.C. 2953-2838, was the first Emperor to organize sacrifices to,
and worship of, spirits. In this he was followed by the Yellow Emperor,
B.C. 2698-2598, who built a temple for the worship of God, in which
incense was used, and first sacrificed to the Mountains and Rivers. He
is also said to have established the worship of the sun, moon, and five
planets, and to have elaborated the ceremonial of ancestral worship.

God the Father, Earth the Mother.--The Yellow Emperor was followed by
the Emperor Shao Hao, B.C. 2598-2514, "who instituted the music of the
Great Abyss in order to bring spirits and men into harmony." Then
came the Emperor Chuan Hsu, B.C. 2514-2436, of whom it is said that he
appointed an officer "to preside over the worship of God and Earth,
in order to form a link between the spirits and man," and also "caused
music to be played for the enjoyment of God." Music, by the way, is said
to have been introduced into worship in imitation of thunder, and was
therefore supposed to be pleasing to the Almighty. After him followed
the Emperor Ti K'u, B.C. 2436-2366, who dabbled in astronomy, and "came
to a knowledge of spiritual beings, which he respectfully worshipped."
The Emperor Yao, B.C. 2357-2255, built a temple for the worship of
God, and also caused dances to be performed for the enjoyment of God
on occasions of special sacrifice and communication with the spiritual
world. After him, we reach the Emperor Shun, B.C. 2255-2205, in whose
favour Yao abdicated.

Additional Deities.--Before, however, Shun ventured to mount the throne,
he consulted the stars, in order to find out if the unseen Powers were
favourable to his elevation; and on receiving a satisfactory reply, "he
proceeded to sacrifice to God, to the Six Honoured Ones (unknown), to
the Mountains and Rivers, and to Spirits in general. . . . In the second
month of the year, he made a tour of inspection eastwards, as far as
Mount T'ai (in modern Shantung), where he presented a burnt offering to
God, and sacrificed to the Mountains and Rivers."

God punishes the wicked and rewards the good.--The Great Yu, who drained
the empire, and came to the throne in B.C. 2205 as first Emperor of the
Hsia dynasty, followed in the lines of his pious predecessors. But the
Emperor K'ung Chia, B.C. 1879-1848, who at first had treated the Spirits
with all due reverence, fell into evil ways, and was abandoned by God.
This was the beginning of the end. In B.C. 1766 T'ang the Completer,
founder of the Shang dynasty, set to work to overthrow Chieh Kuei, the
last ruler of the Hsia dynasty. He began by sacrificing to Almighty
God, and asked for a blessing on his undertaking. And in his subsequent
proclamation to the empire, he spoke of that God as follows: "God has
given to every man a conscience; and if all men acted in accordance with
its dictates, they would not stray from the right path. . . . The way of
God is to bless the good and punish the bad. He has sent down calamities
on the House of Hsia, to make manifest its crimes."

God manifests displeasure.--In B.C. 1637 the Emperor T'ai Mou succeeded.
His reign was marked by the supernatural appearance in the palace of two
mulberry-trees, which in a single night grew to such a size that
they could hardly be spanned by two hands. The Emperor was terrified;
whereupon a Minister said, "No prodigy is a match for virtue. Your
Majesty's government is no doubt at fault, and some reform of conduct
is necessary." Accordingly, the Emperor began to act more circumspectly;
after which the mulberry-trees soon withered and died.

Revelation in a dream.--The Emperor Wu Ting, B.C. 1324-1264, began his
reign by not speaking for three years, leaving all State affairs to be
decided by his Prime Minister, while he himself gained experience.
Later on, the features of a sage were revealed to him in a dream; and
on waking, he caused a portrait of the apparition to be prepared and
circulated throughout the empire. The sage was found, and for a long
time aided the Emperor in the right administration of government. On the
occasion of a sacrifice, a pheasant perched upon the handle of the great
sacrificial tripod, and crowed, at which the Emperor was much alarmed.
"Be not afraid," cried a Minister; "but begin by reforming your
government. God looks down upon mortals, and in accordance with their
deserts grants them many years or few. God does not shorten men's
lives; they do that themselves. Some are wanting in virtue, and will not
acknowledge their transgressions; only when God chastens them do they
cry, What are we to do?"

Anthropomorphism and Fetishism.--One of the last Emperors of the Shang
dynasty, Wu I, who reigned B.C. 1198-1194, even went so far as "to make
an image in human form, which he called God. With this image he used
to play at dice, causing some one to throw for the image; and if 'God'
lost, he would overwhelm the image with insult. He also made a bag of
leather, which he filled with blood and hung up. Then he would shoot at
it, saying that he was shooting God. By and by, when he was out hunting,
he was struck down by a violent thunderclap, and killed."

God indignant.--Finally, when the Shang dynasty sank into the lowest
depths of moral abasement, King Wu, who charged himself with its
overthrow, and who subsequently became the first sovereign of the Chou
dynasty, offered sacrifices to Almighty God, and also to Mother Earth.
"The King of Shang," he said in his address to the high officers who
collected around him, "does not reverence God above, and inflicts
calamities on the people below. Almighty God is moved with indignation."
On the day of the final battle he declared that he was acting in the
matter of punishment merely as the instrument of God; and after his
great victory and the establishment of his own line, it was to God that
he rendered thanks.

No Devil, No Hell.--In this primitive monotheism, of which only scanty,
but no doubt genuine, records remain, no place was found for any being
such as the Buddhist Mara or the Devil of the Old and New Testaments.
God inflicted His own punishments by visiting calamities on mankind,
just as He bestowed His own rewards by sending bounteous harvests in due
season. Evil spirits were a later invention, and their operations were
even then confined chiefly to tearing people's hearts out, and so forth,
for their own particular pleasure; we certainly meet no cases of evil
spirits wishing to undermine man's allegiance to God, or desiring to
make people wicked in order to secure their everlasting punishment. The
vision of Purgatory, with all its horrid tortures, was introduced into
China by Buddhism, and was subsequently annexed by the Taoists, some
time between the third and sixth centuries A.D.

Chinese Terms for God.--Before passing to the firmer ground,
historically speaking, of the Chou dynasty, it may be as well to state
here that there are two terms in ancient Chinese literature which seem
to be used indiscriminately for God. One is _T'ien_, which has come
to include the material heavens, the sky; and the other is _Shang Ti_,
which has come to include the spirits of deceased Emperors. These two
terms appear simultaneously, so to speak, in the earliest documents
which have come down to us, dating back to something like the twentieth
century before Christ. Priority, however, belongs beyond all doubt to
_T'ien_, which it would have been more natural to find meaning, first
the visible heavens, and secondly the Deity, whose existence beyond the
sky would be inferred from such phenomena as lightning, thunder, wind,
and rain. But the process appears to have been the other way, so far at
any rate as the written language is concerned. The Chinese script, when
it first came into existence, was purely pictorial, and confined to
visible objects which were comparatively easy to depict. There does not
seem to have been any attempt to draw a picture of the sky. On the other
hand, the character _T'ien_ was just such a representation of a human
being as would be expected from the hand of a prehistoric artist;
and under this unmistakable shape the character appears on bells and
tripods, as seen in collections of inscriptions, so late as the sixth
and seventh centuries B.C., after which the head is flattered to a line,
and the arms are raised until they form another line parallel to that of
the head.

Distinction between T'ien and Shang Ti.--The term _Shang Ti_ means
literally Supreme Ruler. It is not quite so vague as _T'ien_, which
seems to be more of an abstraction, while _Shang Ti_ is a genuinely
personal God. Reference to _T'ien_ is usually associated with fate or
destiny, calamities, blessings, prayers for help, etc. The commandments
of _T'ien_ are hard to obey; He is compassionate, to be feared, unjust,
and cruel. _Shang Ti_ lives in heaven, walks, leaves tracks on the
ground, enjoys the sweet savour of sacrifice, approves or disapproves
of conduct, deals with rewards and punishments in a more particular way,
and comes more actually into touch with the human race.

Thus _Shang Ti_ would be the God who walked in the garden in the cool of
the day, the God who smelled the sweet savour of Noah's sacrifice, and
the God who allowed Moses to see His back. _T'ien_ would be the God of
Gods of the Psalms, whose mercy endureth for ever; the everlasting God
of Isaiah, who fainteth not, neither is weary.

Roman Catholic Dissensions.--These two, in fact, were the very terms
favoured by the early Jesuit missionaries to China, though not with the
limitations above suggested, as fit the proper renderings for God; and
of the two terms the great Manchu Emperor K'ang Hsi chose _T'ien_. It
has been thought that the conversion of China to Christianity under the
guiding influence of the Jesuits would soon have become an accomplished
fact, but for the ignorant opposition to the use of these terms by the
Franciscans and Dominicans, who referred this question, among others, to
the Pope. In 1704 Clement XI published a bull declaring that the Chinese
equivalent for God was _T'ien Chu_=Lord of Heaven; and such it has
continued to be ever since, so far as the Roman Catholic church is
concerned, in spite of the fact that _T'ien Chu_ was a name given at the
close of the third century B.C. to one of the Eight Spirits.

The two Terms are One.--That the two terms refer in Chinese thought to
one and the same Being, though possibly with differing attributes, even
down to modern times, may be seen from the account of a dream by the
Emperor Yung Lo, A.D. 1403-1425, in which His Majesty relates that an
angel appeared to him, with a message from _Shang Ti_; upon which the
Emperor remarked, "Is not this a command from _T'ien_?" A comparison
might perhaps be instituted with the use of "God" and "Jehovah" in
the Bible. At the same time it must be noted that this view was not
suggested by the Emperor K'ang Hsi, who fixed upon _T'ien_ as the
appropriate term. It is probable that, vigorous Confucianist as he was,
he was anxious to appear on the side rather of an abstract than of
a personal Deity, and that he was repelled by the overwrought
anthropomorphism of the Christian God. His conversion was said to have
been very near at times; we read, however, that, when hard pressed by
the missionaries to accept baptism, "he always excused himself by saying
that he worshipped the same God as the Christians."

God in the "Odes."--The Chou dynasty lasted from B.C. 1122 to B.C.
255. It was China's feudal age, when the empire, then included between
latitude 34-40 and longitude 109-118, was split up into a number of
vassal States, which owned allegiance to a suzerain State. And it is to
the earlier centuries of the Chou dynasty that must be attributed the
composition of a large number of ballads of various kinds, ultimately
collected and edited by Confucius, and now known as the _Odes_. From
these _Odes_ it is abundantly clear that the Chinese people continued
to hold, more clearly and more firmly than ever, a deep-seated belief in
the existence of an anthropomorphic and personal God, whose one care was
the welfare of the human race:--

     There is Almighty God;
     Does He hate any one?

He reigns in glory.--The soul of King Wen, father of the King Wu below,
and posthumously raised by his son to royal rank, is represented as
enjoying happiness in a state beyond the grave:--

     King Wen is on high,
     In glory in heaven.
     His comings and his goings
     Are to and from the presence of God.

He is a Spirit.--Sometimes in the _Odes_ there is a hint that God, in
spite of His anthropomorphic semblance, is a spirit:--

     The doings of God
     Have neither sound nor smell.

Spiritual Beings.--Spirits were certainly supposed to move freely among
mortals:--

     Do not say, This place is not public;
     No one can see me here.
     The approaches of spiritual Beings
     Cannot be calculated beforehand;
     But on no account should they be ignored.

The God of Battle.--In the hour of battle the God of ancient China was
as much a participator in the fight as the God of Israel in the Old
Testament:--

     God is on your side!

was the cry which stimulated King Wu to break down the opposing ranks
of Shang. To King Wu's father, and others, direct communications had
previously been made from heaven, with a view to the regeneration of the
empire:--

     The dynasties of Hsia and Shang
     Had not satisfied God with their government;
     So throughout the various States
     He sought and considered
     For a State on which He might confer the rule.

     God said to King Wen,
     I am pleased with your conspicuous virtue,
     Without noise and without display,
     Without heat and without change,
     Without consciousness of effort,
     Following the pattern of God.

     God said to King Wen,
     Take measures against hostile States,
     Along with your brethren,
     Get ready your grappling-irons,
     And your engines of assault,
     To attack the walls of Ts'ung.

God sends Famine.--The _Ode_ from which the following extract is taken
carries us back to the ninth century B.C., at the time of a prolonged
and disastrous drought:--

     Glorious was the Milky Way,
     Revolving brightly in the sky,
     When the king said, Alas!
     What crime have my people committed now,
     That God sends down death and disorder,
     And famine comes upon us again?
     There is no spirit to whom I have not sacrificed;
     There is no victim that I have grudged;
     Our sacrificial symbols are all used up;--
     How is it that I am not heard?

The Confucian Criterion.--The keystone of the Confucian philosophy, that
man is born good, will be found in the following lines:--

     How mighty is God!
     How clothed in majesty is God,
     And how unsearchable are His judgments!
     God gives birth to the people,
     But their natures are not constant;
     All have the same beginning,
     But few have the same end.

God, however, is not held responsible for the sufferings of mankind.
King Wen, in an address to the last tyrant of the House of Shang, says
plainly,

     It is not God who has caused this evil time,
     But it is you who have strayed from the old paths.

The Associate of God.--Worshipped on certain occasions as the Associate
of God, and often summoned to aid in hours of distress or danger, was a
personage known as Hou Chi, said to have been the original ancestor
of the House of Chou. His story, sufficiently told in the _Odes_, is
curious for several reasons, and especially for an instance in Chinese
literature, which, in the absence of any known husband, comes near
suggesting the much-vexed question of parthenogenesis:--

     She who first gave birth to our people
     Was the lady Chiang Yuan.
     How did she give birth to them?
     She offered up a sacrifice
     That she might not be childless;
     Then she trod in a footprint of God's, and conceived,
     The great and blessed one,
     Pregnant with a new birth to be,
     And brought forth and nourished
     Him who was Hou Chi.

     When she had fulfilled her months,
     Her firstborn came forth like a lamb.
     There was no bursting, no rending,
     No injury, no hurt,
     In order to emphasise his divinity.
     Did not God give her comfort?
     Had He not accepted her sacrifice,
     So that thus easily she brought forth her son?

     He was exposed in a narrow lane,
     But sheep and oxen protected and suckled him;
     He was exposed in a wide forest,
     But woodcutters found him;
     He was exposed on cold ice,
     But birds covered him with their wings.

Apotheosis of Hou Chi.--And so he grew to man's estate, and taught
the people husbandry, with a success that has never been rivalled.
Consequently, he was deified, and during several centuries of the Chou
dynasty was united in worship with God:--

     O wise Hou Chi,
     Fit Associate of our God,
     Founder of our race,
     There is none greater than thou!
     Thou gavest us wheat and barley,
     Which God appointed for our nourishment,
     And without distinction of territory,
     Didst inculcate the virtues over our vast dominions.

Other Deities.--During the long period covered by the Chou dynasty,
various other deities, of more or less importance, were called into
existence.

The patriarchal Emperor Shen Nung, B.C. 2838-2698, who had taught his
people to till the ground and eat of the fruits of their labour, was
deified as the tutelary genius of agriculture:--

     That my fields are in such good condition
     Is matter of joy to my husbandmen.
     With lutes, and with drums beating,
     We will invoke the Father of Husbandry,
     And pray for sweet rain,
     To increase the produce of our millet fields,
     And to bless my men and their wives.

There were also sacrifices to the Father of War, whoever he may have
been; to the Spirits of Wind, Rain, and Fire; and even to a deity who
watched over the welfare of silkworms. Since those days, the number of
spiritual beings who receive worship from the Chinese, some in one part
of the empire, some in another, has increased enormously. A single
work, published in 1640, gives notices of no fewer than eight hundred
divinities.

Superstitions.--During the period under consideration, all kinds of
superstition prevailed; among others, that of referring to the rainbow.
The rainbow was believed by the vulgar to be an emanation from an
enormous oyster away in the great ocean which surrounded the world, i.e.
China. Philosophers held it to be the result of undue proportions in the
mixture of the two cosmogonical principles which when properly blended
produce the harmony of nature. By both parties it was considered to be
an inauspicious manifestation, and merely to point at it would produce a
sore on the hand.

Supernatural Manifestations.--Several events of a supernatural character
are recorded as having taken place under the Chou dynasty. In B.C. 756,
one of the feudal Dukes saw a vision of a yellow serpent which descended
from heaven and laid its head on the slope of a mountain. The Duke spoke
of this to his astrologer, who said, "It is a manifestation of God;
sacrifice to it."

In B.C. 747, another Duke found on a mountain a being in the semblance
of a stone. Sacrifices were at once offered, and the stone was deified,
and received regular worship from that time forward.

In B.C. 659, a third Duke was in a trance for five days, when he saw
a vision of God, and received from Him instructions as to matters then
pressing. For many generations afterwards the story ran that the Duke
had been up to Heaven. This became a favourite theme for romancers. It
is stated in the biography of a certain Feng Po that "one night he saw
the gate of heaven open, and beheld exceeding glory within, which shone
into his courtyard."

The following story is told by Huai-nan Tzu (d. B.C. 122):--"Once when
the Duke of Lu-yang was at war with the Han State, and sunset drew near
while a battle was still fiercely raging, the Duke held up his spear and
shook it at the sun, which forthwith went back three zodiacal signs."

Only the Emperor worships God and Earth.--From the records of this
period we can also see how jealously the worship of God and Earth was
reserved for the Emperor alone.

In B.C. 651, Duke Huan of the Ch'i State, one of the feudal nobles to
be mentioned later on, wished to signalise his accession to the post of
doyen or leader of the vassal States by offering the great sacrifices
to God and to Earth. He was, however, dissuaded from this by a wise
Minister, who pointed out that only those could perform these ceremonies
who had personally received the Imperial mandate from God.

This same Minister is said to be responsible for the following
utterance:--

"Duke Huan asked Kuan Chang, saying, To what should a prince attach the
highest importance? To God, replied the Minister; at which Duke Huan
gazed upwards to the sky. The God I mean, continued Kuan Chung, is not
the illimitable blue above. A true prince makes the people his God."

Sacrifices.--Much has been recorded by the Chinese on the subject
of sacrifice,--more indeed than can be easily condensed into a small
compass. First of all, there were the great sacrifices to God and to
Earth, at the winter and summer solstices respectively, which were
reserved for the Son of Heaven alone. Besides what may be called private
sacrifices, the Emperor sacrificed also to the four quarters, and to the
mountains and rivers of the empire; while the feudal nobles sacrificed
each to his own quarter, and to the mountains and rivers of his own
domain. The victim offered by the Emperor on a blazing pile of wood was
an ox of one colour, always a young animal; a feudal noble would use any
fatted ox; and a petty official a sheep or a pig. When sacrificing to
the spirits of the land and of grain, the Son of Heaven used a bull, a
ram, and a boar; the feudal nobles only a ram and a boar; and the common
people, scallions and eggs in spring, wheat and fish in summer, millet
and a sucking-pig in autumn, and unhulled rice and a goose in winter.
If there was anything infelicitous about the victim intended for God, it
was used for Hou Chi. The victim intended for God required to be kept in
a clean stall for three months; that for Hou Chi simply required to
be perfect in its parts. This was the way in which they distinguished
between heavenly and earthly spirits.

In primeval times, we are told, sacrifices consisted of meat and drink,
the latter being the "mysterious liquid," water, for which wine was
substituted later on. The ancients roasted millet and pieces of pork;
they made a hole in the ground and scooped the water from it with their
two hands, beating upon an earthen drum with a clay drumstick. Thus they
expressed their reverence for spiritual beings.

"Sacrifices," according to the _Book of Rites_ (Legge's translation),
"should not be frequently repeated. Such frequency is an indication of
importunateness; and importunateness is inconsistent with reverence. Nor
should they be at distant intervals. Such infrequency is indicative
of indifference; and indifference leads to forgetting them altogether.
Therefore the superior man, in harmony with the course of Nature, offers
the sacrifices of spring and autumn. When he treads on the dew which
has descended as hoar-frost he cannot help a feeling of sadness, which
arises in his mind, and which cannot be ascribed to the cold. In spring,
when he treads on the ground, wet with the rains and dews that have
fallen heavily, he cannot avoid being moved by a feeling as if he were
seeing his departed friends. We meet the approach of our friends with
music, and escort them away with sadness, and hence at the sacrifice in
spring we use music, but not at the sacrifice in autumn."

"Sacrifice is not a thing coming to a man from without; it issues from
within him, and has its birth in his heart. When the heart is deeply
moved, expression is given to it by ceremonies; and hence, only men
of ability and virtue can give complete exhibition to the idea of
sacrifice." It was in this sense that Confucius warned his followers not
to sacrifice to spirits which did not belong to them, i.e. to other than
those of their own immediate ancestors. To do otherwise would raise a
suspicion of ulterior motives.

Ancestral Worship.--For the purpose of ancestral worship, which had been
practised from the earliest ages, the Emperor had seven shrines, each
with its altar representing various forefathers; and at all of these a
sacrifice was offered every month. Feudal nobles could have only five
sets of these, and the various officials three or fewer, on a descending
scale in proportion to their rank. Petty officers and the people
generally had no ancestral shrine, but worshipped the shades of their
forefathers as best they could in their houses and cottages.

For three days before sacrificing to ancestors, a strict vigil and
purification was maintained, and by the end of that time, from sheer
concentration of thought, the mourner was able to see the spirits of
the departed; and at the sacrifice next day seemed to hear their very
movements, and even the murmur of their sighs.

The object of the ceremony was to bring down the spirits from above,
together with the shades of ancestors, and thus to secure the blessing
of God; at the same time to please the souls of the departed, and to
create a link between the living and the dead.

"The object in sacrifices is not to pray; the time should not be
hastened on; a great apparatus is not required; ornamental details are
not to be approved; the victims need not be fat and large (cf. Horace,
Od. III, 23; _Immunis aram_, etc.); a profusion of the other offerings
is not to be admired." There must, however, be no parsimony. A high
official, well able to afford better things, was justly blamed for
having sacrificed to the manes of his father a sucking-pig which did not
fill the dish.

Religious Dances.--"The various dances displayed the gravity of the
performers, but did not awaken the emotion of delight. The ancestral
temple produced the impression of majesty, but did not dispose one to
rest on it. Its vessels might be employed, but could not be conveniently
used for any other purpose. The idea which leads to intercourse with
spiritual Beings is not interchangeable with that which finds its
realisation in rest and pleasure."

Priestcraft.--From the ceremonial of ancestor worship the thin end of
the wedge of priestcraft was rigorously excluded. "For the words of
prayer and blessing and those of benediction to be kept hidden away by
the officers of prayer of the ancestral temple, and by the sorcerers and
recorders, is a violation of the rules of propriety. This may be called
keeping in a state of darkness."

Confucius sums up the value of sacrifices in the following words. "By
their great sacrificial ceremonies the ancients served God; by their
ceremonies in the ancestral temple they worshipped their forefathers. He
who should understand the great sacrificial ceremonies, and the meaning
of the ceremonies in the ancestral temple, would find it as easy to
govern the empire as to look upon the palm of his hand."

Filial Piety.--Intimately connected with ancestral worship is the
practice of filial piety; it is in fact on filial piety that ancestral
worship is dependent for its existence. In early ages, sons sacrificed
to the manes of their parents and ancestors generally, in order to
afford some mysterious pleasure to the disembodied spirits. There was
then no idea of propitiation, of benefits to ensue. In later times, the
character of the sacrifice underwent a change, until a sentiment of _do
ut des_ became the real mainspring of the ceremony. Meanwhile, Confucius
had complained that the filial piety of his day only meant the support
of parents. "But," argued the Sage, "we support our dogs and our horses;
without reverence, what is there to distinguish one from the other?" He
affirmed that children who would be accounted filial should give their
parents no cause of anxiety beyond such anxiety as might be occasioned
by ill-health. Filial piety, he said again, did not consist in relieving
the parents of toil, or in setting before them wine and food; it did
consist in serving them while alive according to the established rules,
in burying them when dead according to the established rules, and in
sacrificing to them after death, also according to the established
rules. In another passage Confucius declared that filial piety consists
in carrying on the aims of our forefathers, which really amounts to
serving the dead as they would have been served if alive.

Divination.--Divination seems to have been practised in China from
the earliest ages. The implements used were the shell of the tortoise,
spiritualised by the long life of its occupant, and the stalks of a kind
of grass, to which also spiritual powers had for some reason or other
been attributed. These were the methods, we are told, by which the
ancient Kings made their people revere spirits, obey the law, and settle
all their doubts. God gave these spiritual boons to mankind, and the
sages took advantage of them. "To explore what is complex, to search
out what is hidden, to hook up what lies deep, and to reach to what is
distant, thereby determining the issues for good or ill of all events
under the sky, and making all men full of strenuous endeavour, there are
no agencies greater than those of the stalks and the tortoise shell."

In B.C. 2224, when the Emperor Shun wished to associate the Great Yu
with him in the government, the latter begged that recourse might be
had to divination, in order to discover the most suitable among the
Ministers for this exalted position. The Emperor refused, saying that
his choice had already been confirmed by the body of Ministers. "The
spirits too have signified their assent, the tortoise and grass having
both concurred. Divination, when fortunate, may not be repeated."

Sincerity, on which Confucius lays such especial stress, is closely
associated with success in divination. "Sincerity is of God; cultivation
of sincerity is of man. He who is naturally sincere is he who hits his
mark without effort, and without thinking apprehends. He easily keeps to
the golden mean; he is inspired. He who cultivates sincerity is he who
chooses what is good and holds fast to it.

"It is characteristic of the most entire sincerity to be able to
foreknow. When a State or a family is about to flourish, there are sure
to be happy omens; and when it is about to perish, there are sure to
be unpropitious omens. The events portended are set forth by the
divining-grass and the tortoise. When calamity or good fortune may be
about to come, the evil or the good will be foreknown by the perfectly
sincere man, who may therefore be compared with a spirit."

The tortoise and the grass have long since disappeared as instruments of
divination, which is now carried on by means of lots drawn from a vase,
with answers attached; by planchette; and by the _chiao_. The last
consists of two pieces of wood, anciently of stone, in the shape of the
two halves of a kidney bean. These are thrown into the air before the
altar in a temple,--Buddhist or Taoist, it matters nothing,--with
the following results. Two convex sides uppermost mean a response
indifferently good; two flat sides mean negative and bad; one convex
and one flat side mean that the prayer will be granted. This form of
divination, though widely practised at the present day, is by no means
of recent date. It was common in the Ch'u State, which was destroyed
B.C. 300, after four hundred and twenty years of existence.



CHAPTER II -- CONFUCIANISM

Attitude of Confucius.--Under the influence of Confucius, B.C. 551-479,
the old order of things began to undergo a change. The Sage's attitude
of mind towards religion was one of a benevolent agnosticism, as summed
up in his famous utterance, "Respect the spirits, but keep them at a
distance." That he fully recognised the existence of a spirit world,
though admitting that he knew nothing about it, is manifest from the
following remarks of his:--

"How abundantly do spiritual beings display the powers that belong to
them! We look for, but do not see them; we listen for, but do not hear
them; yet they enter into all things, and there is nothing without them.
They cause all the people in the empire to fast and purify themselves,
and array themselves in their richest dresses, in order to attend at
their sacrifices. Then, like overflowing water, they seem to be over the
heads, and on the right and left, of their worshippers."

He believed that he himself was, at any rate to some extent, a prophet
of God, as witness his remarks when in danger from the people of
K'uang:--

"After the death of King Wen, was not wisdom lodged in me? If God were
to destroy this wisdom, future generations could not possess it. So long
as God does not destroy this wisdom, what can the people of K'uang do to
me?"

Again, when Confucius cried, "Alas! there is no one that knows me," and
a disciple asked what was meant, he replied, "I do not murmur against
God. I do not mumble against man. My studies lie low, and my penetration
lies high. But there is God; He knows me."

We know that Confucius fasted, and we know that "he sacrificed to the
spirits as though the spirits were present;" it is even stated that
"when a friend sent him a present, though it might be a carriage and
horses, unless it were flesh which had been used in sacrifice, he did
not bow." He declared that for a person in mourning food and music were
without flavour and charm; and whenever he saw anyone approaching
who was in mourning dress, even though younger than himself, he
would immediately rise from his seat. He believed in destiny; he was
superstitious, changing colour at a squall or at a clap of thunder; and
he even countenanced the ceremonies performed by villagers when driving
out evil spirits from their dwellings. He protested against any attempt
to impose on God. He said that "he who offends against God has none to
whom he can pray;" and when in an hour of sickness a disciple asked to
be allowed to pray for him, he replied, "My praying has been for a long
time." Yet he declined to speak to his disciples of God, of spiritual
beings or even of death and a hereafter, holding that life and its
problems were alone sufficient to tax the energies of the human race.
While not altogether ignoring man's duty towards God, he subordinated
it in every way to man's duty towards his neighbour. He also did much
towards weakening the personality of God, for whom he invariably
used _T'ien_, never _Shang Ti_, regarding Him evidently more as
an abstraction than as a living sentient Being, with the physical
attributes of man. Confucianism is therefore entirely a system of
morality, and not a religion.

It is also a curious fact that throughout the _Spring and Autumn_, or
Annals of the State of Lu, which extend from B.C. 722 to B.C. 484, there
is no allusion of any kind to the interposition of God in human affairs,
although a variety of natural phenomena are recorded, such as have
always been regarded by primitive peoples as the direct acts of an
angered or benevolent Deity. Lu was the State in which Confucius was
born, and its annals were compiled by the Sage himself; and throughout
these Annals the term God is never used except in connection with the
word "King," where it always has the sense of "by the grace of God,"
and once where the suzerain is spoken of as "the Son of God," or, as we
usually phrase it, "the Son of Heaven."

How to bring rain.--In the famous Commentary by Tso-ch'iu Ming on the
_Spring and Autumn_, which imparts a human interest to the bald entries
set against each year of these annals, there are several allusions to
the Supreme Being. For instance, at a time of great drought the Duke of
Lu wished, in accordance with custom, to burn a witch and a person in
the last stage of consumption; the latter being sometimes exposed in the
sun so as to excite the compassion of God, who would then cause rain
to fall. A Minister vigorously protested against this superstition,
pointing out that the proper way to meet a drought would be to reduce
the quantity of food consumed, and to practise rigid economy in all
things. "What have these creatures to do with the matter?" he asked. "If
God had wished to put them to death, He had better not have given
them life. If they can really produce drought, to burn them will only
increase the calamity." The Duke accordingly desisted; and although
there was a famine, it is said to have been less severe than usual.

In B.C. 523 there was a comet. A Minister said, "This broom-star sweeps
away the old, and brings in the new. The doings of God are constantly
attended by such appearances."

Under B.C. 532 we have the record of a stone speaking. The Marquis of
Lu enquired of his chief musician if this was a fact, and received the
following answer: "Stones cannot speak. Perhaps this one was possessed
by a spirit. If not, the people must have heard wrong. And yet it
is said that when things are done out of season, and discontents and
complaints are stirring among the people, then speechless things do
speak."

Human Sacrifices.--Human sacrifices appear to have been not altogether
unknown. The _Commentary_ tells us that in B.C. 637, in consequence of
a failure to appear and enter into a covenant, the Viscount of Tseng was
immolated by the people of the Chu State, to appease the wild tribes
of the east. The Minister of War protested: "In ancient times the six
domestic animals were not offered promiscuously in sacrifice; and for
small matters, the regular sacrificial animals were not used. How then
should we dare to offer up a man? Sacrifices are performed for the
benefit of men, who thus as it were entertain the spirits. But if men
sacrifice men, who will enjoy the offering?"

Again, in B.C. 529, the ruler of the Ch'u State destroyed the Ts'ai
State, and offered up the heir apparent as a victim. An officer said,
"This is inauspicious. If the five sacrificial animals may not be used
promiscuously, how much less can a feudal prince be offered up?"

The custom of burying live persons with the dead was first practised in
China in B.C. 580. It is said to have been suggested by an earlier
and more harmless custom of placing straw and wooden effigies in the
mausolea of the great. When the "First Emperor" died in B.C. 210, all
those among his wives who had borne no children were buried alive with
him.

Praying for Rain.--From another Commentary on the _Spring and Autumn_,
by Ku-liang Shu, fourth century B.C., we have the following note on
Prayers for Rain, which are still offered up on occasions of drought,
but now generally through the medium of Taoist and Buddhist priests:--

"Prayers for rain should be offered up in spring and summer only; not in
autumn and winter. Why not in autumn and winter? Perhaps the moisture of
growing things is not then exhausted; neither has man reached the limit
of his skill. Why in spring and summer? Because time is pressing and
man's skill is of no further avail. How so? Because without rain just
then nothing could be made to grow; the crops would fail, and famine
ensue. But why wait until time is pressing, and man's skill of no
further avail? Because to pray for rain is the same thing as asking a
favour, and the ancients did not lightly ask favours. Why so? Because
they held it more blessed to give than to receive; and as the latter
excludes the former, the main object of man's life is taken away. How
is praying for rain asking a favour? It is a request that God will do
something for us. The divine men of old who had any request to make to
God were careful to prefer it in due season. At the head of all his high
officers of State, the prince would proceed in person to offer up his
prayer. He could not ask any one else to go as his proxy."

Posthumous Honours for Confucius.--Before leaving Confucius, it is
necessary to add that now for many centuries he has been the central
figure and object of a cult as sincere as ever offered by man to any
being, human or divine. The ruler of Confucius' native State of Lu was
profoundly distressed by the Sage's death, and is said to have built a
shrine to commemorate his great worth, at which sacrifices were offered
at the four seasons. By the time however that the Chou dynasty was
drawing to its close (third century B.C.), it would be safe to say
that, owing to civil war and the great political upheaval generally, the
worship of Confucius was altogether discontinued. It certainly did not
flourish under the "First Emperor" (see _post_), and was only revived in
B.C. 195 by the first Emperor of the Han dynasty, who visited the grave
of Confucius in Shantung and sacrificed to his spirit a pig, a sheep,
and an ox. Fifty years later a temple was built to Confucius at his
native place; and in A.D. 72 his seventy-two disciples were admitted
to share in the worship, music being shortly afterwards added to the
ceremonial. Gradually, the people came to look upon Confucius as a
god, and women used to pray to him for children, until the practice was
stopped by Edict in A.D. 472. In 505, which some consider to be the date
of the first genuine Confucian Temple, wooden images of the Sage were
introduced; in 1530 these were abolished, and inscribed tablets of wood,
in use at the present day, were substituted. In 555 temples were placed
in all prefectural cities; and later on, in all the important cities
and towns of the empire. In the second and eighth months of each
year, before dawn, sacrifices to Confucius are still celebrated with
considerable solemnity and pomp, including music and dances by bands of
either thirty-six or sixty-four performers.

Mencius and Confucianism.--Mencius, who lived B.C. 372-289, and devoted
himself to the task of spreading and consolidating the Confucian
teachings, made no attempt to lead back the Chinese people towards their
early beliefs in a personal God and in a spiritual world beyond the ken
of mortals. He observes in a general way that "those who obey God are
saved, while those who rebel against Him perish," but his reference is
to this life, and not to a future one. He also says that those whom God
destines for some great part, He first chastens by suffering and
toil. But perhaps his most original contribution will be found in the
following paragraph:--

"By exerting his mental powers to the full, man comes to understand his
own nature. When he understands his own nature, he understands God."

In all the above instances the term used for God is _T'ien_. Only in one
single passage does Mencius use _Shang Ti_:--"Though a man be wicked, if
he duly prepares himself by fasting and abstinence and purification by
water, he may sacrifice to God."

Ch'u Yuan.--The statesman-poet Ch'u Yuan, B.C. 332-295, who drowned
himself in despair at his country's outlook, and whose body is still
searched for annually at the Dragon-Boat festival, frequently alludes to
a Supreme Being:--

     Almighty God, Thou who art impartial,
     And dost appoint the virtuous among men as Thy Assistants.

One of his poems is entitled "God Questions," and consists of a number
of questions on various mysteries in the universe. The meaning of the
title would be better expressed by "Questions put to God," but we are
told that such a phrase was impossible on account of the holiness of
God and the irreverence of questioning Him. One question was, "Who has
handed down to us an account of the beginning of all things, and how
do we know anything about the time when heaven and earth were without
form?" Another question was, "As Nu-ch'i had no husband, how could she
bear nine sons?" The _Commentary_ tells us that Nu-ch'i was a "divine
maiden," but nothing more seems to be known about her.

The following prose passage is taken from Ch'u Yuan's biography:--

"Man came originally from God, just as the individual comes from his
parents. When his span is at an end, he goes back to that from which
he sprang. Thus it is that in the hour of bitter trial and exhaustion,
there is no man but calls to God, just as in his hours of sickness and
sorrow every one of us will turn to his parents."

The great sacrifices to God and to Earth, as performed by the early
rulers of China, had been traditionally associated with Mount T'ai, in
the modern province of Shantung, one of China's five sacred mountains.
Accordingly, in B.C. 219, the self-styled "First Emperor," desirous
of restoring the old custom, which had already fallen into desuetude,
proceeded to the summit of Mount T'ai, where he is said to have carried
out his purpose, though what actually took place was always kept a
profound secret. The literati, however, whom the First Emperor had
persecuted by forbidding any further study of the Confucian Canon, and
burning all the copies he could lay hands on, gave out that he had been
prevented from performing the sacrifices by a violent storm of rain,
alleging as a reason that he was altogether deficient in the virtue
required for such a ceremony.

It may be added that in B.C. 110 the then reigning Emperor proceeded
to the summit of Mount T'ai, and performed the great sacrifice to God,
following this up by sacrificing to Earth on a hill at the foot of
the mountain. At the ceremony he was dressed in yellow robes, and was
accompanied by music. During the night there was light, and a white
cloud hung over the altar. The Emperor himself declared that he saw
a dazzling glory, and heard a voice speaking to him. The truthful
historian--the Herodotus of China--who has left an account of these
proceedings, accompanied the Emperor on this and other occasions; he
was also present at the sacrifices offered before the departure of the
mission, and has left it on record that he himself actually heard the
voices of spirits.



CHAPTER III -- TAOISM

Lao Tzu.--Meanwhile, other influences had been helping to divert the
attention of the Chinese people from the simple worship of God and of
the powers of nature. The philosophy associated with the name of Lao
Tzu, who lived nobody knows when,--probably about B.C. 600--which is
popularly known as Taoism, from Tao, the omnipresent, omnipotent, and
unthinkable principle on which it is based, operated with Confucianism,
though in an opposite direction, in dislimning the old faith while
putting nothing satisfactory in its place. Confucianism, with its
shadowy monotheistic background, was at any rate a practical system for
everyday use, and it may be said to contain all the great ethical truths
to be found in the teachings of Christ. Lao Tzu harped upon a doctrine
of Inaction, by virtue of which all things were to be accomplished,--a
perpetual accommodation of self to one's surroundings, with the minimum
of effort, all progress being spontaneous and in the line of least
resistance. Such a system was naturally far better fitted for the study,
where in fact it has always remained, than for use in ordinary life.

In one of the few genuine utterances of Lao Tzu which have survived the
wreck of time, we find an allusion to a spiritual world. Unfortunately,
it is impossible to say exactly what the passage means. According to Han
Fei (died B.C. 233), who wrote several chapters to elucidate the sayings
of Lao Tzu, the following is the correct interpretation:--

"Govern a great nation as you would cook a small fish (i.e. do not
overdo it).

"If the empire is governed according to Tao, evil spirits will not be
worshipped as good ones.

"If evil spirits are not worshipped as good ones, good ones will do no
injury. Neither will the Sages injure the people. Each will not injure
the other. And if neither injures the other, then there will be mutual
profit."

The latter portion is explained by another commentator as follows:--

"Spirits do not hurt the natural. If people are natural, spirits have
no means of manifesting themselves; and if spirits do not manifest
themselves, we are not conscious of their existence as such. Likewise,
if we are not conscious of the existence of spirits as such, we must be
equally unconscious of the existence of inspired teachers as such; and
to be unconscious of the existence of spirits and of inspired teachers
is the very essence of Tao."

Adumbrations of Heracleitus.--In the hands of Lao Tzu's more immediate
followers, Tao became the Absolute, the First Cause, and finally One in
whose obliterating unity all seemingly opposed conditions of time and
space were indistinguishably blended. This One, the source of human
life, was placed beyond the limits of our visible universe; and in order
for human life to return thither at death and to enjoy immortality, it
was only necessary to refine away corporeal grossness according to the
doctrines of Lao Tzu. Later on, this One came to be regarded as a fixed
point of dazzling luminosity, in remote ether, around which circled for
ever and ever, in the supremest glory of motion, the souls of those who
had successfully passed through the ordeal of life, and who had left the
slough of humanity behind them.

The final state is best described by a poet of the ninth century A.D.:--

     Like a whirling water-wheel,
     Like rolling pearls,--
     Yet how are these worthy to be named?
     They are but illustrations for fools.
     There is the mighty axis of Earth,
     The never-resting pole of Heaven;
     Let us grasp their clue,
     And with them be blended in One,
     Beyond the bounds of thought,
     Circling for ever in the great Void,
     An orbit of a thousand years,--
     Yes, this is the key to my theme.

Debased Taoism.--This view naturally suggested the prolongation of
earthly life by artificial means; hence the search for an elixir,
carried on through many centuries by degenerate disciples of Taoism. But
here we must pass on to consider some of the speculations on God, life,
death, and immortality, indulged in by Taoist philosophers and others,
who were not fettered, as the Confucianists were, by traditional
reticence on the subject of spirits and an unseen universe.

Spirits must exist.--Mo Tzu, a philosopher of the fourth and fifth
centuries B.C., was arguing one day for the existence of spirits with a
disbelieving opponent. "All you have to do," he said, "is to go into
any village and make enquiries. From of old until now the people have
constantly seen and heard spiritual beings; how then can you say they do
not exist? If they had never seen nor heard them, could people say that
they existed?" "Of course," replied the disbeliever, "many people have
seen and heard spirits; but is there any instance of a properly verified
appearance?" Mo Tzu then told a long story of how King Hsuan, B.C.
827-781, unjustly put to death a Minister, and how the latter had said
to the King, "If there is no consciousness after death, this matter will
be at an end; but if there is, then within three years you will hear
from me." Three years later, at a grand durbar, the Minister descended
from heaven on a white horse, and shot the King dead before the eyes of
all.

Traces of Mysticism.--Chuang Tzu, the famous philosopher of the third
and fourth centuries B.C., and exponent of the Tao of Lao Tzu, has the
following allusions to God, of course as seen through Taoist glasses:--

"God is a principle which exists by virtue of its own intrinsicality,
and operates spontaneously without self-manifestation.

"He who knows what God is, and what Man is, has attained. Knowing what
God is, he knows that he himself proceeded therefrom. Knowing what Man
is, he rests in the knowledge of the known, waiting for the knowledge of
the unknown.

"The ultimate end is God. He is manifested in the laws of nature. He is
the hidden spring. At the beginning of all things, He was."

Taoism, however, does not seem to have succeeded altogether, any more
than Confucianism, in altogether estranging the Chinese people from
their traditions of a God, more or less personal, whose power was the
real determining factor in human events. The great general Hsiang Yu,
B.C. 233-202, said to his charioteer at the battle which proved fatal
to his fortunes, "I have fought no fewer than seventy fights, and have
gained dominion over the empire. That I am now brought to this pass is
because God has deserted me."



CHAPTER IV -- MATERIALISM

Yang Hsiung.--Yang Hsiung was a philosopher who flourished
B.C. 53 - A.D. 18. He taught that the nature of man at birth is neither
good nor evil, but a mixture of both, and that development in either
direction depends wholly upon environment. To one who asked about God,
he replied, "What have I to do with God? Watch how without doing
anything He does all things." To another who said, "Surely it is God who
fashions and adorns all earthly forms," he replied, "Not so; if God in
an earthly sense were to fashion and adorn all things, His strength
would not be adequate to the task."

Wang Ch'ung.--Wang Ch'ung, A.D. 27-97, denies that men after death live
again as spiritual beings on earth. "Animals," he argues, "do not become
spirits after death; why should man alone undergo this change? . . .
That which informs man at birth is vitality, and at death this vitality
is extinguished. Vitality is produced by the pulsations of the blood;
when these cease, vitality is extinguished, the body decays, and becomes
dust. How can it become a spirit? . . . When a man dies, his soul
ascends to heaven, and his bones return (_kuei_) to earth; therefore he
is spoken of as a disembodied spirit (_kuei_), the latter word really
meaning that which has returned. . . . Vitality becomes humanity, just
as water becomes ice. The ice melts and is water again; man dies
and reverts to spirituality. . . . The spirits which people see are
invariably in the form of human beings, and that very fact is enough of
itself to prove that these apparitions cannot be the souls of dead men.
If a sack is filled with grain, it will stand up, and is obviously a
sack of grain; but if the sack is burst and the grain falls out, then it
collapses and disappears from view. Now, man's soul is enfolded in his
body as grain in a sack. When he dies his body decays and his vitality
is dissipated; and if when the grain is taken away the sack loses its
form, why, when the vitality is gone, should the body obtain a new shape
in which to appear again in the world? . . . The number of persons who
have died since the world began, old, middle-aged, and young, must run
into thousands of millions, far exceeding the number of persons alive at
the present day. If every one of these has become a disembodied spirit,
there must be at least one to every yard as we walk along the road; and
those who die must now suddenly find themselves face to face with vast
crowds of spirits, filling every house and street. . . . People say that
spirits are the souls of dead men. That being the case, spirits should
always appear naked, for surely it is not contended that clothes have
souls as well as men. . . . It can further be shown not only that dead
men never become spirits, but also that they are without consciousness,
by the fact that before birth they are without consciousness. Before
birth man rests in the First Cause; when he dies he goes back to the
First Cause. The First Cause is vague and without form, and man's soul
is there in a state of unconsciousness. At death the soul reverts to its
original state: how then can it possess consciousness? . . . As a matter
of fact, the universe is full of disembodied spirits, but these are not
the souls of dead men. They are beings only of the mind, conjured up
for the most part in sickness, when the patient is especially subject to
fear. For sickness induces fear of spirits; fear of spirits causes the
mind to dwell upon them; and thus apparitions are produced."

Another writer enlarges on the view that _kuei_ "disembodied spirit" is
the same as _kuei_ "to return." "At death, man's soul returns to heaven,
his flesh to earth, his blood to water, his blood-vessels to marshes,
his voice to thunder, his motion to the wind, his sleep to the sun and
moon, his bones to trees, his muscles to hills, his teeth to stones, his
fat to dew, his hair to grass, while his breath returns to man."

Attributes of God.--There was a certain philosopher, named Ch'in Mi
(died A.D. 226), whose services were much required by the King of Wu,
who sent an envoy to fetch him. The envoy took upon himself to catechise
the philosopher, with the following result:--

"You are engaged in study, are you not?" asked the envoy.

"Any slip of a boy may be that," replied Ch'in; "why not I?"

"Has God a head?" said the envoy.

"He has," was the reply.

"Where is He?" was the next question.

"In the West. The _Odes_ say,

     He gazed fondly on the West,

From which it may be inferred that his head was in the West."

"Has God got ears?"

"God sits on high," replied Ch'in, "but hears the lowly. The _Odes_ say,

     The crane cries in the marsh,
     And its cry is heard by God.

If He had not ears, how could He hear it?"

"Has God feet?" asked the envoy.

"He has," replied Ch'in. "The _Odes_ say,

     The steps of God are difficult;
     This man does not follow them.

If He had no feet, how could He step?"

"Has God a surname?" enquired the envoy. "And if so, what is it?"

"He has a surname," said Ch'in, "and it is Liu."

"How do you know that?" rejoined the other.

"The surname of the Emperor, who is the Son of Heaven, is Liu," replied
Ch'in; "and that is how I know it."

These answers, we are told, came as quickly as echo after sound. A
writer of the ninth century A.D., when reverence for the one God of
ancient China had been to a great extent weakened by the multiplication
of inferior deities, tells a story how this God, whose name was Liu, had
been displaced by another God whose name was Chang.

The _Hsing ying tsa lu_ has the following story. There was once a very
poor scholar, who made it his nightly practice to burn incense and pray
to God. One evening he heard a voice from above, saying, "God has been
touched by your earnestness, and has sent me to ask what you require."
"I wish," replied the scholar, "for clothes and food, coarse if you
will, sufficient for my necessities in this life, and to be able to
roam, free from care, among the mountains and streams, until I complete
my allotted span; that is all." "All!" cried the voice, amid peals of
laughter from the clouds. "Why, that is the happiness enjoyed by the
spirits in heaven; you can't have that. Ask rather for wealth and rank."

Good and Evil.--It has already been stated that the Chinese imagination
has never conceived of an Evil One, deliverance from whom might be
secured by prayer. The existence of evil in the abstract has however
received some attention.

Wei Tao Tzu asked Yu Li Tzu, saying, "Is it true that God loves good and
hates evil?"

"It is," replied Yu.

"In that case," rejoined Wei, "goodness should abound in the Empire
and evil should be scarce. Yet among birds, kites and falcons outnumber
phoenixes; among beasts, wolves are many and unicorns are few; among
growing plants, thorns are many and cereals are few; among those who eat
cooked food and stand erect, the wicked are many and the virtuous are
few; and in none of these cases can you say that the latter are evil and
the former good. Can it be possible that what man regards as evil, God
regards as good, and _vice versa_? Is it that God is unable to determine
the characteristics of each, and lets each follow its own bent and
develop good or evil accordingly? If He allows good men to be put upon,
and evil men to be a source of fear, is not this to admit that God has
His likes and dislikes? From of old until now, times of misgovernment
have always exceeded times of right government; and when men of
principle have contended with the ignoble, the latter have usually won.
Where then is God's love of good and hatred of evil?"

Yu Li Tzu had no answer to make.

The _Tan yen tsa lu_ says, "If the people are contented and happy, God
is at peace in His mind. When God is at peace in His mind, the two great
motive Powers act in harmony."

Where is God?--The _Pi ch'ou_ says, "The empyrean above you is not God;
it is but His outward manifestation. That which remains ever fixed in
man's heart and which rules over all things without cease, that is
God. Alas, you earnestly seek God in the blue sky, while forgetting Him
altogether in your hearts. Can you expect your prayers to be answered?"

This view--"For behold, the kingdom of God is within you," St. Luke
xvii. 21,--has been brought out by the philosopher Shao Yung, A.D.
1011-1077, in the following lines:--

     The heavens are still: no sound.
     Where then shall God be found? . . .
     Search not in distant skies;
     In man's own heart He lies.

Conflict of Faiths.--Han Wen-kung, A.D. 768-824, the eminent
philosopher, poet, and statesman, who suffered banishment for his
opposition to the Buddhist religion, complains that, "of old there was
but one faith; now there are three,"--meaning Confucianism, Buddhism,
and Taoism. He thus pictures the simplicity of China's ancient kings:--

"Their clothes were of cloth or of silk. They dwelt in palaces or in
ordinary houses. They ate grain and vegetables and fruit and fish and
flesh. Their method was easy of comprehension: their doctrines were
easily carried into practice. Hence their lives passed pleasantly away,
a source of satisfaction to themselves, a source of benefit to mankind.
At peace within their own hearts, they readily adapted themselves to
the necessities of the family and of the State. Happy in life, they were
remembered after death. Their sacrifices were grateful to the God of
Heaven, and the spirits of the departed rejoiced in the honours of
ancestral worship."

His mind seems to have been open on the subject of a future state. In a
lamentation on the death of a favourite nephew, he writes,

"If there is knowledge after death, this separation will be but for a
little while. If there is no knowledge after death, so will this sorrow
be but for a little while, and then no more sorrow for ever."

His views as to the existence of spirits on this earth are not very
logical:--

"If there is whistling among the rafters, and I take a light but fail to
see anything,--is that a spirit? It is not; for spirits are soundless.
If there is something in the room, and I look for it but cannot see
it,--is that a spirit? It is not; spirits are formless. If something
brushes against me, and I grab at, but do not seize it,--is that a
spirit? It is not; for if spirits are soundless and formless, how can
they have substance?

"If then spirits have neither sound nor form nor substance, are they
consequently non-existent? Things which have form without sound exist in
nature; for instance, earth, and stones. Things which have sound without
form exist in nature; for instance, wind, and thunder. Things which have
both sound and form exist in nature; for instance, men, and animals.
And things which have neither sound nor form also exist in nature; for
instance, disembodied spirits and angels."

For his own poetical spirit, according to the funeral elegy written
some two hundred and fifty years after his death, a great honour was
reserved:--

     Above in heaven there was no music, and God was sad,
     And summoned him to his place beside the Throne.

His friend and contemporary, Liu Tsung-yuan, a poet and philosopher like
himself, was tempted into the following reflections by the contemplation
of a beautiful landscape which he discovered far from the beaten
track:--

"Now, I have always had my doubts about the existence of a God; but this
scene made me think He really must exist. At the same time, however,
I began to wonder why He did not place it in some worthy centre of
civilisation, rather than in this out-of-the-way barbarous region, where
for centuries there has been no one to enjoy its beauty. And so, on the
other hand, such waste of labour and incongruity of position disposed me
to think that there could not be a God after all."

Letter from God.--In A.D. 1008 there was a pretended revelation from God
in the form of a letter, recalling the letter from Christ on the neglect
of the Sabbath mentioned by Roger of Wendover and Hoveden, contemporary
chroniclers. The Emperor and his Court regarded this communication with
profound awe; but a high official of the day said, "I have learnt (from
the Confucian Discourses) that God does not even speak; how then should
He write a letter?"

Modern Materialism.--The philosopher and commentator, Chu Hsi, A.D.
1130-1200, whose interpretations of the Confucian Canon are the only
ones now officially recognised, has done more than any one since
Confucius himself to disseminate a rigid materialism among his
fellow-countrymen. The "God" of the Canon is explained away as an
"Eternal Principle;" the phenomena of the universe are attributed to
Nature, with its absurd personification so commonly met with in Western
writers; and spirits generally are associated with the perfervid
imaginations of sick persons and enthusiasts.

"Is consciousness dispersed after death, or does it still exist?" said
an enquirer.

"It is not dispersed," replied Chu Hsi; "it is at an end. When vitality
comes to an end, consciousness comes to an end with it."

He got into more trouble over the verse quoted earlier,

     King Wen is on high,
     In glory in heaven.
     His comings and his goings
     Are to and from the presence of God.

"If it is asserted," he argued, "that King Wen was really in the
presence of God, and that there really is such a Being as God, He
certainly cannot have the form in which He is represented by the clay
or wooden images in vogue. Still, as these statements were made by the
Prophets of old, there must have been some foundation for them."

There is, however, a certain amount of inconsistency in his writings on
the supernatural, for in another passage he says,

"When God is about to send down calamities upon us, He first raises up
the hero whose genius shall finally prevail against those calamities."

Sometimes he seems to be addressing the educated Confucianist; at other
times, the common herd whose weaknesses have to be taken into account.



CHAPTER V -- BUDDHISM AND OTHER RELIGIONS

So early as the third century B.C., Buddhism seems to have appeared in
China, though it was not until the latter part of the first century A.D.
that a regular propaganda was established, and not until a century or
two later still that this religion began to take a firm hold of the
Chinese people. It was bitterly opposed by the Taoists, and only after
the lapse of many centuries were the two doctrines able to exist side
by side in peace. Each religion began early to borrow from the other. In
the words of the philosopher Chu Hsi, of the twelfth century, "Buddhism
stole the best features of Taoism; Taoism stole the worst features of
Buddhism. It is as though one took a jewel from the other, and the loser
recouped the loss with a stone."

From Buddhism the Taoists borrowed their whole scheme of temples,
priests, nuns, and ritual. They drew up liturgies to resemble the
Buddhist _Sutras_, and also prayers for the dead. They adopted the
idea of a Trinity, consisting of Lao Tzu, P'an Ku, and the Ruler of the
Universe; and they further appropriated the Buddhist Purgatory with all
its frightful terrors and tortures after death.

Nowadays it takes an expert to distinguish between the temples and
priests of the two religions, and members of both hierarchies are often
simultaneously summoned by persons needing religious consolation or
ceremonial of any kind.

Doubts.--In a chapter on "Doubts," by the Taoist philosopher Mou Tzu, we
read,

"Some one said to Mou, The Buddhist doctrine teaches that when men die
they are born again. I cannot believe this.

"When a man is at the point of death, replied Mou, his family mount upon
the house-top and call to him to stay. If he is already dead, to whom do
they call?

"They call his soul, said the other.

"If the soul comes back, the man lives, answered Mou; but if it does
not, whither does it go?

"It becomes a disembodied spirit, was the reply.

"Precisely so, said Mou. The soul is imperishable; only the body decays,
just as the stalks of corn perish, while the grain continues for ever
and ever. Did not Lao Tzu say, 'The reason why I suffer so much is
because I have a body'?

"But all men die whether they have found the truth or not, urged the
questioner; what then is the difference between them?

"That, replied Mou, is like considering your reward before you have put
in right conduct for a single day. If a man has found the truth, even
though he dies, his spirit will go to heaven; if he has led an evil life
his spirit will suffer everlastingly. A fool knows when a thing is done,
but a wise man knows beforehand. To have found the truth and not to have
found it are as unlike as gold and leather; good and evil, as black and
white. How then can you ask what is the difference?"

Buddhism, which forbids the slaughter of any living creature, has wisely
abstained from denouncing the sacrifice of victims at the Temple of
Heaven and at the Confucian Temple. But backed by Confucianism it
denounces the slaughter for food of the ox which tills the soil. Some
lines of doggerel to this effect, based upon the Buddhist doctrine of
the transmigration of souls and put into the mouth of an ox, have been
rendered as follows:--

     My murderers shall come to grief,
     Along with all who relish beef;
     When I'm a man and you're a cow,
     I'll eat you as you eat me now.

Fire Worshippers.--Mazdeism, the religion of Zoroaster, based upon the
worship of fire, and in that sense not altogether unfamiliar to the
Chinese, reached China some time in the seventh century A.D. The first
temple was built at Ch'ang-an, the capital, in 621, ten years after
which came the famous missionary, Ho Lu the Magus. But the lease of life
enjoyed by this religion was of short duration.

Islamism.--Mahometans first settled in China in the year of the Mission,
A.D. 628, under Wahb-Abi-Kabcha, a maternal uncle of Mahomet, who was
sent with presents to the Emperor. The first mosque was built at Canton,
where, after several restorations, it still exists. There is at present
a very large Mahometan community in China, chiefly in the province of
Yunnan. These people carry on their worship unmolested, on the sole
condition that in each mosque there shall be exhibited a small tablet
with an inscription, the purport of which is recognition of allegiance
to the reigning Emperor.

Nestorians.--In A.D. 631 the Nestorian Church introduced Christianity
into China, under the title of "The Luminous Doctrine;" and in 636
Nestorian missionaries were allowed to settle at the capital. In 781
the famous Nestorian Tablet, with a bilingual inscription in Chinese and
Syriac, was set up at Si-ngan Fu, where it still remains, and where it
was discovered in 1625 by Father Semedo, long after Nestorianism had
altogether disappeared, leaving not a rack behind.

Manichaeans.--In A.D. 719 an ambassador from Tokharestan arrived at
the capital. He was accompanied by one Ta-mou-she, who is said to have
taught the religion of the Chaldean Mani, or Manes, who died about A.D.
274. In 807 the Manichaean sect made formal application to be allowed
to have recognised places of meeting; shortly after which they too
disappear from history.

Judaism.--The Jews, known to the Chinese as those who "take out the
sinew," from their peculiar method of preparing meat, are said by some
to have reached China, and to have founded a colony in Honan,
shortly after the Captivity, carrying the Pentateuch with them. Three
inscriptions on stone tablets are still extant, dated 1489, 1512, and
1663, respectively. The first says the Jews came to China during the
Sung dynasty; the second, during the Han dynasty; and the third, during
the Chou dynasty. The first is probably the correct account. We know
that the Jews built a synagogue at K'ai-feng Fu in A.D. 1164, where they
were discovered by Ricci in the seventeenth century, and where, in 1850,
there were still to be found traces of the old faith, now said to be
completely effaced.

Christianity.--With the advent of the Jesuit Fathers in the sixteenth
century, and of the Protestant missionaries, Marshman and Morrison, in
1799 and 1807 respectively, we pass gradually down to the present day,
where we may well pause and look around to see what remains to the
modern Chinese of their ancient faiths. It is scarcely too much to
say that all idea of the early God of their forefathers has long since
ceased to vivify their religious instincts, though the sacrifices to
God and to Earth are still annually performed by the Emperor.
Ancestor-worship, and the cult of Confucius, are probably very much
what they were many hundreds of years ago; while Taoism, once a pure
philosophy, is now a corrupt religion. As to alien faiths, the Buddhism
of China would certainly not be recognised by the Founder of Buddhism
in India; Mahometanism is fairly flourishing; Christianity is still
bitterly opposed.




CHRONOLOGICAL SYLLABUS


Legendary Period (Twenty-ninth Century to Tenth Century B.C.)--P'an
Ku and Creation--First Worship of Spirits--Worship of God, with
incense--Sacrifices to Mountains and Rivers--Worship of Sun, Moon, and
Stars--Institution of Ancestral Worship--God enjoys music, dancing,
and burnt offerings--God resents bad government--Revelation in a
Dream--Anthropomorphism--Fetishism--No Devil--No Hell--Terms for
God--The Character for "God" is a picture of a Man--God and Jehovah--God
in the _Odes_--Hou Chi and Parthenogenesis--Superstitions and
Supernatural Manifestations--Sacrifice--Ancestral Worship--Filial Piety.

Feudal Age (Tenth Century to Third Century B.C.)--The Influence
of Confucianism--His Agnosticism--Weakening of Supernatural
Beliefs--Consolidation of Confucianism--Human Sacrifices--Prayers for
Rain--The Philosophy of Taoism--A Rival to Confucianism--But uniting to
weaken the old Monotheistic Faith--Its Theory of Spirits--Modifications
of Taoism--The Elixir of Life--Evidences of a Spiritual
World--Mysticism.

The Empire (Third Century B.C. to modern times)--Arguments against
a Spiritual World--Attributes of God--Good and Evil--Buddhism
appears--Conflict of Faiths--Struggle between Buddhism and
Taoism--Taoism borrows from Buddhism and becomes a Religion--Mazdeism
appears--Followed closely by Mahometanism, Nestorian Christianity, and
Manichaeism--Mahometanism alone survived--Jews arrived about Eleventh
Century A.D.--Chu Hsi materialised the Confucian Canon--Henceforward
Agnosticism the rule for _literati_--Buddhism and Taoism (both debased)
for the Masses--The Jesuits arrive in the Sixteenth Century--Protestant
Missionaries date from 1799.




SELECTED WORKS BEARING ON THE RELIGIONS OF CHINA

Religion in China. Joseph Edkins, D.D.

The Religions of China. James Legge, D.D.

The Dragon, Image and Demon, or the three Religions of China. Rev. H. C.
du Bose.

Les Religions de la Chine. C. de Harbez.

The Religious System of China: Its ancient forms, evolution, history,
etc. J. J. de Groot, Ph.D.

The Sacred Books of China. James Legge, D.D.

Chinese Buddhism. Joseph Edkins, D.D.

Le Shinntoisme. Michel Revon.

========================================
========================================

and revised by David Widger, Kuwehe, Judith Wirawan, Juliet Sutherland,
Tony De Vita, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 2156-h.htm or 2156-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/2156/2156-h/2156-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/2156/2156-h.zip)





[Illustration: A NUE-CHEN TARTAR
(_14th Century_)]


CHINA AND THE MANCHUS

by

HERBERT A. GILES, M.A., LL.D.

Professor of Chinese in the University of Cambridge,
and Sometime H.B.M. Consul at Ningpo




CONTENTS

   CHAP.                                              PAGE

      I. THE NUE-CHENS AND KITANS                         1

     II. THE FALL OF THE MINGS                          14

    III. SHUN CHIH                                      28

     IV. K'ANG HSI                                      40

      V. YUNG CHENG AND CH'IEN LUNG                     52

     VI. CHIA CH'ING                                    61

    VII. TAO KUANG                                      69

   VIII. HSIEN FENG                                     81

     IX. T'UNG CHIH                                     98

      X. KUANG HSUE                                    106

     XI. HSUEAN T'UNG                                  121

    XII. SUN YAT-SEN                                   129

         LIST OF WORKS CONSULTED                       141

         INDEX                                         142




ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP

   A NUE-CHEN TARTAR (14_th Century_)       _Frontispiece_

   A KITAN TARTAR (14_th Century_)         _facing page_ 2

   SKETCH MAP OF THE FAR EAST                     _at end_




NOTE

It is impossible to give here a complete key to the pronunciation
of Chinese words. For those who wish to pronounce with approximate
correctness the proper names in this volume, the following may be a
rough guide:--


     a            as in alms.
     e            as u in fun.
     i            as ie in thief.
     o            as aw in saw.
     u            as oo in soon.
     ue            as u in French, or ue in German.
     [)u]         as e in her.
     ai           as aye (yes).
     ao           as ow in cow.
     ei           as ey in prey.
     ow           as o (not as ow in cow).
     ch           as ch in church.
     chih         as chu in church.
     hs           as sh (hsiu = sheeoo).
     j            as in French.
     ua and uo    as wa and wo.

     The insertion of a rough breathing ' calls for a strong aspirate.




CHAPTER I

THE NUE-CHENS AND KITANS


The Manchus are descended from a branch of certain wild Tungusic
nomads, who were known in the ninth century as the Nue-chens, a name
which has been said to mean "west of the sea." The cradle of their
race lay at the base of the Ever-White Mountains, due north of Korea,
and was fertilised by the head waters of the Yalu River.

In an illustrated Chinese work of the fourteenth century, of which
the Cambridge University Library possesses the only known copy, we
read that they reached this spot, originally the home of the Su-shen
tribe, as fugitives from Korea; further, that careless of death and
prizing valour only, they carried naked knives about their persons,
never parting from them by day or night, and that they were as
"poisonous" as wolves or tigers. They also tattooed their faces, and
at marriage their mouths. By the close of the ninth century the
Nue-chens had become subject to the neighbouring Kitans, then under
the rule of the vigorous Kitan chieftain, Opaochi, who, in 907,
proclaimed himself Emperor of an independent kingdom with the
dynastic title of Liao, said to mean "iron," and who at once entered
upon that long course of aggression against China and encroachment
upon her territory which was to result in the practical division of
the empire between the two powers, with the Yellow River as boundary,
K'ai-feng as the Chinese capital, and Peking, now for the first time
raised to the status of a metropolis, as the Kitan capital. Hitherto,
the Kitans had recognised China as their suzerain; they are first
mentioned in Chinese history in A.D. 468, when they sent ambassadors
to court, with tribute.

Turning now to China, the famous House of Sung, the early years of
which were so full of promise of national prosperity, and which is
deservedly associated with one of the two most brilliant periods in
Chinese literature, was founded in 960. Korea was then forced, in
order to protect herself from the encroachments of China, to accept
the hated supremacy of the Kitans; but being promptly called upon to
surrender large tracts of territory, she suddenly entered into an
alliance with the Nue-chens, who were also ready to revolt, and who
sent an army to the assistance of their new friends. The Nue-chen and
Korean armies, acting in concert, inflicted a severe defeat on the
Kitans, and from this victory may be dated the beginning of the
Nue-chen power. China had indeed already sent an embassy to the
Nue-chens, suggesting an alliance and also a combination with Korea,
by which means the aggression of the Kitans might easily be checked;
but during the eleventh century Korea became alienated from the
Nue-chens, and even went so far as to advise China to join with the
Kitans in crushing the Nue-chens. China, no doubt, would have been
glad to get rid of both of these troublesome neighbours, especially
the Kitans, who were gradually filching territory from the empire,
and driving the Chinese out of the southern portion of the province
of Chihli.

[Illustration: A KITAN TARTAR
(_14th Century_)]

For a long period China weakly allowed herself to be blackmailed by
the Kitans, who, in return for a large money subsidy and valuable
supplies of silk, forwarded a quite insignificant amount of local
produce, which was called "tribute" by the Chinese court.

Early in the twelfth century, the Kitan monarch paid a visit to the
Sungari River, for the purpose of fishing, and was duly received by
the chiefs of the Nue-chen tribes in that district. On this occasion
the Kitan Emperor, who had taken perhaps more liquor than was good
for him, ordered the younger men of the company to get up and dance
before him. This command was ignored by the son of one of the chiefs,
named Akuteng (sometimes, but wrongly, written _Akuta_), and it was
suggested to the Emperor that he should devise means for putting out
of the way so uncompromising a spirit. No notice, however, was taken
of the affair at the moment; and that night Akuteng, with a band of
followers, disappeared from the scene. Making his way eastward,
across the Sungari, he started a movement which may be said to have
culminated five hundred years later in the conquest of China by the
Manchus. In 1114 he began to act on the offensive, and succeeded in
inflicting a severe defeat on the Kitans. By 1115 he had so far
advanced towards the foundation of an independent kingdom that he
actually assumed the title of Emperor. Thus was presented the rare
spectacle of three contemporary rulers, each of whom claimed a title
which, according to the Chinese theory, could only belong to one. The
style he chose for his dynasty was Chin (also read _Kin_), which
means "gold," and which some say was intended to mark a superiority
over Liao (= iron), that of the Kitans, on the ground that gold is
not, like iron, a prey to rust. Others, however, trace the origin of
the term to the fact that gold was found in the Nue-chen territory.

A small point which has given rise to some confusion, may fitly be
mentioned here. The tribe of Tartars hitherto spoken of as Nue-chens,
and henceforth known in history as the "Golden Dynasty," in 1035
changed the word _chen_ for _chih_, and were called Nue-chih Tartars.
They did this because at that date the word _chen_ was part of the
personal name of the reigning Kitan Emperor, and therefore taboo. The
necessity for such change would of course cease with their
emancipation from Kitan rule, and the old name would be revived; it
will accordingly be continued in the following pages.

The victories of Akuteng over the Kitans were most welcome to the
Chinese Emperor, who saw his late oppressors humbled to the dust by
the victorious Nue-chens; and in 1120 a treaty of alliance was signed
by the two powers against the common enemy. The upshot of this move
was that the Kitans were severely defeated in all directions, and
their chief cities fell into the hands of the Nue-chens, who finally
succeeded, in 1122, in taking Peking by assault, the Kitan Emperor
having already sought safety in flight. When, however, the time came
for an equitable settlement of territory between China and the
victorious Nue-chens, the Chinese Emperor discovered that the
Nue-chens, inasmuch as they had done most of the fighting, were
determined to have the lion's share of the reward; in fact, the yoke
imposed by the latter proved if anything more burdensome than that of
the dreaded Kitans. More territory was taken by the Nue-chens, and
even larger levies of money were exacted, while the same old farce of
worthless tribute was carried on as before.

In 1123, Akuteng died, and was canonised as the first Emperor of the
Chin, or Golden Dynasty. He was succeeded by a brother; and two years
later, the last Emperor of the Kitans was captured and relegated to
private life, thus bringing the dynasty to an end.

The new Emperor of the Nue-chens spent the rest of his life in one
long struggle with China. In 1126, the Sung capital, the modern
K'ai-feng Fu in Honan, was twice besieged: on the first occasion for
thirty-three days, when a heavy ransom was exacted and some territory
was ceded; on the second occasion for forty days, when it fell, and
was given up to pillage. In 1127, the feeble Chinese Emperor was
seized and carried off, and by 1129 the whole of China north of the
Yang-tsze was in the hands of the Nue-chens. The younger brother of
the banished Emperor was proclaimed by the Chinese at Nanking, and
managed to set up what is known as the southern Sung dynasty; but the
Nue-chens gave him no rest, driving him first out of Nanking, and then
out of Hangchow, where he had once more established a capital.
Ultimately, there was peace of a more or less permanent character,
chiefly due to the genius of a notable Chinese general of the day;
and the Nue-chens had to accept the Yang-tsze as the dividing line
between the two powers.

The next seventy years were freely marked by raids, first of one side
and then of the other; but by the close of the twelfth century the
Mongols were pressing the Nue-chens from the north, and the southern
Sungs were seizing the opportunity to attack their old enemies from
the south. Finally, in 1234, the independence of the Golden Dynasty
of Nue-chens was extinguished by Ogotai, third son of the great
Genghis Khan, with the aid of the southern Sungs, who were themselves
in turn wiped out by Kublai Khan, the first Mongol Emperor to rule
over a united China.

The name of this wandering people, whose territory covers such a huge
space on the map, has been variously derived from (1) _moengel_,
celestial, (2) _mong_, brave, and (3) _munku_, silver, the last
mentioned being favoured by some because of its relation to the iron
and golden dynasties of the Kitans and Nue-chens respectively.

Three centuries and a half must now pass away before entering upon
the next act of the Manchu drama. The Nue-chens had been scotched, but
not killed, by their Mongol conquerors, who, one hundred and
thirty-four years later (1368), were themselves driven out of China,
a pure native dynasty being re-established under the style of Ming,
"Bright." During the ensuing two hundred years the Nue-chens were
scarcely heard of, the House of Ming being busily occupied in other
directions. Their warlike spirit, however, found scope and
nourishment in the expeditions organised against Japan and Tan-lo, or
Quelpart, as named by the Dutch, a large island to the south of the
Korean peninsula; while on the other hand the various tribes
scattered over a portion of the territory known to Europeans as
Manchuria, availed themselves of long immunity from attack by the
Chinese to advance in civilization and prosperity. It may be noted
here that "Manchuria" is unknown to the Chinese or to the Manchus
themselves as a geographical expression. The present extensive home
of the Manchus is usually spoken of as the Three Eastern Provinces,
namely, (1) Shengking, or Liao-tung, or Kuan-tung, (2) Kirin, and (3)
Heilungchiang or Tsitsihar.

Among the numerous small independent communities above mentioned,
which traced their ancestry to the Nue-chens of old, one of the
smallest, the members of which inhabited a tract of territory due
east of what is now the city of Mukden, and were shortly to call
themselves Manchus,--the origin of the name is not known,--produced,
in 1559, a young hero who altered the course of Chinese history to
such an extent that for nearly three hundred years his descendants
sat on the throne of China, and ruled over what was for a great
portion of the time the largest empire on earth. Nurhachu, the real
founder of the Manchu power, was born in 1559, from a virile stock,
and was soon recognised to be an extraordinary child. We need not
linger over his dragon face, his phoenix eye, or even over his large,
drooping ears, which have always been associated by the Chinese with
intellectual ability. He first came into prominence in 1583, when, at
twenty-four years of age, he took up arms, at the head of only one
hundred and thirty men, in connection with the treacherous murder by
a rival chieftain of his father and grandfather, who had ruled over a
petty principality of almost infinitesimal extent; and he finally
succeeded three years later in securing from the Chinese, who had
been arrayed against him, not only the surrender of the murderer, but
also a sum of money and some robes of honour. He was further
successful in negotiating a treaty, under the terms of which Manchu
furs could be exchanged at certain points for such Chinese
commodities as cotton, sugar, and grain.

In 1587, Nurhachu built a walled city, and established an
administration in his tiny principality, the even-handed justice and
purity of which soon attracted a large number of settlers, and before
very long he had succeeded in amalgamating five Manchu States under
his personal rule. Extension of territory by annexation after
victories over neighbouring States followed as a matter of course,
the result being that his growing power came to be regarded with
suspicion, and even dread. At length, a joint attempt on the part of
seven States, aided by two Mongol chieftains, was made to crush him;
but, although numerical superiority was overpoweringly against him,
he managed to turn the enemy's attack into a rout, killed four
thousand men, and captured three thousand horses, besides other
booty. Following up this victory by further annexations, he now began
to present a bold front to the Chinese, declaring himself
independent, and refusing any longer to pay tribute. In 1603, he
built himself a new capital, Hingking, which he placed not very far
east of the modern Mukden, and there he received envoys from the
Mongolian chieftains, sent to congratulate him on his triumph.

At this period the Manchus, whose spoken words were polysyllabic, and
not monosyllabic like Chinese, had no written language beyond certain
rude attempts at alphabetic writing, formed from Chinese characters,
and found to be of little practical value. The necessity for
something more convenient soon appealed to the prescient and active
mind of Nurhachu; accordingly, in 1599, he gave orders to two learned
scholars to prepare a suitable script for his rapidly increasing
subjects. This they accomplished by basing the new script upon
Mongol, which had been invented in 1269, by Baschpa, or 'Phagspa, a
Tibetan lama, acting under the direction of Kublai Khan. Baschpa had
based his script upon the written language of the Ouigours, who were
descendants of the Hsiung-nu, or Huns. The Ouigours, known by that
name since the year 629, were once the ruling race in the regions
which now form the khanates of Khiva and Bokhara, and had been the
first of the tribes of Central Asia to have a script of their own.
This they formed from the Estrangelo Syriac of the Nestorians, who
appeared in China in the early part of the seventh century. The
Manchu written language, therefore, is lineally descended from
Syriac; indeed, the family likeness of both Manchu and Mongol to the
parent stem is quite obvious, except that these two scripts,
evidently influenced by Chinese, are written vertically, though,
unlike Chinese, they are read from left to right. Thirty-three years
later various improvements were introduced, leaving the Manchu script
precisely as we find it at the present day.

In 1613, Nurhachu had gathered about him an army of some forty
thousand men; and by a series of raids in various directions, he
further gradually succeeded in extending considerably the boundaries
of his kingdom. There now remained but one large and important State,
towards the annexation of which he directed all his efforts. After
elaborate preparations which extended over more than two years, at
the beginning of which (1616) the term Manchu (etymology unknown) was
definitively adopted as a national title, Nurhachu, in 1618, drew up
a list of grievances against the Chinese, under which he declared
that his people had been and were still suffering, and solemnly
committed it to the flames,--a recognised method of communication
with the spirits of heaven and earth. This document consisted of
seven clauses, and was addressed to the Emperor of China; it was, in
fact, a declaration of war. The Chinese, who were fast becoming aware
that a dangerous enemy had arisen, and that their own territory would
be the next to be threatened, at length decided to oppose any further
progress on the part of Nurhachu; and with this view dispatched an
army of two hundred thousand men against him. These troops, many of
whom were physically unfit, were divided on arrival at Mukden into
four bodies, each with some separate aim, the achievement of which
was to conduce to the speedy disruption of Nurhachu's power. The
issue of this move was certainly not expected on either side. In a
word, Nurhachu defeated his Chinese antagonists in detail, finally
inflicting such a crushing blow that he was left completely master of
the situation, and before very long had realised the chief object of
his ambition, namely, the reunion under one rule of those states into
which the Golden Dynasty had been broken up when it collapsed before
the Mongols in 1234.




CHAPTER II

THE FALL OF THE MINGS


It is almost a conventionalism to attribute the fall of a Chinese
dynasty to the malign influence of eunuchs. The Imperial court was
undoubtedly at this date entirely in the hands of eunuchs, who
occupied all kinds of lucrative posts for which they were quite
unfitted, and even accompanied the army, nominally as officials, but
really as spies upon the generals in command. One of the most
notorious of these was Wei Chung-hsien, whose career may be taken as
typical of his class. He was a native of Su-ning in Chihli, of
profligate character, who made himself a eunuch, and changed his name
to Li Chin-chung. Entering the palace, he managed by bribery to get
into the service of the mother of the future Emperor, posthumously
canonised as Hsi Tsung, and became the paramour of that weak
monarch's wet-nurse. The pair gained the Emperor's affection to an
extraordinary degree, and Wei, an ignorant brute, was the real ruler
of China during the reign of Hsi Tsung. He always took care to
present memorials and other State papers when his Majesty was
engrossed in carpentry, and the Emperor would pretend to know all
about the question, and tell Wei to deal with it. Aided by unworthy
censors, a body of officials who are supposed to be the "eyes
and ears" of the monarch, and privileged to censure him for
misgovernment, he gradually drove all loyal men from office, and put
his opponents to cruel and ignominious deaths. He persuaded Hsi Tsung
to enrol a division of eunuch troops, ten thousand strong, armed with
muskets; while, by causing the Empress to have a miscarriage, his
paramour cleared his way to the throne. Many officials espoused his
cause, and the infatuated sovereign never wearied of loading him with
favours. In 1626, temples were erected to him in all the provinces
except Fuhkien, his image received Imperial honours, and he was
styled Nine Thousand Years, i.e. only one thousand less than the
Emperor himself, the Chinese term in the latter case being _wan sui_,
which has been adopted by the Japanese as _banzai_. All successes
were ascribed to his influence, a Grand Secretary declaring that his
virtue had actually caused the appearance of a "unicorn" in Shantung.
In 1627, he was likened in a memorial to Confucius, and it was
decreed that he should be worshipped with the Sage in the Imperial
Academy. His hopes were overthrown by the death of Hsi Tsung, whose
successor promptly dismissed him. He hanged himself to escape trial,
and his corpse was disembowelled. His paramour was executed, and in
1629, nearly three hundred persons were convicted and sentenced to
varying penalties for being connected with his schemes.

Jobbery and corruption were rife; and at the present juncture these
agencies were successfully employed to effect the recall of a really
able general who had been sent from Peking to recover lost ground,
and prevent further encroachments by the Manchus. For a time,
Nurhachu had been held in check by his skilful dispositions of
troops, Mukden was strongly fortified, and confidence generally was
restored; but the fatal policy of the new general rapidly alienated
the Chinese inhabitants, and caused them to enter secretly into
communication with the Manchus. It was thus that in 1621 Nurhachu was
in a position to advance upon Mukden. Encamping within a mile or two
of the city, he sent forward a reconnoitring party, which was
immediately attacked by the Chinese commandant at the head of a large
force. The former fled, and the latter pursued, only to fall into the
inevitable ambush; and the Chinese troops, on retiring in their turn,
found that the bridge across the moat had been destroyed by traitors
in their own camp, so that they were unable to re-enter the city.
Thus Mukden fell, the prelude to a series of further victories, one
of which was the rout of an army sent to retake Mukden, and the chief
of which was the capture of Liao-yang, now remembered in connection
with the Russo-Japanese war. In many of these engagements the
Manchus, whose chief weapon was the long bow, which they used with
deadly effect, found themselves opposed by artillery, the use of
which had been taught to the Chinese by Adam Schaal, the Jesuit
father. The supply of powder, however, had a way of running short,
and at once the pronounced superiority of the Manchu archers
prevailed.

Other cities now began to tender a voluntary submission, and many
Chinese took to shaving the head and wearing the queue, in
acknowledgment of their allegiance to the Manchus. All, however, was
not yet over, for the growing Manchu power was still subjected to
frequent attacks from Chinese arms in directions as far as possible
removed from points where Manchu troops were concentrated. Meanwhile
Nurhachu gradually extended his borders eastward, until in 1625, the
year in which he placed his capital at Mukden, his frontiers reached
to the sea on the east and to the river Amur on the north, the
important city of Ning-yuean being almost the only possession
remaining to the Chinese beyond the Great Wall. The explanation of
this is as follows.

An incompetent general, as above mentioned, had been sent at the
instance of the eunuchs to supersede an officer who had been holding
his own with considerable success, but who was not a _persona grata_
at court. The new general at once decided that no territory outside
the Great Wall was to be held against the Manchus, and gave orders
for the immediate retirement of all troops and Chinese residents
generally. To this command the civil governor of Ning-yuean, and the
military commandant, sent an indignant protest, writing out an oath
with their blood that they would never surrender the city. Nurhachu
seized the opportunity, and delivered a violent attack, with which he
seemed to be making some progress, until at length artillery was
brought into play. The havoc caused by guns at close quarters was
terrific, and the Manchus fled. This defeat was a blow from which
Nurhachu never recovered; his chagrin brought on a serious illness,
and he died in 1626, aged sixty-eight. Later on, when his descendants
were sitting upon the throne of China, he was canonised as T'ai Tsu,
the Great Ancestor, the representatives of the four preceding
generations of his family being canonised as Princes.

Nurhachu was succeeded by his fourth son, Abkhai, then thirty-four
years of age, and a tried warrior. His reign began with a
correspondence between himself and the governor who had been the
successful defender of Ning-yuean, in which some attempt was made to
conclude a treaty of peace. The Chinese on their side demanded the
return of all captured cities and territory; while the Manchus, who
refused to consider any such terms, suggested that China should pay
them a huge subsidy in money, silk, etc., in return for which they
offered but a moderate supply of furs, and something over half a ton
of ginseng (_Panax repens_), the famous forked root said to resemble
the human body, and much valued by the Chinese as a strengthening
medicine. This, of course, was a case of "giving too little and
asking too much," and the negotiations came to nothing. In 1629,
Abkhai, who by this time was master of Korea, marched upon Peking, at
the head of a large army, and encamped within a few miles from its
walls; but he was unable to capture the city, and had finally to
retire. The next few years were devoted by the Manchus, who now began
to possess artillery of their own casting, to the conquest of
Mongolia, in the hope of thus securing an easy passage for their
armies into China. An offer of peace was now made by the Chinese
Emperor, for reasons shortly to be stated; but the Manchu terms were
too severe, and hostilities were resumed, the Manchus chiefly
occupying themselves in devastating the country round Peking, their
numbers being constantly swelled by a stream of deserters from the
Chinese ranks. In 1643, Abkhai died; he was succeeded by his ninth
son, a boy of five, and was later on canonised as T'ai Tsung, the
Great Forefather. By 1635, he had already begun to style himself
Emperor of China, and had established a system of public
examinations. The name of the dynasty had been "Manchu" ever since
1616; twenty years later he translated this term into the Chinese
word _Ch'ing_(or Ts'ing), which means "pure"; and as the Great Pure
Dynasty it will be remembered in history. Other important enactments
of his reign were prohibitions against the use of tobacco, which had
been recently introduced into Manchuria from Japan, through Korea;
against the Chinese fashion of dress and of wearing the hair; and
against the practice of binding the feet of girls. All except the
first of these were directed towards the complete denationalisation
of the Chinese who had accepted his rule, and whose numbers were
increasing daily.

So far, the Manchus seem to have been little influenced by religious
beliefs or scruples, except of a very primitive kind; but when they
came into closer contact with the Chinese, Buddhism began to spread
its charms, and not in vain, though strongly opposed by Abkhai
himself.

By 1635 the Manchus had effected the conquest of Mongolia, aided to a
great extent by frequent defections of large bodies of Mongols who
had been exasperated by their own ill-treatment at the hands of the
Chinese. Among some ancient Mongolian archives there has recently
been discovered a document, dated 1636, under which the Mongol chiefs
recognised the suzerainty of the Manchu Emperor. It was, however,
stipulated that, in the event of the fall of the dynasty, all the
laws existing previously to this date should again come into force.

A brief review of Chinese history during the later years of Manchu
progress, as described above, discloses a state of things such as
will always be found to prevail towards the close of an outworn
dynasty. Almost from the day when, in 1628, the last Emperor of the
Ming Dynasty ascended the throne, national grievances began to pass
from a simmering and more or less latent condition to a state of open
and acute hostility. The exactions and tyranny of the eunuchs had led
to increased taxation and general discontent; and the horrors of
famine now enhanced the gravity of the situation. Local outbreaks
were common, and were with difficulty suppressed. The most capable
among Chinese generals of the period, Wu San-kuei, shortly to play a
leading part in the dynastic drama, was far away, employed in
resisting the invasions of the Manchus, when a very serious
rebellion, which had been in preparation for some years, at length
burst violently forth.

Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng was a native of Shensi, who, before he was twenty
years old, had succeeded his father as village beadle. The famine of
1627 had brought him into trouble over the land-tax, and in 1629 he
turned brigand, but without conspicuous success during the following
ten years. In 1640, he headed a small gang of desperadoes, and
overrunning parts of Hupeh and Honan, was soon in command of a large
army. He was joined by a female bandit, formerly a courtesan, who
advised him to avoid slaughter and to try to win the hearts of the
people. In 1642, after several attempts to capture the city of
K'ai-feng, during one of which his left eye was destroyed by an
arrow, he at length succeeded, chiefly in consequence of a sudden
rise of the Yellow River, the waters of which rushed through a canal
originally intended to fill the city moat and flood out the rebels.
The rise of the river, however, was so rapid and so unusually high
that the city itself was flooded, and an enormous number of the
inhabitants perished, the rest seeking safety in flight to higher
ground.

By 1644, Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng had reduced the whole of the province of
Shensi; whereupon he began to advance on Peking, proclaiming himself
first Emperor of the Great Shun Dynasty, the term _shun_ implying
harmony between rulers and ruled. Terror reigned at the Chinese
court, especially as meteorological and other portents appeared in
unusually large numbers, as though to justify the panic. The Emperor
was in despair; the exchequer was empty, and there was no money to
pay the troops, who, in any case, were too few to man the city walls.
Each of the Ministers of State was anxious only to secure his own
safety. Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng's advance was scarcely opposed, the eunuch
commanders of cities and passes hastening to surrender them and save
their own lives. For, in case of immediate surrender, no injury was
done by Li to life or property, and even after a short resistance
only a few lives were exacted as penalty; but a more obstinate
defence was punished by burning and looting and universal slaughter.

The Emperor was now advised to send for Wu San-kuei; but that step
meant the end of further resistance to the invading Manchus on the
east, and for some time he would not consent. Meanwhile, he issued an
Imperial proclamation, such as is usual on these occasions,
announcing that all the troubles which had come upon the empire were
due to his own incompetence and unworthiness, as confirmed by the
droughts, famines, and other signs of divine wrath, of recent
occurrence; that the administration was to be reformed, and only
virtuous and capable officials would be employed. The near approach,
however, of Li's army at length caused the Emperor to realise that it
was Wu San-kuei or nothing, and belated messengers were dispatched to
summon him to the defence of the capital. Long before he could
possibly arrive, a gate of the southern city of Peking was
treacherously opened by the eunuch in charge of it, and the next
thing the Emperor saw was his capital in flames. He then summoned the
Empress and the court ladies, and bade them each provide for her own
safety. He sent his three sons into hiding, and actually killed with
his own hand several of his favourites, rather than let them fall
into the hands of the One-Eyed Rebel. He attempted the same by his
daughter, a young girl, covering his face with the sleeve of his
robe; but in his agony of mind he failed in his blow, and only
succeeded in cutting off an arm, leaving the unfortunate princess to
be dispatched later on by the Empress. After this, in concert with a
trusted eunuch and a few attendants, he disguised himself, and made
an attempt to escape from the city by night; but they found the gates
closed, and the guard refused to allow them to pass. Returning to the
palace in the early morning, the Emperor caused the great bell to be
rung as usual to summon the officers of government to audience; but
no one came. He then retired, with his faithful eunuch, to a kiosque,
on what is known as the Coal Hill, in the palace grounds, and there
wrote a last decree on the lapel of his coat:--"I, poor in virtue and
of contemptible personality, have incurred the wrath of God on high.
My Ministers have deceived me. I am ashamed to meet my ancestors; and
therefore I myself take off my crown, and with my hair covering my
face, await dismemberment at the hands of the rebels. Do not hurt a
single one of my people!" Emperor and eunuch then committed suicide
by hanging themselves, and the Great Ming Dynasty was brought to an
end.

Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng made a grand official entry into Peking, upon which
many of the palace ladies committed suicide. The bodies of the two
Empresses were discovered, and the late Emperor's sons were captured
and kindly treated; but of the Emperor himself there was for some
time no trace. At length his body was found, and was encoffined,
together with those of the Empresses, by order of Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng,
by-and-by to receive fit and proper burial at the hands of the
Manchus.

Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng further possessed himself of the persons of Wu
San-kuei's father and affianced bride, the latter of whom, a very
beautiful girl, he intended to keep for himself. He next sent off a
letter to Wu San-kuei, offering an alliance against the Manchus,
which was fortified by another letter from Wu San-kuei's father,
urging his son to fall in with Li's wishes, especially as his own
life would be dependent upon the success of the mission. Wu San-kuei
had already started on his way to relieve the capital when he heard
of the events above recorded; and it seems probable that he would
have yielded to circumstances and persuasion but for the fact that Li
had seized the girl he intended to marry. This decided him; he
retraced his steps, shaved his head after the required style, and
joined the Manchus.

It was not very long before Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng's army was in full
pursuit, with the twofold object of destroying Wu San-kuei and
recovering Chinese territory already occupied by the Manchus. In the
battle which ensued, all these hopes were dashed; Li sustained a
crushing defeat, and fled to Peking. There he put to death the Ming
princes who were in his hands, and completely exterminated Wu
San-kuei's family, with the exception of the girl above mentioned,
whom he carried off after having looted and burnt the palace and
other public buildings. Now was the opportunity of the Manchus; and
with the connivance and loyal aid of Wu San-kuei, the Great Ch'ing
Dynasty was established.

Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng, who had officially mounted the Dragon Throne as
Emperor of China nine days after his capture of Peking, was now hotly
pursued by Wu San-kuei, who had the good fortune to recover from the
rebels the girl, who had been taken with them in their flight, and
whom he then married. Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng retreated westwards; and after
two vain attempts to check the pursuers, his army began to melt away.
Driven south, he held Wu-ch'ang for a time; but ultimately he fled
down the Yang-tsze, and was slain by local militia in Hupeh.

Li was a born soldier. Even hostile writers admit that his army was
wonderfully well disciplined, and that he put a stop to the hideous
atrocities which had made his name a terror in the empire, just so
soon as he found that he could accomplish his ends by milder means.
His men were obliged to march light, very little baggage being
allowed; his horses were most carefully looked after. He himself was
by nature calm and cold, and his manner of life was frugal and
abstemious.




CHAPTER III

SHUN CHIH


The back of the rebellion was now broken; but an alien race, called
in to drive out the rebels, found themselves in command of the
situation. Wu San-kuei had therefore no alternative but to
acknowledge the Manchus definitively as the new rulers of China, and
to obtain the best possible terms for his country. Ever since the
defeat of Li by the combined forces of Chinese and Manchus, it had
been perfectly well understood that the latter were to be supported
in their bid for Imperial power, and the conditions under which the
throne was to be transferred were as follows:--(1) No Chinese women
were to be taken into the Imperial seraglio; (2) the Senior Classic
at the great triennial examination, on the results of which
successful candidates were drafted into the public service, was never
to be a Manchu; (3) Chinese men were to adopt the Manchu dress,
shaving the front part of the head and plaiting the back hair into a
queue, but they were to be allowed burial in the costume of the
Mings; (4) Chinese women were not to adopt the Manchu dress, nor to
cease to compress their feet, in accordance with ancient custom.

Wu San-kuei was loaded with honours, among others with a triple-eyed
peacock's feather, a decoration introduced, together with the
"button" at the top of the hat, by the Manchus, and classed as
single-, double-, and triple-eyed, according to merit. A few years
later, his son married the sister of the Emperor; and a few years
later still, he was appointed one of three feudatory princes, his
rule extending over the huge provinces of Yuennan and Ss[)u]ch'uan.
There we shall meet him again.

The new Emperor, the ninth son of Abkhai, best known by his
year-title as Shun Chih (favourable sway), was a child of seven when
he was placed upon the throne in 1644, under the regency of an uncle;
and by the time he was twelve years old, the uncle had died, leaving
him to his own resources. Before his early death, the regent had
already done some excellent work on behalf of his nephew. He had
curtailed the privileges of the eunuchs to such an extent that for a
hundred and fifty years to come,--so long, in fact, as the empire was
in the hands of wise rulers,--their malign influence was
inappreciable in court circles and politics generally. He left
Chinese officials in control of the civil administration, keeping
closely to the lines of the system which had obtained under the
previous dynasty; he did not hastily press for the universal adoption
of Manchu costume; and he even caused sacrificial ceremonies to be
performed at the mausolea of the Ming Emperors. One new rule of
considerable importance seems to have been introduced by the Manchus,
namely, that no official should be allowed to hold office within the
boundaries of his own province. Ostensibly a check on corrupt
practices, it is probable that this rule had a more far-reaching
political purport. The members of the Han-lin College presented an
address praying him (1) to prepare a list of all worthy men; (2) to
search out such of these as might be in hiding; (3) to exterminate
all rebels; (4) to proclaim an amnesty; (5) to establish peace; (6)
to disband the army, and (7) to punish corrupt officials.

The advice conveyed in the second clause of the above was speedily
acted upon, and a number of capable men were secured for the
government service. At the same time, with a view to the full
technical establishment of the dynasty, the Imperial ancestors were
canonised, and an ancestral shrine was duly constituted. The general
outlook would now appear to have been satisfactory from the point of
view of Manchu interests; but from lack of means of communication,
China had in those days almost the connotation of space infinite, and
events of the highest importance, involving nothing less than the
change of a dynasty, could be carried through in one portion of the
empire before their imminence had been more than whispered in
another. No sooner was Peking taken by the One-Eyed Rebel, than a
number of officials fled southwards and took refuge in Nanking, where
they set up a grandson of the last Emperor but one of the Ming
Dynasty, who was now the rightful heir to the throne. The rapidly
growing power of the Manchus had been lost sight of, if indeed it had
ever been thoroughly realised, and it seemed quite natural that the
representative of the House of Ming should be put forward to resist
the rebels.

This monarch, however, was quite unequal to the fate which had
befallen him; and, before long, both he himself and his capital were
in the hands of the Manchus. Other claimants to the throne appeared
in various places; notably, one at Hangchow and another at Foochow,
each of whom looked upon the other as a usurper. The former was soon
disposed of, but the latter gradually established his rule over a
wide area, and for a long time kept the Manchus at bay, so hateful
was the thought of an alien domination to the people of the province
in question. Towards the close of 1646, he too had been captured, and
the work of pacification went on, the penalty of death now being
exacted in the case of officials who refused to shave the head and
wear the queue. Two more Emperors, both of Imperial Ming blood, were
next proclaimed in Canton, one of whom strangled himself on the
advance of the Manchus, while the other disappeared. A large number
of loyal officials, rather than shave the front part of the head and
wear the Manchu queue, voluntarily shaved the whole head, and sought
sanctuary in monasteries, where they joined the Buddhist priesthood.

One more early attempt to re-establish the Mings must be noticed. The
fourth son of a grandson of the Ming Emperor Wan Li (_died_ 1620) was
in 1646 proclaimed Emperor at Nan-yang in Honan. For a number of
years of bloody warfare he managed to hold out; but gradually he was
forced to retire, first to Fuhkien and Kuangtung, and then into
Kueichou and Yuennan, from which he was finally expelled by Wu
San-kuei. He next fled to Burma, where in 1661 he was handed over to
Wu San-kuei, who had followed in pursuit; and he finally strangled
himself in the capital of Yuennan. He is said to have been a
Christian, as also many of his adherents; in consequence of which,
the Jesuit father, A. Koffler, bestowed upon him the title of the
Constantine of China. In view of the general character for ferocity
with which the Manchus are usually credited, it is pleasant to be
able to record that when the official history of the Ming Dynasty
came to be written, a Chinese scholar of the day, sitting on the
historical commission, pleaded that three of the princes above
mentioned, who were veritable scions of the Imperial stock, should be
entered as "brave men" and not as "rebels," and that the Emperor, to
whose reign we are now coming, graciously granted his request.

In the year 1661 Shun Chih, the first actual Emperor of the Ch'ing
dynasty, "became a guest on high." He does not rank as one of China's
great monarchs, but his kindly character as a man, and his
magnanimity as a ruler, were extolled by his contemporaries. He
treated the Catholic missionaries with favour. The Dutch and Russian
embassies to his court in 1656 found there envoys from the Great
Mogul, from the Western Tartars, and from the Dalai Lama. China, in
the days when her civilization towered above that of most countries
on the globe, and when her strength commanded the respect of all
nations, great and small, was quite accustomed to receive embassies
from foreign parts; the first recorded instance being that of
"An-tun" = Marcus Aurelius _Anton_inus, which reached China in A.D.
166. But because the tribute offered in this case contained no
jewels, consisting merely of ivory, rhinoceros-horn, tortoise-shell,
etc., which had been picked up in Annam, some have regarded it merely
as a trading enterprise, and not really an embassy from the Roman
Emperor; Chinese writers, on the other hand, suggest that the envoys
sold the valuable jewels and bought a trumpery collection of tribute
articles on the journey.

By the end of Shun Chih's reign, the Manchus, once a petty tribe of
hardy bowmen, far beyond the outskirts of the empire, were in
undoubted possession of all China, of Manchuria, of Korea, of most of
Mongolia, and even of the island of Formosa. How this island,
discovered by the Chinese only in 1430, became Manchu property, is a
story not altogether without romance.

The leader of a large fleet of junks, traders or pirates as occasion
served, known to the Portuguese of the day as Iquon, was compelled to
place his services at the command of the last sovereign of the Ming
dynasty, in whose cause he fought against the Manchu invaders along
the coasts of Fuhkien and Kuangtung. In 1628 he tendered his
submission to the Manchus, and for a time was well treated, and
cleared the seas of other pirates. Gradually, however, he became too
powerful, and it was deemed necessary to restrain him by force. He
was finally induced to surrender to the Manchu general in Fuhkien;
and having been made a prisoner, was sent to Peking, with two of his
sons by a Japanese wife, together with other of his adherents, all of
whom were executed upon arrival. Another son, familiar to foreigners
under the name of Koxinga, a Portuguese corruption of his title, had
remained behind with the fleet when his father surrendered, and he,
determined to avenge his father's treacherous death, declared an
implacable war against the Manchus. His piratical attacks on the
coast of China had long been a terror to the inhabitants; to such an
extent, indeed, that the populations of no fewer than eighty
townships had been forced to remove inland. Then Formosa, upon which
the Dutch had begun to form colonies in 1634, and where substantial
portions of their forts are still to be seen, attracted his piratical
eye. He attacked the Dutch, and succeeded in driving them out with
great slaughter, thus possessing himself of the island; but gradually
his followers began to drop off, in submission to the new dynasty,
and at length he himself was reported to Peking as dead. In 1874,
partly on the ground that he was really a supporter of the Ming
dynasty and not a rebel, and partly on the ground that "he had
founded in the midst of the waste of waters a dominion which he had
transmitted to his descendants, and which was by them surrendered to
the Imperial sway,"--a memorial was presented to the throne, asking
that his spirit might be canonized as the guardian angel of Formosa,
and that a shrine might be built in his honour. The request was
granted.

Consolidation of the empire thus won by the sword was carried out as
follows. In addition to the large Manchu garrison at Peking, smaller
garrisons were established at nine of the provincial capitals, and at
ten other important points in the provinces. The Manchu commandant of
each of the nine garrisons above mentioned, familiar to foreigners as
the Tartar General, was so placed in order to act as a check upon the
civil Governor or Viceroy, of whom he, strictly speaking, took
precedence, though in practice their ranks have always been regarded
as equal. With the empire at peace, the post of Tartar General has
always been a sinecure, and altogether out of comparison with that of
the Viceroy and his responsibilities; but in the case of a Viceroy
suspected of disloyalty and collusion with rebels, the swift
opportunity of the Tartar General was the great safeguard of the
dynasty, further strengthened as he was by the regulation which gave
to him the custody of the keys to the city gates. Those garrisons,
the soldiers of which were accompanied by their wives and families,
were from the first intended to be permanent institutions; and there
until quite recently were to be found the descendants of the original
drafts, not allowed to intermarry with their Chinese neighbours, but
otherwise influenced to such an extent that their Manchu
characteristics had almost entirely disappeared. In one direction the
Manchus made a curious concession which, though entirely sentimental,
was nevertheless well calculated to appeal to a proud though
conquered people. A rule was established under which every Manchu
high official, when memorializing the throne, was to speak of himself
to the Emperor as "your Majesty's slave," whereas the term accepted
from every Chinese high official was simply "your Majesty's servant."
During the early years of Manchu rule, proficiency in archery was as
much insisted on as in the days of Edward III with us; and even down
to a few years ago Manchu Bannermen, as they came to be called, might
be seen everywhere diligently practising the art--actually one of the
six fine arts of China--by the aid of which their ancestors had
passed from the state of a petty tribal community to possession of
the greatest empire in the world.

The term Bannerman, it may here be explained, is applied to all
Manchus in reference to their organization under one or other of
eight banners of different colour and design; besides which, there
are also eight banners for Mongolians, and eight more for the
descendants of those Chinese who sided with the Manchus against the
Mings, and thus helped to establish the Great Pure dynasty.

One of the first cares to the authorities of a newly-established
dynasty in China is to provide the country with a properly authorized
Penal Code, and this has usually been accomplished by accepting as
basis the code of the preceding rulers, and making such changes or
modifications as may be demanded by the spirit of the times. It is
generally understood that such was the method adopted under the first
Manchu Emperor. The code of the Mings was carefully examined, its
severities were softened, and various additions and alterations were
made; the result being a legal instrument which has received almost
unqualified admiration from eminent Western lawyers. It has, however,
been stated that the true source of the Manchu code must be looked
for in the code of the T'ang dynasty (A.D. 618-905); possibly both
codes were used. Within the compass of historical times, the country
has never been without one, the first code having been drawn up by a
distinguished statesman so far back as 525 B.C. In any case, at the
beginning of the reign of Shun Chih a code was issued, which
contained only certain fundamental and unalterable laws for the
empire, with an Imperial preface, nominally from the hand of the
Emperor himself. The next step was to supply any necessary additions
and modifications; and as time went on these were further amended or
enlarged by Imperial decrees, founded upon current events,--a process
which has been going on down to the present day. The code therefore
consists of two parts: (1) immutable laws more or less embodying
great principles beyond the reach of revision, and (2) a body of
case-law which, since 1746, has been subject to revision every five
years. With the publication of the Penal Code, the legal
responsibilities of the new Emperor began and ended. There is not,
and never has been, anything in China of the nature of civil law,
beyond local custom and the application of common sense.

Towards the close of this reign, intercourse with China brought about
an economic revolution in the West, especially in England, the
importance of which it is difficult to realize sufficiently at this
distant date. A new drink was put on the breakfast-table, destined to
displace completely the quart of ale with which even Lady Jane Grey
is said to have washed down her morning bacon. It is mentioned by
Pepys, under the year 1660, as "tee (a China drink)," which he says
he had never tasted before. Two centuries later, the export of tea
from China had reached huge proportions, no less an amount than one
hundred million _lb._ having been exported in one season from Foochow
alone.




CHAPTER IV

K'ANG HSI


The Emperor Shun Chih was succeeded by his third son, known by his
year-title as K'ang Hsi (lasting prosperity), who was only eight
years old at the time of his accession. Twelve years later the new
monarch took up the reins of government, and soon began to make his
influence felt. Fairly tall and well proportioned, he loved all manly
exercises, and devoted three months annually to hunting. Large bright
eyes lighted up his face, which was pitted with smallpox.
Contemporary observers vie with one another in praising his wit,
understanding, and liberality of mind. He was not twenty when the
three feudatory princes broke into open rebellion. Of these, Wu
San-kuei, the virtual founder of the dynasty, who had been appointed
in 1659, was the chief; and it was at his instigation that his
colleagues who ruled in Kuangtung and Fuhkien determined to throw off
their allegiance and set up independent sovereignties. Within a few
months, K'ang Hsi found vast portions of the empire slipping from his
grasp; but though at one moment only the provinces of Chihli, Honan,
and Shantung were left to him in peaceable possession, he never lost
heart. The resources of Wu San-kuei were ultimately found to be
insufficient for the struggle, the issue of which was determined
partly by his death in 1678, and partly by the powerful artillery
manufactured for the Imperial forces by the Jesuit missionaries, who
were then in high favour at court. The capital city of Yuennan was
taken by assault in 1681, upon which Wu San-kuei's son committed
suicide, and the rebellion collapsed. From that date the Manchus
decided that there should be no more "princes" among their Chinese
subjects, and the rule has been observed until the present day.

Under the Emperor K'ang Hsi a re-arrangement of the empire was
planned and carried out; that is to say, whereas during the Mongol
dynasty there had only been thirteen provinces, increased to fifteen
by the Mings, there was now a further increase of three, thus
constituting what is known as the Eighteen Provinces, or China
Proper. To effect this, the old province of Kiangnan was divided into
the modern Anhui and Kiangsu; Kansuh was carved out of Shensi; and
Hukuang was separated into Hupeh and Hunan. Formosa, which was
finally reconquered in 1683, was made part of the province of
Fuhkien, and so remained for some two hundred years, when it was
erected into an independent province. Thus, for a time China Proper
consisted of nineteen provinces, until the more familiar "eighteen"
was recently restored by the transfer of Formosa to Japan. In
addition to the above, the eastern territory, originally inhabited by
the Manchus, was divided into the three provinces already mentioned,
all of which were at first organized upon a purely military basis;
but of late years the administration of the southernmost province, in
which stands Mukden, the Manchu capital, has been brought more into
line with that of China Proper.

In 1677 the East India Company established an agency at Amoy, which,
though withdrawn in 1681, was re-established in 1685. The first
treaty with Russia was negotiated in 1679, but less than ten years
later a further treaty was found necessary, under which it was agreed
that the river Amur was to be the boundary-line between the two
dominions, the Russians giving up possession of both banks. Thus
Ya-k'o-sa, or Albazin, was ceded by Russia to China, and some of the
inhabitants, who appear to have been either pure Russians or
half-castes, were sent as prisoners to Peking, where religious
instruction was provided for them according to the rules of the
orthodox church. All the descendants of these Albazins probably
perished in the destruction of the Russian college during the siege
of the Legations in 1900. Punitive expeditions against Galdan and
Arabtan carried the frontiers of the empire to the borders of Khokand
and Badakshan, and to the confines of Tibet.

Galdan was a khan of the Kalmucks, who succeeded in establishing his
rule through nearly the whole of Turkestan, after attaining his
position by the murder of a brother. He attacked the Khalkas, and
thus incurred the resentment of K'ang Hsi, whose subjects they were;
and in order to strengthen his power, he applied to the Dalai Lama
for ordination, but was refused. He then feigned conversion to
Mahometanism, though without attracting Mahometan sympathies. In 1689
the Emperor in person led an army against him, crossing the deadly
desert of Gobi for this purpose. Finally, after a further expedition
and a decisive defeat in 1693, Galdan became a fugitive, and died
three years afterwards. He was succeeded as khan by his nephew,
Arabtan, who soon took up the offensive against China. He invaded
Tibet, and pillaged the monasteries as far as Lhasa; but was
ultimately driven back by a Manchu army to Sungaria, where he was
murdered in 1727.

The question of the calendar early attracted attention under the
reign of K'ang Hsi. After the capture of Peking in 1644, the Manchus
had employed the Jesuit Father, Schaal, upon the Astronomical Board,
an appointment which, owing to the jealousies aroused, very nearly
cost him his life. What he taught was hardly superior to the
astronomy then in vogue, which had been inherited from the Mongols,
being nothing more than the old Ptolemaic system, already discarded
in Europe. In 1669, a Flemish Jesuit Father from Courtrai, named
Verbiest, was placed upon the Board, and was entrusted with the
correction of the calendar according to more recent investigations.

Christianity was officially recognized in 1692, and an Imperial edict
was issued ordering its toleration throughout the empire. The
discovery of the Nestorian Tablet in 1625 had given a considerable
impulse, in spite of its heretical associations, to Christian
propagandism; and it was estimated that in 1627 there were no fewer
than thirteen thousand converts, many of whom were highly placed
officials, and even members of the Imperial family. An important
question, however, now came to a head, and completely put an end to
the hope that China under the Manchus might embrace the Roman
Catholic faith. The question was this: May converts to Christianity
continue the worship of ancestors? Ricci, the famous Jesuit, who died
in 1610, and who is the only foreigner mentioned by name in the
dynastic histories of China, was inclined to regard worship of
ancestors more as a civil than a religious rite. He probably foresaw,
as indeed time has shown, that ancestral worship would prove to be an
insuperable obstacle to many inquirers, if they were called upon to
discard it once and for all; at the same time, he must have known
that an invocation to spirits, coupled with the hope of obtaining
some benefit therefrom, is _worship_ pure and simple, and cannot be
explained away as an unmeaning ceremony.

Against the Jesuits in this matter were arrayed the Dominicans and
Franciscans; and the two parties fought the question before several
Popes, sometimes one side carrying its point, and sometimes the
other. At length, in 1698, a fresh petition was forwarded by the
Jesuit order in China, asking the Pope to sanction the practice of
this rite by native Christians, and also praying that the Chinese
language might be used in the celebration of mass. K'ang Hsi
supported the Jesuits in the view that ancestral worship was a
harmless ceremony; but after much wrangling, and the dispatch of a
Legate to the Manchu court, the Pope decided against the Jesuits and
their Imperial ally. This was too much for the pride of K'ang Hsi,
and he forthwith declared that in future he would only allow
facilities for preaching to those priests who shared his view. In
1716, an edict was issued, banishing all missionaries unless excepted
as above. The Emperor had indeed been annoyed by another
ecclesiastical squabble, on a minor scale of importance, which had
been raging almost simultaneously around the choice of an appropriate
Chinese term for God. The term approved, if not suggested, by K'ang
Hsi, and indisputably the right one, as shown by recent research, was
set aside by the Pope in 1704 in favour of one which was supposed for
a long time to have been coined for the purpose, but which had really
been applied for many centuries previously to one of the eight
spirits of ancient mythology.

In addition to his military campaign, K'ang Hsi carried out several
journeys of considerable length, and managed to see something of the
empire beyond the walls of Peking. He climbed the famous mountain,
T'ai-shan, in Shantung, the summit of which had been reached in 219
B.C. by the famous First Emperor, burner of the books and part
builder of the Great Wall, and where a century later another Emperor
had instituted a mysterious worship of Heaven and Earth. The ascent
of T'ai-shan had been previously accomplished by only six Emperors in
all, the last of whom went up in the year 1008; since K'ang Hsi no
further Imperial attempts have been made, so that his will close the
list in connexion with the Manchu dynasty. It was on this occasion
too that he visited the tomb of Confucius, also in Shantung.

The vagaries of the Yellow River, named "China's Sorrow" by a later
Emperor, were always a source of great anxiety to K'ang Hsi; so much
so that he paid a personal visit to the scene, and went carefully
into the various plans for keeping the waters to a given course.
Besides causing frequently recurring floods, with immense loss of
life and property, this river has a way of changing unexpectedly its
bed; so lately as 1856, it turned off at right angles near the city
of K'ai-feng, in Honan, and instead of emptying itself into the
Yellow Sea about latitude 34 deg., found a new outlet in the Gulf of
Peichili, latitude 38 deg.

K'ang Hsi several times visited Hangchow, returning to Tientsin by
the Grand Canal, a distance of six hundred and ninety miles. This
canal, it will be remembered, was designed and executed under Kublai
Khan in the thirteenth century, and helped to form an almost unbroken
line of water communication between Peking and Canton. At Hangchow,
during one visit, he held an examination of all the (so-called)
B.A.'s and M.A.'s, especially to test their poetical skill; and he
also did the same at Soochow and Nanking, taking the opportunity,
while at Nanking, to visit the mausoleum of the founder of the Ming
dynasty, who lies buried near by, and whose descendants had been
displaced by the Manchus. Happily for K'ang Hsi's complacency, the
book of fate is hidden from Emperors, as well as from subjects,--

   All but the page prescribed, their present state

and he was unable to foresee another visit paid to that mausoleum two
hundred and seven years later, under very different conditions, to
which we shall come in due course.

The census has always been an important institution in China. Without
going back so far as the legendary golden age, the statistics of
which have been invented by enthusiasts, we may accept unhesitatingly
such records as we find subsequent to the Christian era, on the
understanding that these returns are merely approximate. They could
hardly be otherwise, inasmuch as the Chinese count families and not
heads, roughly allowing five souls to each household. This plan
yields a total of rather over fifty millions for the year A.D. 156,
and one hundred and five millions for the fortieth year of the reign
of K'ang Hsi, 1701.

No record of this Emperor, however brief, could fail to notice the
literary side of his character, and his extraordinary achievements in
this direction. It is almost paradoxical, though absolutely true,
that two Manchu Emperors, sprung from a race which but a few decades
before had little thought for anything beyond war and the chase, and
which had not even a written language of its own, should have
conferred more benefits upon the student of literature than all the
rest of China's Emperors put together. The literature in question is,
of course, Chinese literature. Manchu was the court language, spoken
as well as written, for many years after 1644, and down to quite
recent times all official documents were in duplicate, one copy in
Chinese and one in Manchu; but a Manchu literature can hardly be said
to exist, beyond translations of all the most important Chinese
works. The Manchu dynasty is an admirable illustration of the old
story: conquerors taken captive by the conquered.

At this moment, the term "K'ang Hsi" is daily on the lips of every
student of the Chinese language, native or foreign, throughout the
empire. This is due to the fact that the Emperor caused to be
produced under his own personal superintendence, on a more extensive
scale and a more systematic plan than any previous work of the kind,
a lexicon of the Chinese language, containing over forty thousand
characters, with numerous illustrative phrases chronologically
arranged, the spelling of each character according to the method
introduced by Buddhist teachers and first used in the third century,
the tones, various readings, etc., etc., altogether a great work and
still without a rival at the present day.

It would be tedious even to enumerate all the various literary
undertakings conceived and carried out under the direction of K'ang
Hsi; but there are two works in particular which cannot be passed
over. One of these is the huge illustrated encyclopaedia in which
everything which has ever been said upon each of a vast array of
subjects is brought into a systematized book of reference, running to
many hundred volumes, and being almost a complete library in itself.
It was printed, after the death of K'ang Hsi, from movable copper
types. The other is, if anything, a still more extraordinary though
not such a voluminous work. It is a concordance to all literature;
not of words, but of phrases. A student meeting with an unfamiliar
combination of characters can turn to its pages and find every
passage given, in sufficient fullness, where the phrase in question
has been used by poet, historian, or essayist.

The last years of K'ang Hsi were beclouded by family troubles. For
some kind of intrigue, in which magic played a prominent part, he had
been compelled to degrade the Heir Apparent, and to appoint another
son to the vacant post; but a year or two later, this son was found
to be mentally deranged, and was placed under restraint. So things
went on for several more years, the Emperor apparently unable to make
up his mind as to the choice of a successor; and it was not until the
last day of his life that he finally decided in favour of his fourth
son. Dying in 1723, his reign had already extended beyond the Chinese
cycle of sixty years, a feat which no Emperor of China, in historical
times, had ever before achieved, but which was again to be
accomplished, before the century was out, by his grandson.




CHAPTER V

YUNG CHENG AND CH'IEN LUNG


The fourth son of K'ang Hsi came to the throne under the year-title
of Yung Cheng (harmonious rectitude). He was confronted with serious
difficulties from the very first. Dissatisfaction prevailed among his
numerous brothers, at least one of whom may have felt that he had a
better claim to rule than his junior in the family. This feeling
culminated in a plot to dethrone Yung Cheng, which was, however,
discovered in time, and resulted only in the degradation of the
guilty brothers. The fact that among his opponents were native
Christians--some say that the Jesuits were at the bottom of all the
mischief--naturally influenced the Emperor against Christianity; no
fewer than three hundred churches were destroyed, and all Catholic
missionaries were thenceforward obliged to live either at Peking or
at Macao. In 1732 he thought of expelling them altogether; but
finding that they were enthusiastic teachers of filial piety, he left
them alone, merely prohibiting fresh recruits from coming to China.

These domestic troubles were followed by a serious rebellion in
Kokonor, which was not fully suppressed until the next reign; also by
an outbreak among the aborigines of Kueichow and Yuennan, which lasted
until three years later, when the tribesmen were brought under
Imperial rule.

A Portuguese envoy, named Magalhaens (or Magaillans), visited Peking
in 1727, bearing presents for the Emperor; but nothing very much
resulted from his mission. In 1730, in addition to terrible floods,
there was a severe earthquake, which lasted ten days, and in which
one hundred thousand persons are said to have lost their lives. In
1735, Yung Cheng's reign came to an end amid sounds of a further
outbreak of the aborigines in Kueichow. Before his death, he named
his fourth son, then only fifteen, as his successor, under the
regency of two of the boy's uncles and two Grand Secretaries, one of
the latter being a distinguished scholar, who was entrusted with the
preparation of the history of the Ming dynasty. Yung Cheng's name has
always been somewhat unfairly associated by foreigners with a bitter
hostility to the Catholic priests of his day, simply because he
refused to allow them a free hand in matters outside their proper
sphere. Altogether, it may be said that he was a just and
public-spirited ruler, anxious for his people's welfare. He hated
war, and failed to carry on his father's vigorous policy in Central
Asia; nevertheless, by 1730, Chinese rule extended to the Laos
border, and the Shan States paid tribute. He was a man of letters,
and completed some of his father's undertakings.

Yung Cheng's successor was twenty-five years of age when he came to
the throne with the year-title of Ch'ien Lung (or Kien Long =
enduring glory), and one of his earliest acts was to forbid the
propagation of Christian doctrine, a prohibition which developed
between 1746 and 1785 into active persecution of its adherents. The
first ten years of this reign were spent chiefly in internal
reorganization; the remainder, which covered half a century, was
almost a continuous succession of wars. The aborigines of Kueichow,
known as the Miao-tz[)u], offered a determined resistance to all
attempts to bring them under the regular administration; and although
they were ultimately conquered, it was deemed advisable not to insist
upon the adoption of the queue, and also to leave them a considerable
measure of self-government. Acting under Manchu guidance, chiefs and
leading tribesmen were entrusted with important executive offices;
they had to keep the peace among their people, and to collect the
revenue of local produce to be forwarded to Peking. These posts were
hereditary. On the death of the father, the eldest son proceeded to
Peking and received his appointment in person, together with his seal
of office. Failing sons or their children, brothers had the right of
succession.

In 1741 the population was estimated by Pere Amiot, S.J., at over one
hundred and fifty millions, as against twenty-one million households
in 1701.

In 1753 there was trouble in Ili. After the death of Galdan II., son
of Arabtan, an attempt was made by one, Amursana, to usurp the
principality. He was, however, driven out, and fled to Peking, where
he was favourably received by Ch'ien Lung, and an army was sent to
reinstate him. With the subsequent settlement, under which he was to
have only one quarter of Ili, Amursana was profoundly dissatisfied,
and took the earliest opportunity of turning on his benefactors. He
murdered the Manchu-Chinese garrison and all the other Chinese he
could find, and proclaimed himself khan of the Eleuths. His triumph
was short-lived; another army was sent from Peking, this time against
him, and he fled into Russian territory, dying there soon afterwards
of smallpox. This campaign was lavishly illustrated by Chinese
artists, who produced a series of realistic pictures of the battles
and skirmishes fought by Ch'ien Lung's victorious troops. How far
these were prepared under the guidance of the Jesuit Fathers does not
seem to be known. About sixty years previously, under the reign of
K'ang Hsi, the Jesuits had carried out extensive surveys, and had
drawn fairly accurate maps of Chinese territory, which had been sent
to Paris and there engraved on copper by order of Louis XIV. In like
manner, the pictures now in question were forwarded to Paris and
engraved, between 1769 and 1774, by skilled draughtsmen, as may be
gathered from the lettering at the foot of each; for instance--_Grave
par J. P. Le Bas, graveur du cabinet du roi_ (Cambridge University
Library).

Kuldja and Kashgaria were next added to the empire, and Manchu
supremacy was established in Tibet. Burma and Nepal were forced to
pay tribute, after a disastrous war (1766-1770) with the former
country, in which a Chinese army had been almost exterminated;
rebellions in Ss[)u]ch'uan (1770), Shantung (1777), and Formosa
(1786) were suppressed.

Early in the eighteenth century, the Turguts, a branch of the Kalmuck
Tartars, unable to endure the oppressive tyranny of their rulers,
trekked into Russia, and settled on the banks of the Volga. Some
seventy years later, once more finding the burden of taxation too
heavy, they again organized a trek upon a colossal scale. Turning
their faces eastward, they spent a whole year of fearful suffering
and privation in reaching the confines of Ili, a terribly diminished
host. There they received a district, and were placed under the
jurisdiction of a khan. This journey has been dramatically described
by De Quincey in an essay entitled "Revolt of the Tartars, or Flight
of the Kalmuck Khan and his people from the Russian territories to
the Frontiers of China." Of this contribution to literature it is
only necessary to remark that the scenes described, and especially
the numbers mentioned, must be credited chiefly to the perfervid
imagination of the essayist, and also to certain not very trustworthy
documents sent home by Pere Amiot. It is probable that about one
hundred and sixty thousand Turguts set out on that long march, of
whom only some seventy thousand reached their goal.

In 1781, the Dungans (or Tungans) of Shensi broke into open
rebellion, which was suppressed only after huge losses to the
Imperialists. These Dungans were Mahometan subjects of China, who in
very early times had colonized, under the name of Gao-tchan, in
Kansuh and Shensi, and subsequently spread westward into Turkestan.
Some say that they were a distinct race, who, in the fifth and sixth
centuries, occupied the Tian Shan range, with their capital at
Harashar. The name, however, means, in the dialect of Chinese
Tartary, "converts," that is, to Mahometanism, to which they were
converted in the days of Timour by an Arabian adventurer. We shall
hear of them again in a still more serious connexion.

Eight years later there was a revolution in Cochin-China. The king
fled to China, and Ch'ien Lung promptly espoused his cause, sending
an army to effect his restoration. This was no sooner accomplished
than the chief Minister rebelled, and, rapidly attracting large
numbers to his standard, succeeded in cutting off the retreat of the
Chinese force. Ch'ien Lung then sent another army, whereupon the
rebel Minister submitted, and humbled himself so completely that the
Emperor appointed him to be king instead of the other. After this,
the Annamese continued to forward tribute, but it was deemed
advisable to cease from further interference with their government.

The next trouble was initiated by the Gurkhas, who, in 1790, raided
Tibet. On being defeated and pursued by a Chinese army, they gave up
all the booty taken, and entered into an agreement to pay tribute
once every five years.

The year 1793 was remarkable for the arrival of an English embassy
under Lord Macartney, who was received in audience by the Emperor at
Jehol (= hot river), an Imperial summer residence lying about a
hundred miles north of Peking, beyond the Great Wall. It had been
built in 1780 after the model of the palace of the Panshen Erdeni at
Tashilumbo, in Tibet, when that functionary, the spiritual ruler of
Tibet, as opposed to the Dalai Lama, who is the secular ruler,
proceeded to Peking to be present on the seventieth anniversary of
Ch'ien Lung's birthday. Two years later, the aged Emperor, who had,
like his grandfather, completed his cycle of sixty years on the
throne, abdicated in favour of his son, dying in retirement four
years after. These two monarchs, K'ang Hsi and Ch'ien Lung, were
among the ablest, not only of Manchu rulers, but of any whose lot it
has been to shape the destinies of China. Ch'ien Lung was an
indefatigable administrator, a little too ready perhaps to plunge
into costly military expeditions, and somewhat narrow in the policy
he adopted towards the "outside barbarians" who came to trade at
Canton and elsewhere, but otherwise a worthy rival of his
grandfather's fame as a sovereign and patron of letters. From the
long list of works, mostly on a very extensive scale, produced under
his supervision, may be mentioned the new and revised editions of the
Thirteen Classics of Confucianism and of the Twenty-four Dynastic
Histories. In 1772 a search was instituted under Imperial orders for
all literary works worthy of preservation, and high provincial
officials vied with one another in forwarding rare and important
works to Peking. The result was the great descriptive Catalogue of
the Imperial Library, arranged under the four heads of Classics
(Confucianism), History, Philosophy, and General Literature, in which
all the facts known about each work are set forth, coupled with
judicious critical remarks,--an achievement which has hardly a
parallel in any literature in the world.




CHAPTER VI

CHIA CH'ING


Ch'ien Lung's son, who reigned as Chia Ch'ing (high felicity--not to
be confounded with Chia Ching of the Ming dynasty, 1522-1567), found
himself in difficulties from the very start. The year of his
accession was marked by a rising of the White Lily Society, one of
the dreaded secret associations with which China is, and always has
been, honeycombed. The exact origin of this particular society is not
known. A White Lily Society was formed in the second century A.D. by
a certain Taoist patriarch, and eighteen members were accustomed to
assemble at a temple in modern Kiangsi for purposes of meditation.
But this seems to have no connexion with the later sect, of which we
first hear in 1308, when its existence was prohibited, its shrines
destroyed, and its votaries forced to return to ordinary life.
Members of the fraternity were then believed to possess a knowledge
of the black art; and later on, in 1622, the society was confounded
by Chinese officials in Shantung with Christianity. In the present
instance, it is said that no fewer than thirty thousand adherents
were executed before the trouble was finally suppressed; from which
statement it is easy to gather that under whatever form the White
Lily Society may have been originally initiated, its activities were
now of a much more serious character, and were, in fact, plainly
directed against the power and authority of the Manchus.

Almost from this very date may be said to have begun that turn of the
tide which was to reach its flood a hundred years afterwards. The
Manchus came into power, as conquerors by force of arms, at a time
when the mandate of the previous dynasty had been frittered away in
corruption and misrule; and although to the Chinese eye they were
nothing more than "stinking Tartars," there were not wanting many
glad enough to see a change of rule at any price. Under the first
Emperor, Shun Chih, there was barely time to find out what the new
dynasty was going to do; then came the long and glorious reign of
K'ang Hsi, followed, after the thirteen harmless years of Yung Cheng,
by the equally long and equally glorious reign of Ch'ien Lung. The
Chinese people, who, strictly speaking, govern themselves in the most
democratic of all republics, have not the slightest objection to the
Imperial tradition, which has indeed been their continuous heritage
from remotest antiquity, provided that public liberties are duly
safeguarded, chiefly in the sense that there shall always be equal
opportunities for all. They are quick to discover the character of
their rulers, and discovery in an unfavourable direction leads to an
early alteration of popular thought and demeanour. At the beginning
of the seventeenth century, they had tired of eunuch oppression and
unjust taxation, and they naturally hailed the genuine attempt in
1662 to get rid of eunuchs altogether, coupled with the persistent
efforts of K'ang Hsi, and later of Ch'ien Lung, to lighten the
burdens of revenue which weighed down the energies of all. But
towards the end of his reign Ch'ien Lung had become a very old man;
and the gradual decay of his powers of personal supervision opened a
way for the old abuses to creep in, bringing in their train the usual
accompaniment of popular discontent.

The Emperor Chia Ch'ing, a worthless and dissolute ruler, never
commanded the confidence of his people as his great predecessors had
done, nor had he the same confidence in them. This want of mutual
trust was not confined to his Chinese subjects only. In 1799,
Ho-shen, a high Manchu official who had been raised by Ch'ien Lung
from an obscure position to be a Minister of State and Grand
Secretary, was suspected, probably without a shadow of evidence, of
harbouring designs upon the throne. He was seized and tried,
nominally for corruption and undue familiarity, and was condemned to
death, being allowed as an act of grace to commit suicide.

In 1803 the Emperor was attacked in the streets of Peking; and ten
years later there was a serious outbreak organized by a secret
society in Honan, known as the Society of Divine Justice, and
alternatively as the White Feather Society, from the badge worn by
those members who took part in the actual movement, which happened as
follows. An attack upon the palace during the Emperor's absence on a
visit to the Imperial tombs was arranged by the leaders, who
represented a considerable body of malcontents, roused by the wrongs
which their countrymen were suffering all over the empire at the
hands of their Manchu rulers. By promises of large rewards and
appointments to lucrative offices when the Manchus should be got rid
of, the collusion of a number of the eunuchs was secured; and on a
given day some four hundred rebels, disguised as villagers carrying
baskets of fruit in which arms were concealed, collected about the
gates of the palace. Some say that one of the leaders was betrayed,
others that the eunuchs made a mistake in the date; at any rate there
was a sudden rush on the part of the conspirators, the guards at the
gates were overpowered, every one who was not wearing a white feather
was cut down, and the palace seemed to be at the mercy of the rebels.
The latter, however, were met by a desperate resistance from the
young princes, who shot down several of them, and thus alarmed the
soldiers. Assistance was promptly at hand, and the rebels were all
killed or captured. Immediate measures were taken to suppress the
Society, of which it is said that over twenty thousand members were
executed, and as many more sent in exile to Ili.

Not one, however, of the numerous secret societies, which from time
to time have flourished in China, can compare for a moment either in
numbers or organization with the formidable association known as the
Heaven and Earth Society, and also as the Triad Society, or Hung
League, which dates from the reign of Yung Cheng, and from first to
last has had one definite aim,--the overthrow of the Manchu dynasty.

The term "Triad" signifies the harmonious union of heaven (_q.d._
God), earth, and man; and members of the fraternity communicate to
one another the fact of membership by pointing first up to the sky,
then down to the ground, and last to their own hearts. The Society
was called the Hung League, because all the members adopted Hung as a
surname, a word which suggests the idea of a cataclysm. By a series
of lucky chances the inner working of this Society became known about
fifty years ago, when a mass of manuscripts containing the history of
the Society, its ritual, oaths, and secret signs, together with an
elaborate set of drawings of flags and other regalia, fell into the
hands of the Dutch Government at Batavia. These documents, translated
by Dr G. Schlegel, disclose an extraordinary similarity in many
respects between the working of Chinese lodges and the working of
those which are more familiar to us as temples of the Ancient Order
of Free and Accepted Masons. Such points of contact, however, as may
be discoverable, are most probably mere coincidences; if not, and if,
as is generally understood, the ritual of the European craft was
concocted by Cagliostro, then it follows that he must have borrowed
from the Chinese, and not the Chinese from him. The use of the square
and compasses as symbols of moral rectitude, which forms such a
striking feature of European masonry, finds no place in the
ceremonial of the Triad Society, although recognized as such in
Chinese literature from the days of Confucius, and still so employed
in the every-day colloquial of China.

In 1816 Lord Amherst's embassy reached Peking. Its object was to
secure some sort of arrangement under which British merchants might
carry on trade after a more satisfactory manner than had been the
case hitherto. The old Co-hong, a system first established in 1720,
under which certain Chinese merchants at Canton became responsible to
the local authorities for the behaviour of the English merchants, and
to the latter for all debts due to them, had been so complicated by
various oppressive laws, that at one time the East India Company had
threatened to stop all business. Lord Amherst, however, accomplished
nothing in the direction of reform. From the date of his landing at
Tientsin, he was persistently told that unless he agreed to perform
the _kotow_, he could not possibly be admitted to an audience. It was
probably his equally persistent refusal to do so--a ceremonial which
had been excused by Ch'ien Lung in the case of Lord Macartney--that
caused the Ministers to change their tactics, and to declare, on Lord
Amherst's arrival at the Summer Palace, tired and wayworn, that the
Emperor wished to see him immediately. Not only had the presents, of
which he was the bearer, not arrived at the palace, but he and his
suite, among whom were Sir George Stanton, Dr Morrison, and Sir John
Davis, had not received the trunks containing their uniforms. It was
therefore impossible for the ambassador to present himself before the
Emperor, and he flatly refused to do so; whereupon he received orders
to proceed at once to the sea-coast, and take himself off to his own
country. A curious comment on this fiasco was made by Napoleon, who
thought that the English Government had acted wrongly in not having
ordered Lord Amherst to comply with the custom of the place he was
sent to; otherwise, he should not have been sent at all. "It is my
opinion that whatever is the custom of a nation, and is practised by
the first characters of that nation towards their chief, cannot
degrade strangers who perform the same."

In 1820 Chia Ch'ing died, after a reign of twenty-five years,
notable, if for nothing else, as marking the beginning of Manchu
decadence, evidence of which is to be found in the unusually restless
temper of the people, and even in such apparent trifles as the
abandonment of the annual hunting excursions, always before carried
out on an extensive scale, and presenting, as it were, a surviving
indication of former Manchu hardihood and personal courage. He was
succeeded by his second son, who was already forty years of age, and
whose hitherto secluded life had ill-prepared him for the difficult
problems he was shortly called upon to face.




CHAPTER VII

TAO KUANG


Tao Kuang (glory of right principle), as he is called, from the style
chosen for his reign, gave promise of being a useful and enlightened
ruler; at the least a great improvement on his father. He did his
best at first to purify the court, but his natural indolence stood in
the way of any real reform, and with the best intentions in the world
he managed to leave the empire in a still more critical condition
than that in which he had found it. Five years after his accession,
his troubles began in real earnest. There was a rising of the people
in Kashgaria, due to criminal injustice practised over a long spell
of time on the part of the Chinese authorities. The rebels found a
leader in the person of Jehangir, who claimed descent from one of the
old native chiefs, formerly recognized by the Manchu Emperors, but
now abolished as such. Thousands flocked to his standard; and by the
time an avenging army could arrive on the scene, he was already
master of the country. During the campaign which followed, his men
were defeated in battle after battle; and at length he himself was
taken prisoner and forwarded to Peking, where he failed to defend his
conduct, and was put to death.

The next serious difficulty which confronted the Emperor was a
rising, in 1832, of the wild Miao tribes of Kuangsi and Hunan, led by
a man who either received or adopted the title of the Golden Dragon.
At the bottom of all the trouble we find, as usually to be expected
henceforward, the secret activities of the far-reaching Triad
Society, which seized the occasion to foment into open rebellion the
dissatisfaction of the tribesmen with the glaring injustice they were
suffering at the hands of the local authorities. After some initial
massacres and reprisals, a general was sent to put an end to the
outbreak; but so far from doing this, he seems to have come off
second best in most of the battles which ensued, and was finally
driven into Kuangtung. For this he was superseded, and two
Commissioners dispatched to take charge of further operations. It
occurred to these officials that possibly persuasion might succeed
where violence had failed; and accordingly a proclamation was widely
circulated, promising pardon and redress of wrongs to all who would
at once return to their allegiance, and pointing out at the same time
the futility of further resistance. The effect of this move was
magical; within a few days the rebellion was over.

We are now reaching a period at which European complications began to
be added to the more legitimate worries of a Manchu Emperor. Trade
with the Portuguese, the Spaniards, the Dutch, and the English, had
been carried on since the early years of the sixteenth century, but
in a very haphazard kind of way, and under many vexatious
restrictions, bribery being the only effectual means of bringing
commercial ventures to a successful issue. So far back as 1680, the
East India Company had received its charter, and commercial relations
with Chinese merchants could be entered into by British subjects only
through this channel. Such machinery answered its purpose very well
for a long period; but a monopoly of the kind became out of date as
time went on, and in 1834 it ceased altogether. The Company was there
for the sake of trade, and for nothing else; and one of its guiding
principles was avoidance of any acts which might wound Chinese
susceptibilities, and tend to defeat the object of its own existence.
Consequently, the directors would not allow opium to be imported in
their vessels; neither were they inclined to patronize missionary
efforts. It is true that Morrison's dictionary was printed at the
expense of the Company, when the punishment for a native teaching a
foreigner the Chinese language was death; but no pecuniary assistance
was forthcoming when the same distinguished missionary attempted to
translate the Bible for distribution in China.

The Manchus, who had themselves entered the country as robbers of the
soil and spoliators of the people, were determined to do their best
to keep out all future intruders; and it was for this reason that,
suspicious of the aims of the barbarian, every possible obstacle was
placed in the way of those who wished to learn to speak and read
Chinese. This suspicion was very much increased in the case of
missionaries, whose real object the Manchus failed to appreciate, and
behind whose plea of religious propagandism they thought they
detected a deep-laid scheme for territorial aggression, to culminate
of course in their own overthrow; and already in 1805 an edict had
been issued, strictly forbidding anyone to teach even Manchu to any
foreigner.

From this date (1834), any British subject was free to engage in the
trade, and the Home Government sent out Lord Napier to act as Chief
Superintendent, and to enter into regular diplomatic relations with
the Chinese authorities. Lord Napier, however, even though backed by
a couple of frigates, was unable to gain admission to the city of
Canton, and after a demonstration, the only result of which was to
bring all business to a standstill, he was finally obliged in the
general interest to retire. He went to Macao, a small peninsula to
the extreme south-west of the Kuangtung province, famous as the
residence of the poet Camoens, and there he died a month later. Macao
was first occupied by the Portuguese trading with China in 1557;
though there is a story that in 1517 certain Portuguese landed there
under pretence of drying some tribute presents to the Emperor, which
had been damaged in a storm, and proceeded to fortify their
encampment, whereupon the local officials built a wall across the
peninsula, shutting off further access to the mainland. It also
appears that, in 1566, Macao was actually ceded to the Portuguese on
condition of payment of an annual sum to China, which payment ceased
after trouble between the two countries in 1849.

The next few years were employed by the successors of Lord Napier in
endeavours, often wrongly directed, to establish working, if not
harmonious, relations with the Chinese authorities; but no
satisfactory point was reached, for the simple reason that recent
events had completely confirmed the officials and people in their old
views as to the relative status of the barbarians and themselves.

It is worth noticing here that Russia, with her conterminous and
ever-advancing frontier, has always been regarded somewhat
differently from the oversea barbarian. She has continually during
the past three centuries been the dreaded foreign bogy of the
Manchus; and a few years back, when Manchus and Chinese alike fancied
that their country was going to be "chopped up like a melon" and
divided among western nations, a warning geographical cartoon was
widely circulated in China, showing Russia in the shape of a huge
bear stretching down from the north and clawing the vast areas of
Mongolia and Manchuria to herself.

Now, to aggravate the already difficult situation, the opium question
came suddenly to the front in an acute form. For a long time the
import of opium had been strictly forbidden by the Government, and
for an equally long time smuggling the drug in increasing quantities
had been carried on in a most determined manner until, finally, swift
vessels with armed crews, sailing under foreign flags, succeeded in
terrorizing the native revenue cruisers, and so delivering their
cargoes as they pleased. It appears that the Emperor Tao Kuang, who
had sounded the various high authorities on the subject, was
genuinely desirous of putting an end to the import of opium, and so
checking the practice of opium-smoking, which was already assuming
dangerous proportions; and in this he was backed up by Captain Elliot
(afterwards Sir Charles Elliot), now Superintendent of Trade, an
official whose vacillating policy towards the Chinese authorities did
much to precipitate the disasters about to follow. After a serious
riot had been provoked, in which the foreign merchants of Canton
narrowly escaped with their lives, and to quell which it was
necessary to call out the soldiery, the Emperor decided to put a
definite stop to the opium traffic; and for this purpose he appointed
one of his most distinguished servants, at that time Viceroy of
Hukuang, and afterwards generally known as Commissioner Lin, a name
much reverenced by the Chinese as that of a true patriot, and never
mentioned even by foreigners without respect. Early in 1839, Lin took
up the post of Viceroy of Kuangtung, and immediately initiated an
attack which, to say the least of it, deserved a better fate.

Within a few days a peremptory order was made for the delivery of all
opium in the possession of foreign merchants at Canton. This demand
was resisted, but for a short time only. All the foreign merchants,
together with Captain Elliot, who had gone up to Canton specially to
meet the crisis, found themselves prisoners in their own houses,
deprived of servants and even of food. Then Captain Elliot undertook,
on behalf of his Government, to indemnify British subjects for their
losses; whereupon no fewer than twenty thousand two hundred and
ninety-one chests of opium were surrendered to Commissioner Lin, and
the incident was regarded by the Chinese as closed. On receipt of the
Emperor's instructions, the whole of this opium, for which the owners
received orders on the Treasury at the rate of L120 per chest, was
mixed with lime and salt water, and was entirely destroyed.

Lin's subsequent demands were so arbitrary that at length the English
mercantile community retired altogether from Canton, and after a
futile attempt to settle at Macao, where their presence, owing to
Chinese influence with the Portuguese occupiers, was made unwelcome,
they finally found a refuge at Hongkong, then occupied only by a few
fishermen's huts. Further negotiations as to the renewal of trade
having fallen through, Lin gave orders for all British ships to leave
China within three days, which resulted in a fight between two
men-of-war and twenty-nine war-junks, in which the latter were either
sunk or driven off with great loss. In June, 1840, a British fleet of
seventeen men-of-war and twenty-seven troopships arrived at Hongkong;
Canton was blockaded; a port on the island of Chusan was subsequently
occupied; and Lord Palmerston's letter to the Emperor was carried to
Tientsin, and delivered there to the Viceroy of Chihli. Commissioner
Lin was now cashiered for incompetency; but was afterwards instructed
to act with the Viceroy of Chihli, who was sent down to supersede
him. Further vexatious action, or rather inaction, on the part of
these two at length drove Captain Elliot to an ultimatum; and as no
attention was paid to this, the Bogue forts near the mouth of the
Canton river were taken by the British fleet, after great slaughter
of the Chinese. In January, 1841, a treaty of peace was arranged,
under which the island of Hongkong was to be ceded to England, a sum
of over a million pounds was to be paid for the opium destroyed, and
satisfactory concessions were to be made in the matter of official
intercourse between the two nations. The Emperor refused
ratification, and ordered the extermination of the barbarians to be
at once proceeded with. Again the Bogue forts were captured, and
Canton would have been occupied but for another promised treaty, the
terms of which were accepted by Sir Henry Pottinger, who now
superseded Elliot. At this juncture the British fleet sailed
northwards, capturing Amoy and Ningpo, and occupying the island of
Chusan. The further capture of Chapu, where munitions of war in huge
quantities were destroyed, was followed by similar successes at
Shanghai and Chinkiang. At the last-mentioned, a desperate resistance
was offered by the Manchu garrison, who fought heroically against
certain defeat, and who, when all hope was gone, committed suicide in
large numbers rather than fall into the hands of the enemy, from
whom, in accordance with prevailing ideas and with what would have
been their own practice, they expected no quarter. The Chinese
troops, as distinguished from the Manchus, behaved differently; they
took to their heels before a shot had been fired. This behaviour,
which seems to be nothing more than arrant cowardice, is nevertheless
open to a more favourable interpretation. The yoke of the Manchu
dynasty was already beginning to press heavily, and these men felt
that they had no particular cause to fight for, certainly not such a
personal cause as then stared the Manchus in the face. The Manchu
soldiers were fighting for their all: their very supremacy was at
stake; while many of the Chinese troops were members of the Triad
Society, the chief object of which was to get rid of the alien
dynasty. It is thus, too, that we can readily explain the assistance
afforded to the enemy by numerous Cantonese, and the presence of many
as servants on board the vessels of our fleet; they did not help us
or accompany us from any lack of patriotism, of which virtue Chinese
annals have many striking examples to show, but because they were
entirely out of sympathy with their rulers, and would have been glad
to see them overthrown, coupled of course with the tempting pay and
good treatment offered by the barbarian.

It now remained to take Nanking, and thither the fleet proceeded in
August, 1842, with that purpose in view. This move the Chinese
authorities promptly anticipated by offering to come to terms in a
friendly way; and in a short time conditions of peace were arranged
under an important instrument, known as the Treaty of Nanking. Its
chief clauses provided for the opening to British trade of Canton,
Amoy, Foochow, Ningpo, and Shanghai, at which all British subjects
were to enjoy the rights of extra-territoriality, being subject to
the jurisdiction of their own officials only; also, for the cession
to England of the island of Hongkong, and for the payment of a lump
sum of about five million pounds as compensation for loss of opium,
expenses of the war, etc. All prisoners were to be released, and
there was a special amnesty for such Chinese as had given their
services to the British during the war. An equality of status between
the officials of both nations was further conceded, and suitable
rules were to be drawn up for the regulation of trade. The above
treaty having been duly ratified by Tao Kuang and by Queen Victoria,
it must then have seemed to British merchants that a new and
prosperous era had really dawned. But they counted without the
ever-present desire of the great bulk of the Chinese people to see
the last of the Manchus; and the Triad Society, stimulated no doubt
by the recent British successes, had already shown signs of unusual
activity when, in 1850, the Emperor died, and was succeeded by his
fourth son, who reigned under the title of Hsien Feng (or Hien Fong =
universal plenty).




CHAPTER VIII

HSIEN FENG


Hsien Feng came to the throne at the age of nineteen, and found
himself in possession of a heritage which showed evident signs of
going rapidly to pieces. His father, in the opinion of many competent
Chinese, had been sincerely anxious for the welfare of his country;
on the other hand, he had failed to learn anything from the lessons
he had received at the hands of foreigners, towards whom his attitude
to the last was of the bow-wow order. On one occasion, indeed, he
borrowed a classical phrase, and referring to the intrusions of the
barbarians, declared roundly that he would allow no man to snore
alongside of his bed. Brought up in this spirit, Hsien Feng had
already begun to exhibit an anti-foreign bias, when he found himself
in the throes of a struggle which speedily reduced the European
question to quite insignificant proportions.

A clever young Cantonese, named Hung Hsiu-ch'uean, from whom great
things were expected, failed, in 1833, to secure the first degree at
the usual public examination. Four years later, when twenty-four
years of age, he made another attempt, only, however, to be once more
rejected. Chagrin at this second failure brought on melancholia, and
he began to see visions; and later on, while still in this depressed
state of mind, he turned his attention to some Christian tracts which
had been given to him on his first appearance at the examination, but
which he had so far allowed to remain unread. In these he discovered
what he thought were interpretations of his earlier dreams, and soon
managed to persuade himself that he had been divinely chosen to bring
to his countrymen a knowledge of the true God.

In one sense this would only have been reversion to a former
condition, for in ancient times a simple monotheism formed the whole
creed of the Chinese people; but Hung went much further, and after
having become head of a Society of God, he started a sect of
professing Christians, and set to work to collect followers, styling
himself the Brother of Christ. Gradually, the authorities became
aware of his existence, and also of the fact that he was drawing
together a following on a scale which might prove dangerous to the
public peace. It was then that force of circumstances changed his
status from that of a religious reformer to that of a political
adventurer; and almost simultaneously with the advent of Hsien Feng
to the Imperial power, the long-smouldering discontent with Manchu
rule, carefully fostered by the organization of the Triad Society,
broke into open rebellion. A sort of holy war was proclaimed against
the Manchus, stigmatized as usurpers and idolaters, who were to be
displaced by a native administration, called the T'ai P'ing (great
peace) Heavenly Dynasty, at the head of which Hung placed himself,
with the title of "Heavenly King," in allusion to the Christian
principles on which this new departure was founded.

"Our Heavenly King," so ran the rebel proclamations, "has received a
divine commission to exterminate the Manchus utterly, men, women, and
children, with all idolaters, and to possess the empire as its true
sovereign. For the empire and everything in it is his; its mountains
and rivers, its broad lands and public treasuries; you and all that
you have, your family, males and females alike, from yourself to your
youngest child, and your property, from your patrimonial estates to
the bracelet on your infant's arm. We command the services of all,
and we take everything. All who resist us are rebels and idolatrous
demons, and we kill them without sparing; but whoever acknowledges
our Heavenly King and exerts himself in our service shall have full
reward,--due honour and station in the armies and court of the
Heavenly Dynasty."

The T'ai-p'ings now got rid of the chief outward sign of allegiance
to the Manchus, by ceasing to shave the forepart of the head, and
allowing all their hair to grow long, from which they were often
spoken of at the time--and the name still survives--as the
long-haired rebels. Their early successes were phenomenal; they
captured city after city, moving northwards through Kuangsi into
Hunan, whence, after a severe check at Ch'ang-sha, the provincial
capital, the siege of which they were forced to raise, they reached
and captured, among others, the important cities of Wu-ch'ang,
Kiukiang, and An-ch'ing, on the Yang-tsze. The next stage was to
Nanking, a city occupying an important strategic position, and famous
as the capital of the empire in the fourth and fourteenth centuries.
Here the Manchu garrison offered but a feeble resistance, the only
troops who fought at all being Chinese; within ten days (March, 1853)
the city was in the hands of the T'ai-p'ings; all Manchus,--men,
women, and children, said to number no fewer than twenty
thousand,--were put to the sword; and in the same month, Hung was
formally proclaimed first Emperor of the T'ai P'ing Heavenly Dynasty,
Nanking from this date receiving the name of the Heavenly City. So
far, the generals who had been sent to oppose his progress had
effected nothing. One of these was Commissioner Lin, of opium fame,
who had been banished and recalled, and was then living in retirement
after having successfully held several high offices. His health was
not equal to the effort, and he died on his way to take up his post.

After the further capture of Chinkiang, a feat which created a
considerable panic at Shanghai, a force was detached from the main
body of the T'ai-p'ings, and dispatched north for no less a purpose
than the capture of Peking. Apparently a fool-hardy project, it was
one that came nearer to realization than the most sanguine outsider
could possibly have suspected. The army reached Tientsin, which is
only eighty miles from the capital; but when there, a slight reverse,
together with other unexplained reasons, resulted in a return (1855)
of the troops without having accomplished their object. Meanwhile,
the comparative ease with which the T'ai-p'ings had set the Manchus
at defiance, and continued to hold their own, encouraged various
outbreaks in other parts of the empire; until at length more
systematic efforts were made to put a stop to the present impossible
condition of affairs.

Opportunity just now was rather on the side of the Imperialists, as
the futile expedition to Peking had left the rebels in a somewhat
aimless state, not quite knowing what to do next. It is true that
they were busy spreading the T'ai-p'ing conception of Christianity,
in establishing schools, and preparing an educational literature to
meet the exigencies of the time. They achieved the latter object by
building anew on the lines, but not in the spirit, of the old. Thus,
the Trimetrical Classic, the famous schoolboy's handbook, a veritable
guide to knowledge in which a variety of subjects are lightly touched
upon, was entirely rewritten. The form, rhyming stanzas with three
words to each line, was preserved; but instead of beginning with the
familiar Confucian dogma that man's nature is entirely good at his
birth and only becomes depraved by later environment, we find the
story of the Creation, taken from the first chapter of Genesis.

By 1857, Imperialist troops were drawing close lines around the
rebels, who had begun to lose rather than to gain ground. An-ch'ing
and Nanking, the only two cities which remained to them, were
blockaded, and the Manchu plan was simply to starve the enemy out.
During this period we hear little of the Emperor, Hsien Feng; and
what we do hear is not to his advantage. He had become a confirmed
debauchee, in the hands of a degraded clique, whose only contribution
to the crisis was a suggested issue of paper money and debasement of
the popular coinage. Among his generals, however, there was now one,
whose name is still a household word all over the empire, and who
initiated the first checks which led to the ultimate suppression of
the rebellion. Tseng Kuo-fan had been already employed in high
offices, when, in 1853, he was first ordered to take up arms against
the T'ai-p'ings. After some reverses, he entered upon a long course
of victories by which the rebels were driven from most of their
strongholds; and in 1859, he submitted a plan for an advance on
Nanking, which was approved and ultimately carried out. Meanwhile,
the plight of the besieged rebels in Nanking had become so unbearable
that something had to be done. A sortie on a large scale was
accordingly organized, and so successful was it that the T'ai-p'ings
not only routed the besieging army, but were able to regain large
tracts of territory, capturing at the same time huge stores of arms
and munitions of war. These victories were in reality the death-blow
to the rebel cause, for the brutal cruelty then displayed towards the
unfortunate people at large was of such a character as to alienate
completely the sympathy of thousands who might otherwise have been
glad to see the end of the Manchus. Among other acts of desolation,
the large and beautiful city of Soochow was burnt and looted, an
outrage for which the T'ai-p'ings were held responsible, and
regarding which there is a pathetic tale told by an eye-witness of
the ruins; in this instance, however, if indeed in no others, the
acts of vandalism in question were committed by Imperialist soldiers.

It is with the T'ai-p'ing rebellion that we associate _likin_, a tax
which has for years past been the bugbear of the foreign merchant in
China. The term means "thousandth-part money," that is, the
thousandth part of a _tael_ or Chinese ounce of silver, say one
_cash_; and it was originally applied to a tax of one _cash_ per tael
on all sales, said to have been voluntarily imposed on themselves by
the people, as a temporary measure, with a view to make up the
deficiency in the land-tax caused by the rebellion. It was to be set
apart for military purposes only--hence its common name "war-tax";
but it soon drifted into the general body of taxation, and became a
serious impost on foreign trade. We first hear of it in 1852, as
collected by the Governor of Shantung; to hear the last of it has
long been the dream of those who wish to see the expansion of trade
with China.

Tseng Kuo-fan was now (1860) appointed Imperial War Commissioner as
well as Viceroy of the Two Kiang (= provinces of Kiangsi and Kiangsu
+ Anhui). He had already been made a _baturu_, a kind of order
instituted by the first Manchu Emperor, Shun Chih, as a reward for
military prowess; and had also received the Yellow Riding Jacket from
the Emperor Hsien Feng, who drew off the jacket he was himself
wearing at the time, and placed it on the shoulders of his loyal and
successful general. In 1861 he succeeded in recapturing An-ch'ing and
other places; and with this city as his headquarters, siege was
forthwith laid to Nanking.

The Imperialist forces were at this juncture greatly strengthened by
the appointment, on Tseng's recommendation, of two notable men, Tso
Tsung-t'ang and Li Hung-chang, as Governors of Chehkiang and Kiangsu
respectively. Assistance, too, came from another and most unexpected
quarter. An American adventurer, named Ward, a man of considerable
military ability, organized a small force of foreigners, which he led
to such purpose against the T'ai-p'ings, that he rapidly gathered
into its ranks a large if motley crowd of foreigners and Chinese, all
equally bent upon plunder, and with that end in view submitting to
the discipline necessary to success. A long run of victories gained
for this force the title of the Ever Victorious Army; until at length
Ward was killed in battle. He was buried at Sungkiang, near Shanghai,
a city which he had retaken from the T'ai-p'ings, and there a shrine
was erected to his memory, and for a long time--perhaps even
now--offerings were made to his departed spirit. An attempt was made
to replace him by another American named Burgevine, who had been
Ward's second in command. This man, however, was found to be
incapable and was superseded; and in 1863 Major Gordon, R.E., was
allowed by the British authorities to take over command of what was
then an army of about five thousand men, and to act in co-operation
with Tseng Kuo-fan and Li Hung-chang. Burgevine shortly afterwards
went over to the rebels with about three hundred men, and finally
came to a tragic end.

Gordon's appointment to the work which will always be associated with
his name, was speedily followed by disastrous results to the
T'ai-p'ings. The Ever Victorious troops, who had recently been
worsted in more than one encounter with their now desperate enemies,
began to retrieve their reputation, greatly stimulated by the regular
pay which Gordon always insisted upon. Towards the close of the year,
the siege of Soochow ended in a capitulation on terms which Gordon
understood to include a pardon for the eight T'ai-p'ing "princes"
engaged in its defence. These eight were hurriedly decapitated by
order of Li Hung-chang, and Gordon immediately resigned, after having
searched that same night, so the story goes, revolver in hand, for Li
Hung-chang, whose brains he had determined to blow out on the spot.
The Emperor sent him a medal and a present of about L3,000, both of
which he declined; and Imperial affairs would again have been in a
bad way, but that Gordon, yielding to a sense of duty, agreed to
resume command. Foreign interests had begun to suffer badly; trade
was paralysed; and something had to be done. Further successes under
Gordon's leadership reduced the T'ai-p'ings to their last extremity.
Only Nanking remained to be captured, and that was already fully
invested by Tseng Kuo-fan. Gordon therefore laid down his command,
and was rewarded with the title of Provincial Commander-in-Chief, and
also with the bestowal of the Yellow Riding Jacket. A month or so
later (July, 1864), Nanking was carried by storm, defended bravely to
the last by the only remaining "prince," the Heavenly King himself
having taken poison three weeks beforehand. This prince escaped with
the new king, a boy of sixteen, who had just succeeded his father;
but he was soon caught and executed, having first been allowed time
to write a short history of the movement from the T'ai-p'ing point of
view. The boy shared his fate. The Imperial edicts of this date show
clearly what a sense of relief came over the Manchu court when once
it could be said definitively that the great rebellion was over. On
the other hand, there were not wanting some foreigners who would have
liked to see the Manchus overthrown, and who severely blamed the
British Government for helping to bolster up a dynasty already in the
last stage of decay; for it seems to be an indubitable fact that but
for British intervention, the rebellion would ultimately have
succeeded in that particular direction.

During a great part of the last eight years described above, an
ordinary observer would have said that the Manchus had already
sufficient troubles on hand, and would be slow to provoke further
causes of anxiety. It is none the less true, however, that at one of
the most critical periods of the rebellion, China was actually at war
with the very power which ultimately came to the rescue. In 1856 the
Viceroy of Canton, known to foreigners as Governor Yeh, a man who had
gained favour at the Manchu court by his wholesale butchery of real
and suspected rebels, arrested twelve Chinese sailors on board the
"Arrow," a Chinese-owned vessel lying at Canton, which had been
licensed at Hongkong to sail under the British flag, and at the same
time the flag was hauled down by Yeh's men. Had this been an isolated
act, it is difficult to see why very grave consequences need have
followed, and perhaps Justin M'Carthy's condemnation of our Consul,
Mr (afterwards Sir Harry) Parkes, as "fussy," because he sent at once
to Hongkong for armed assistance, might in such case be allowed to
stand unchallenged; but it must be remembered that Yeh was all the
time refusing to foreigners rights which had been already conceded
under treaty, and that action such as Parkes took, against an
adversary such as Yeh, was absolutely necessary either to mend or end
the situation. Accordingly, his action led to what was at first an
awkward state of reprisals, in which some American men-of-war joined
for grievances of their own; forts being attacked and occupied, the
foreign houses of business at Canton being burned down, and rewards
offered for foreigners' heads. In January, 1857, an attempt was
actually made in Hongkong to get rid of all foreigners at one fell
stroke, in which plot there is no doubt that the local officials at
Canton were deeply implicated. The bread was one day found to be
poisoned with arsenic, but so heavily that little mischief was done.
The only possible end to this tension was war; and by the end of the
year a joint British and French force, with Lord Elgin and Baron Gros
as plenipotentiaries, was on the spot. Canton was captured after a
poor resistance; and Governor Yeh, whose enormous bulk made escape
difficult, was captured and banished to Calcutta, where he died. On
the voyage he sank into a kind of stupor, taking no interest whatever
in his new surroundings; and when asked by Alabaster, who accompanied
him as interpreter, why he did not read, he pointed to his stomach,
the Chinese receptacle for learning, and said that there was nothing
worth reading except the Confucian Canon, and that he had already got
all that inside him. After his departure the government of the city
was successfully directed by British and French authorities, acting
in concert with two high Manchu officials.

Lord Elgin then decided to proceed north, in the hope of being able
to make satisfactory arrangements for future intercourse; but the
obstructive policy of the officials on his arrival at the Peiho
compelled him to attack and capture the Taku forts, and finally, to
take up his residence in Tientsin. The lips, as the Chinese say,
being now gone, the teeth began to feel cold; the court was in a
state of panic, and within a few weeks a treaty was signed (June 26,
1858) containing, among other concessions to England, the right to
have a diplomatic representative stationed in Peking, and permission
to trade in the interior of China. It would naturally be supposed
that Lord Elgin's mission was now ended, and indeed he went home; the
Emperor, however, would not hear of ratifications of the treaty being
exchanged in Peking, and in many other ways it was made plain that
there was no intention of its stipulations being carried out. There
was the example of Confucius, who had been captured by rebels and
released on condition that he would not travel to the State of Wei.
Thither, notwithstanding, he continued his route; and when asked by a
disciple if it was right to violate his oath, he replied, "This was a
forced oath; the spirits do not hear such."

By June, 1859, another Anglo-French force was at the mouth of the
Peiho, only to find the Taku forts now strongly fortified, and the
river staked and otherwise obstructed. The allied fleet, after
suffering considerable damage, with much loss of life, was compelled
to retire, greatly to the joy and relief of the Emperor, who at last
saw the barbarian reduced to his proper status. It was on this
occasion that Commander Tatnell of the U.S. navy, who was present,
strictly speaking, as a spectator only, in complete violation of
international law, of which luckily the Chinese knew nothing at that
date, lent efficient aid by towing boat-loads of British marines into
action, justifying his conduct by a saying which will always be
gratefully associated with his name,--"Blood is thicker than water."

By August, 1860, thirteen thousand British troops, seven thousand
French, and two thousand five hundred Cantonese coolies, were ready
to make another attempt. This time there were no frontal attacks on
the forts from the seaward; capture was effected, after a severe
struggle, by land from the rear, a feat which was generally regarded
by the Tartar soldiery as most unsportsmanlike. High Manchu officials
were now hurriedly dispatched from Peking to Tientsin to stop by fair
promises the further advance of the allies; but the British and
French plenipotentiaries decided to move up to T'ung-chow, a dozen
miles or so from the capital. It was on this march that Parkes, Loch,
and others, while carrying out orders under a flag of truce, were
treacherously seized by the soldiers of Seng-ko-lin-sin, the Manchu
prince and general (familiar to the British troops as "Sam
Collinson"), who had just experienced a severe defeat at the taking
of the Taku forts. After being treated with every indignity, the
prisoners, French and English, numbering over thirty in all, were
forwarded to Peking. There they were miserably tortured, and many of
them succumbed; but events were moving quickly now, and relief was at
hand for those for whom it was not already too late. Seng-ko-lin-sin
and his vaunted Tartar cavalry were completely routed in several
encounters, and Peking lay at the mercy of the foreigner, the Emperor
having fled to Jehol, where he died in less than a year. Only then
did Prince Kung, a younger brother of Hsien Feng, who had been left
to bear the brunt of foreign resentment, send back, in a state too
terrible for words, fourteen prisoners, less than half the original
number of those so recently captured. Something in the form of a
punitive act now became necessary, to mark the horror with which this
atrocious treatment of prisoners by the Manchu court was regarded
among the countrymen of the victims. Accordingly, orders were given
to burn down the Summer Palace, appropriately condemned as being the
favourite residence of the Emperor, and also the scene of the
unspeakable tortures inflicted. This palace was surrounded by a
beautiful pleasance lying on the slope of the western hills, about
nine miles to the north-west of Peking. Yuean-ming Yuean, or the
"Bright Round Garden," to give it its proper name, had been laid out
by the Jesuit fathers on the plan of the Trianon at Versailles, and
was packed with valuable porcelain, old bronzes, and every
conceivable kind of curio, most of which were looted or destroyed by
the infuriated soldiery.

The ratification of the Treaty of Tientsin (1858) was now completed,
and before the end of the year the allied forces were gone, save and
except garrisons at Tientsin and Taku, which were to remain until the
indemnity was paid.




CHAPTER IX

T'UNG CHIH


On the death of the Emperor, a plot was concocted by eight members of
the extreme anti-foreign party at Court, who claimed to have been
appointed Regents, to make away with the Empress Dowager, the
concubine mother, known as the Western Empress, of the five-year-old
child just proclaimed under the title of Chi Hsiang (good omen), and
also the late Emperor's three brothers, thus securing to themselves
complete control of the administration. Prince Kung, however, managed
to be "first at the fire," and in accordance with the Chinese
proverb, was therefore "first with his cooking." Having got wind of
the scheme, in concert with the two Empresses Dowager, who had
secured possession of the Emperor, he promptly caused the
conspirators to be seized. Two of them, Imperial princes, were
allowed to commit suicide, and the others were either executed or
banished, while Prince Kung and the two Empresses formed a joint
regency for the direction of public affairs, after changing the style
of the reign from Chi Hsiang to T'ung Chih (united rule).

The position of these two Empresses was a curious one. The Empress
Dowager _par excellence_--for there is only one legal wife in
China--had no children; a concubine had provided the heir to the
throne, and had in consequence been raised to the rank of Western
Empress, subordinate only to the childless Eastern Empress. Of the
latter, there is nothing to be said, except that she remained a
cipher to the end of her life; of the concubine, a great deal has
been said, much of which is untrue. Taken from an ordinary Manchu
family into the palace, she soon gained an extraordinary influence
over Hsien Feng, and began to make her voice heard in affairs of
State. Always on the side of determined measures, she had counselled
the Emperor to remain in Peking and face the barbarians; she is
further believed to have urged the execution of Parkes and Loch, the
order luckily arriving too late to be carried out. For the next three
years the Regents looked anxiously for the final collapse of the
T'ai-p'ings, having meanwhile to put up with the hateful presence of
foreign diplomats, now firmly established within the Manchu section
of the city of Peking. No sooner was the great rebellion entirely
suppressed (1864), than another rising broke out. The Nien-fei, or
Twist Rebels, said to have been so called because they wore as a
badge turbans twisted with grease, were mounted banditti who, here
to-day and gone to-morrow, for several years committed much havoc in
the northern provinces of China, until finally suppressed by Tso
Tsung-t'ang.

Turkestan was the next part of the empire to claim attention. A son
and successor of Jehangir, ruling as vassal of China at Khokand, had
been murdered by his lieutenant, Yakoob Beg, who, in 1866, had set
himself up as Ameer of Kashgaria, throwing off the Manchu yoke and
attracting to his standard large numbers of discontented Mahometans
from all quarters. His attack upon the Dunganis, who had risen on
their own account and had spread rebellion far and wide between the
province of Shensi and Kuldja, caused Russia to step in and annex
Kuldja before it could fall into his hands. Still, he became master
of a huge territory; and in 1874 the title of Athalik Ghazi,
"Champion Father," was conferred upon him by the Ameer of Bokhara. He
is also spoken of as the Andijani, from Andijan, a town in Khokand
whence he and many of his followers came. Luckily for the Manchus,
they were able to avail themselves of the services of a Chinese
general whose extraordinary campaign on this occasion has marked him
as a commander of the first order. Tso Tsung-t'ang, already
distinguished by his successes against the T'ai-p'ings and the
Nien-fei, began by operations, in 1869, against the Mahometans in
Shensi. Fighting his way through difficulties caused by local
outbreaks and mutinies in his rear, he had captured by 1873 the
important city of Su-chow in Kansuh, and by 1874 his advance-guard
had reached Hami. There he was forced to settle down and raise a crop
in order to feed his troops, supplies being very uncertain. In 1876
Urumtsi was recovered; and in 1877 Turfan, Harashar, Yarkand, and
Kashgar. At this juncture, Yakoob Beg was assassinated, after having
held Kashgaria for twelve years. Khoten fell on January 2, 1878. This
wonderful campaign was now over, but China had lost Kuldja. A Manchu
official, named Ch'ung-hou, who was sent to St Petersburg to meet
Russian diplomats on their own ground, the main object being to
recover this lost territory, was condemned to death on his return for
the egregious treaty he had managed to negotiate, and was only spared
at the express request of Queen Victoria; he will be mentioned again
shortly. His error was afterwards retrieved by a young and brilliant
official, son of the great Tseng Kuo-fan, and later a familiar figure
as the Marquis Tseng, Minister at the Court of St James's, by whom
Kuldja was added once more to the Manchu empire.

The year 1868 is remarkable for a singular episode. The Regents and
other high authorities in Peking decided, at whose instigation can
only be surmised, to send an embassy to the various countries of
Europe and America, in order to bring to the notice of foreign
governments China's right, as an independent Power, to manage her
internal affairs without undue interference from outside. The
mission, which included two Chinese officials, was placed under the
leadership of Mr Burlingame, American Minister at Peking, who, in one
of his speeches, took occasion to say that China was simply longing
to cement friendly relations with foreign powers, and that within
some few short years there would be "a shining cross on every hill in
the Middle Kingdom."

Burlingame died early in 1870, before his mission was completed, and
only four months before the Tientsin Massacre threw a shadow of doubt
over his optimistic pronouncements. The native population at Tientsin
had been for some time irritated by the height to which, contrary to
their own custom, the towers of the Roman Catholic Cathedral had been
carried; and rumours had also been circulated that behind the lofty
walls and dark mysterious portals of the Catholic foundling hospital,
children's eyes and hearts were extracted from still warm corpses to
furnish medicines for the barbarian pharmacopoeia. On June 21, the
cathedral and the establishment of sisters of mercy, the French
Consulate and other buildings, were pillaged and burnt by a mob
composed partly of the rowdies of the place and partly of soldiers
who happened to be temporarily quartered there. All the priests and
sisters were brutally murdered, as also the French Consul and other
foreigners. For this outrage eighteen men were executed, a large
indemnity was exacted, and the superintendent of trade, the same
Manchu official whose subsequent diplomatic failure at St Petersburg
has been already noticed, was sent to France with a letter of apology
from the Emperor.

In 1872 T'ung Chih was married, and in the following year took over
the reins of government. Thereupon, the foreign Ministers pressed for
personal interviews; and after much obstruction on the part of the
Manchu court, the first audience was granted. This same year saw the
collapse of the Panthays, a tribe of Mahometans in Yuennan who, so far
back as 1855, had begun to free themselves from Chinese rule. They
chose as their leader an able co-religionist named Tu Wen-hsiu, who
was styled Sultan Suleiman, and he sent agents to Burma to buy arms
and munitions of war; after which, secure in the natural fortress of
Ta-li, he was soon master of all western Yuennan. In 1863 he repulsed
with heavy loss two armies sent against him from the provincial
capital; but the end of the T'ai-p'ing rebellion set free the whole
resources of the empire against him, and he remained inactive while
the Imperialists advanced leisurely westwards. In 1871 he tried
vainly to obtain aid from England, sending over his son, Prince
Hassan, for that purpose. The following year saw the enemy at the
gates of Ta-li, and by and by there was a treacherous surrender of an
important position. Then a promise of an amnesty was obtained at the
price of Tu's head, and an enormous indemnity. On January 15, 1873,
his family having all committed suicide, the Sultan passed for the
last time through the crowded streets of Ta-li on his way to the camp
of his victorious adversary. He arrived there senseless, having taken
poison before setting forth. His corpse was beheaded and his head was
forwarded to the provincial capital, and thence in a jar of honey to
Peking.

His conqueror, whose name is not worth recording, was one of those
comparatively rare Chinese monsters who served their Manchu masters
only too well. Eleven days after the Sultan's death, he invited the
chief men of the town to a feast, and after putting them all to
death, gave the signal for a general massacre, in which thirty
thousand persons are said to have been butchered.

In 1874 the Japanese appear on the scene, adding fresh troubles to
those with which the Manchus were already encompassed. Some sailors
from the Loo-choo Islands, over which Japanese sovereignty had been
successfully maintained, were murdered by the savages on the east
coast of Formosa; and failing to obtain redress, Japan sent a
punitive expedition to the island, and began operations on her own
account, but withdrew on promises of amendment and payment of all
expenses incurred.




CHAPTER X

KUANG HSUE


In 1875 the Emperor T'ung Chih died of smallpox, and with his death
the malign influence of his mother comes more freely into play. The
young Empress was about to become a mother; and had she borne a son,
her position as mother of the baby Emperor would have been of
paramount importance, while the grandmother, the older Empress
Dowager, would have been relegated to a subordinate status.
Consequently,--it may now be said, having regard to subsequent
happenings,--the death of the Empress followed that of her husband at
an indecently short interval, for no particular reason of health; and
the old Empress Dowager became supreme. In order to ensure her
supremacy, she had previously, on the very day of the Emperor's
death, caused the succession to be allotted, in utter violation of
established custom, to a first cousin, making him heir to the Emperor
Hsien Feng, instead of naming one of a lower generation who, as heir
to T'ung Chih, would have been qualified to sacrifice to the spirit
of his adopted father. Thus, the late Emperor was left without a son,
and his spirit without a ministrant at ancestral worship, the only
consolation being that when a son should be born to the new Emperor
(aged four), that child was to become son by adoption to his late
Majesty, T'ung Chih. Remonstrances, even from Manchus, were soon
heard on all sides; but to these the Empress Dowager paid no
attention until four years afterwards (1879), on the occasion of the
deferred funeral of the late Emperor, when a censor, named Wu K'o-tu,
committed suicide at the mausoleum, leaving behind him a memorial in
which he strongly condemned the action of the two Empresses Dowager,
still regarded officially as joint regents, and called for a
re-arrangement of the succession, under which the late Emperor would
be duly provided with an heir. Nothing, however, came of this
sacrifice, except promises, until 1900. A son of Prince Tuan, within
a few months to espouse the Boxer cause, was then made heir to his
late Majesty, as required; but at the beginning of 1901, this
appointment was cancelled and the spirit of the Emperor T'ung Chih
was left once more unprovided for in the ancestral temple. The first
cousin in question, who reigned as Kuang Hsue (= brilliant
succession), was not even the next heir in his own generation; but he
was a child of four, and that suited the plans of the Empress
Dowager, who, having appointed herself Regent, now entered openly
upon the career for which she will be remembered in history. What she
would have done if the Empress had escaped and given birth to a son,
can only be a matter of conjecture.

In 1876 the first resident Envoy ever sent by China to Great Britain,
or to any other nation, was accredited to the Court of St James's.
Kuo Sung-tao, who was chosen for the post, was a fine scholar; he
made several attempts on the score of health to avoid what then
seemed to all Chinese officials--no Manchu would have been sent--to
be a dangerous and unpleasant duty, but was ultimately obliged to
proceed. It was he who, on his departure in 1879, said to Lord
Salisbury that he liked everything about the English very much,
except their shocking immorality.

The question of railways for China had long been simmering in the
minds of enterprising foreigners; but it was out of the question to
think that the Government would allow land to be sold for such a
purpose; therefore there would be no sellers. In 1876 a private
company succeeded in obtaining the necessary land by buying up
connecting strips between Shanghai and Woosung at the mouth of the
river, about eight miles in all. The company then proceeded to lay
down a miniature railway, which was an object of much interest to the
native, whose amusement soon took the form of a trip there and back.
Political influence was then brought to bear, and the whole thing was
purchased by the Government; the rails were torn up and sent to
Formosa, where they were left to rot upon the sea-beach.

The suppression of rebellion in Turkestan and Yuennan has already been
mentioned; also the retrocession of Kuldja, which brings us down to
the year 1881, when the Eastern Empress died. Death must have been
more or less a relief to this colourless personage, who had been
entirely superseded on a stage on which by rights she should have
played the leading part, and who had been terrorized during her last
years by her more masterful colleague.

In 1882 there were difficulties with France over Tongking; these,
however, were adjusted, and in 1884 a convention was signed by
Captain Fournier and Li Hung-chang. A further dispute then arose as
to a breach of the convention by the Chinese, and an _etat de
represailles_ followed, during which the French destroyed the Chinese
fleet. After the peace which was arranged in 1885, a few years of
comparative tranquillity ensued; the Emperor was married (1889), and
relieved his aunt of her duties as Regent.

Japan, in earlier centuries contemptuously styled the Dwarf-nation,
and always despised as a mere imitator and brain-picker of Chinese
wisdom, now swims definitively into the ken of the Manchu court. The
Formosan imbroglio had been forgotten as soon as it was over, and the
recent rapid progress of Japan on Western lines towards national
strength had been ignored by all Manchu statesmen, each of whom lived
in hope that the deluge would not come in his own time. So far back
as 1885, in consequence of serious troubles involving much bloodshed,
the two countries had agreed that neither should send troops to Korea
without due notification to the other. Now, in 1894, China violated
this contract by dispatching troops, at the request of the king of
Korea, whose throne was threatened by a serious rebellion, without
sufficient warning to Japan, and further, by keeping a body of these
troops at the Korean capital even when the rebellion was at an end. A
disastrous war ensued. The Japanese were victorious on land and sea;
the Chinese fleet was destroyed; Port Arthur was taken; and finally,
after surrendering Wei-hai-wei (1895), to which he had retired with
the remnant of his fleet, Admiral Ting, well known as "a gallant
sailor and true gentleman," committed suicide together with four of
his captains. Li Hung-chang was then sent to Japan to sue for peace,
and while there he was shot in the cheek by a fanatical member of the
Soshi class. This act brought him much sympathy--he was then
seventy-two years old; and in the treaty of Shimonoseki, which he
negotiated, better terms perhaps were obtained than would otherwise
have been the case. The terms granted included the independence of
Korea, for centuries a tribute-paying vassal of China, and the
cession of the island of Formosa. Japan had occupied the peninsula on
which stands the impregnable fortress of Port Arthur, and had
captured the latter in a few hours; but she was not to be allowed to
keep them. A coalition of European powers, Russia, Germany, and
France--England refused to join--decided that it would never do to
let Japan possess Port Arthur, and forced her to accept a money
payment instead. So it was restored to China--for the moment; and at
the same time a republic was declared in Formosa; but of this the
Japanese made short work.

The following year was marked by an unusual display of initiative on
the part of the Emperor, who now ordered the introduction of
railways; but in 1897 complications with foreign powers rather gave a
check to these aspirations. Two German Catholic priests were
murdered, and as a punitive measure Germany seized Kiaochow in
Shantung; while in 1898 Russia "leased" Port Arthur, and as a
counterblast England thought it advisable to "lease" Wei-hai-wei. So
soon as the Manchu court had recovered from the shock of these
events, and had resumed its normal state of torpor, it was rudely
shaken from within by a series of edicts which peremptorily commanded
certain reforms of a most far-reaching description. For instance, the
great public examinations, which had been conducted on much the same
system for seven or eight centuries past, were to be modified by the
introduction of subjects suggested by recent intercourse with Western
nations. There was to be a university in Peking, and the temples,
which cover the empire in all directions, were to be closed to
religious services and opened for educational purposes. The Manchus,
indeed, have never shown any signs of a religious temperament. There
had not been, under the dynasty in question, any such wave of
devotional fervour as was experienced under more than one previous
dynasty. Neither the dreams of Buddhism, nor the promises of
immortality held out by the Taoist, seem to have influenced in a
religious, as opposed to a superstitious sense, the rather Boeotian
mind of the Manchu. The learned emperors of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries accepted Confucianism as sufficient for
every-day humanity, and did all in their power to preserve it as a
quasi-State religion. Thus, Buddhism was not favoured at the expense
of Taoism, nor _vice versa_; Mahometanism was tolerated so long as
there was no suspicion of disloyalty; Christianity, on the other
hand, was bitterly opposed, being genuinely regarded for a long time
as a cloak for territorial aggression.

To return to the reforms. Young Manchus of noble family were to be
sent abroad for an education on wider lines than it was possible to
obtain at home. This last was in every way a desirable measure. No
Manchu had ever visited the West; all the officials previously sent
to foreign countries had been Chinese. But other proposed changes
were not of equal value.

At the back of this reform movement was a small band of earnest men
who suffered from too much zeal, which led to premature action. A
plot was conceived, under which the Empress Dowager was to be
arrested and imprisoned; but this was betrayed by Yuean Shih-k'ai, and
she turned the tables by suddenly arresting and imprisoning the
Emperor, and promptly decapitating all the conspirators, with the
exception of K'ang Yu-wei, who succeeded in escaping. He had been the
moving spirit of this abortive revolution; he was a fine scholar, and
had completely gained the ear of the Emperor. The latter became
henceforth to the end of his life a person of no importance, while
China, for the third time in history, passed under the dominion of a
woman. There was no secret about it; the Empress Dowager, popularly
known as the Old Buddha, had succeeded in terrorizing every one who
came into contact with her, and her word was law. It was said of one
of the Imperial princes that he was "horribly afraid of her Majesty,
and that when she spoke to him he was on tenter-hooks, as though
thorns pricked him, and the sweat ran down his face."

All promise of reform now disappeared from the Imperial programme,
and the recent edicts, which had raised premature hope in this
direction, were annulled; the old regime was to prevail once
more. The weakness of this policy was emphasized in the following
year (1899), when England removed from Japan the stigma of
extra-territorial jurisdiction, by which act British defendants, in
civil and criminal cases alike, now became amenable to Japanese
tribunals. Japan had set herself to work to frame a code, and had
trained lawyers for the administration of justice; China had done
nothing, content that on her own territory foreigners and their
lawsuits, as above, should be tried by foreign Consuls. One curious
edict of this date had for its object the conferment of duly graded
civil rank, the right to salutes at official visits, and similar
ceremonial privileges, upon Roman Catholic archbishops, bishops, and
priests of the missionary body in China. The Catholic view was that
the missionaries would gain in the eyes of the people if treated with
more deference than the majority of Chinese officials cared to
display towards what was to them an objectionable class; in practice,
however, the system was found to be unworkable, and was ultimately
given up.

The autumn of this year witnessed the beginning of the so-called
Boxer troubles. There was great unrest, especially in Shantung, due,
it was said, to ill-feeling between the people at large and converts
to Christianity, and at any rate aggravated by recent foreign
acquisitions of Chinese territory. It was thus that what was
originally one of the periodical anti-dynastic risings, with the
usual scion of the Ming dynasty as figure-head, lost sight of its
objective and became a bloodthirsty anti-foreign outbreak. The story
of the siege of the Legations has been written from many points of
view; and most people know all they want to know of the two summer
months in 1900, the merciless bombardment of a thousand foreigners,
with their women and children, cooped up in a narrow space, and also
of the awful butchery of missionaries, men, women, and children
alike, which took place at the capital of Shansi. Whatever may have
been the origin of the movement, there can be little doubt that it
was taken over by the Manchus, with the complicity of the Empress
Dowager, as a means of getting rid of all the foreigners in China.
Considering the extraordinary position the Empress Dowager had
created for herself, it is impossible to believe that she would not
have been able to put an end to the siege by a word, or even by a
mere gesture. She did not do so; and on the relief of the Legations,
for a second time in her life--she had accompanied Hsien Feng to
Jehol in 1860--she sought safety in an ignominious flight. Meanwhile,
in response to a memorial from the Governor of Shansi, she had sent
him a secret decree, saying, "Slay all foreigners wheresoever you
find them; even though they be prepared to leave your province, yet
must they be slain." A second and more urgent decree said, "I command
that all foreigners, men, women, and children, be summarily executed.
Let not one escape, so that my empire may be purged of this noisome
source of corruption, and that peace may be restored to my loyal
subjects." The first of these decrees had been circulated to all the
high provincial officials, and the result might well have been
indiscriminate slaughter of foreigners all over China, but for the
action of two Chinese officials, who had already incurred the
displeasure of the Empress Dowager by memorializing against the Boxer
policy. These men secretly changed the word "slay" into "protect,"
and this is the sense in which the decree was acted upon by
provincial officials generally, with the exception of the Governor of
Shansi, who sent a second memorial, eliciting the second decree as
above. It is impossible to say how many foreigners owe their lives to
this alteration of a word, and the Empress Dowager herself would
scarcely have escaped so easily as she did, had her cruel order been
more fully executed. The trick was soon discovered, and the two
heroes, Yuean Ch'ang and Hsue Ching-ch'eng, were both summarily
beheaded, even although it was to the former that the Empress Dowager
was indebted for information which enabled her to frustrate the plot
against her life in 1898.

Now, at the very moment of departure, she perpetrated a most brutal
crime. A favourite concubine of the Emperor's, who had previously
given cause for offence, urged that his Majesty should not take part
in the flight, but should remain in Peking. For this suggestion the
Empress Dowager caused the miserable girl to be thrown down a well,
in spite of the supplications of the Emperor on her behalf. Then she
fled, ultimately to Hsi-an Fu, the capital of Shensi, and for a year
and a half Peking was rid of her presence. In 1902, she came back
with the Emperor, whose prerogative she still managed to usurp. She
declared at once for reform, and took up the cause with much show of
enthusiasm; but those who knew the Manchu best, decided to "wait and
see." She began by suggesting intermarriage between Manchus and
Chinese, which had so far been prohibited, and advised Chinese women
to give up the practice of footbinding, a custom which the ruling
race had never adopted. It was henceforth to be lawful for Manchus,
even of the Imperial family, to send their sons abroad to be
educated,--a step which no Manchu would be likely to take unless
forcibly coerced into doing so. Any spirit of enterprise which might
have been possessed by the founders of the dynasty had long since
evaporated, and all that Manchu nobles asked was to be allowed to
batten in peace upon the Chinese people.

The direct issue of the emperors of the present dynasty and of their
descendants in the male line, dating from 1616, are popularly known
as Yellow Girdles, from a sash of that colour which they habitually
wear. Each generation becomes a degree lower in rank, until they are
mere members of the family with no rank whatever, although they still
wear the girdle and receive a trifling allowance from the government.
Thus, beggars and even thieves are occasionally seen with this badge
of relationship to the throne. Members of the collateral branches of
the Imperial family wear a red girdle, and are known as Gioros, Gioro
being part of the surname--Aisin Gioro = Golden Race--of an early
progenitor of the Manchu emperors.

As a next step in reform, the examination system was to be
remodelled, but not in the one sense in which it would have appealed
most to the Chinese people. Examinations for Manchus have always been
held separately, and the standard attained has always been very far
below that reached by Chinese candidates, so that the scholarship of
the Manchu became long ago a by-word and a joke. Now, in 1904, it was
settled that entry to an official career should be obtainable only
through the modern educational colleges; but this again applied only
to Chinese and not to Manchus. The Manchus have always had wisdom
enough to employ the best abilities they could discover by process of
examination among the Chinese, many of whom have risen from the
lowest estate to the highest positions in the empire, and have proved
themselves valuable servants and staunch upholders of the dynasty.
Still, in addition to numerous other posts, it may be said that all
the fat sinecures have always been the portion of Manchus. For
instance, the office of Hoppo, or superintendent of customs at Canton
(abolished 1904), was a position which was allowed to degenerate into
a mere opportunity for piling a large fortune in the shortest
possible time, no particular ability being required from the holder
of the post, who was always a Manchu.

Then followed a mission to Europe, at the head of which we now find a
Manchu of high rank, an Imperial Duke, sent to study the mysteries of
constitutional government, which was henceforth promised to the
people, so soon as its introduction might be practicable. In the
midst of these attractive promises (1904-5) came the Russo-Japanese
war, with all its surprises. Among other causes to which the Manchu
court ascribed the success of the Japanese, freedom from the opium
vice took high rank, and this led to really serious enactments
against the growth and consumption of opium in China. Continuous and
strenuous efforts of philanthropists during the preceding half
century had not produced any results at all; but now it seemed as
though this weakness had been all along the chief reason for China's
failures in her struggles with the barbarian, and it was to be
incontinently stamped out. Ten years' grace was allowed, at the end
of which period there was to be no more opium-smoking in the empire.
One awkward feature was that the Empress Dowager herself was an
opium-smoker; the difficulty, however, was got over by excluding from
the application of the edict of 1906 persons over sixty years of age.
Whatever may be thought of the wisdom of this policy, which so far
has chiefly resulted in the substitution of morphia, cocaine, and
alcohol, the thoroughness and rapidity with which it has been carried
out, can only command the admiration of all; of those most who know
China best.




CHAPTER XI

HSUEAN T'UNG


The health of the Emperor, never very good, now began to fail, and by
1908 he was seriously ill; in this same year, too, there were signs
that the Empress Dowager was breaking up. Her last political act of
any importance, except the nomination of the heir to the throne, was
to issue a decree confirming the previous promise of constitutional
government, which was to come into full force within nine years. Not
many weeks later the Emperor died (November 14), the Empress Dowager
having already, while he lay dying, appointed one of his nephews, a
child barely three years old, to succeed him, in the vain hope that
she would thus enjoy a further spell of power until the child should
be of age. But on the following day the Empress Dowager also died; a
singular coincidence which has been attributed to the determination
of the eunuchs and others that the Emperor should not outlive his
aunt, for some time past seen to be "drawing near the wood," lest his
reforming spirit should again jeopardize their nefarious interests.

The Regency devolved upon the Emperor's father, but was not of very
long duration. There was a show of introducing constitutional reform
under the guise of provincial and national assemblies intended to
control the government of the empire; but after all, the final power
to accept or reject their measures was vested in the Emperor, which
really left things very much as they had been. The new charter was
not found to be of much value, and there is little doubt that the
Manchus regarded it in the light of what is known in China as a
"dummy document," a measure to be extolled in theory, but not
intended to appear in practice. Suddenly, in September 1911, the
great revolution broke out, and the end came more rapidly than was
expected.

It must not be imagined that this revolution was an inspiration of
the moment; on the contrary, it had been secretly brewing for quite a
long time beforehand. During that period a few persons familiar with
China may have felt that something was coming, but nobody knew
exactly what. Those who accept without reservation the common
statement that there is no concealment possible in a country where
everybody is supposed to have his price, and that due notice of
anything important is sure to leak out, must have been rather
astonished when, without any warning, they found China in the throes
of a well-planned revolution, which was over, with its object gained,
almost as soon as the real gravity of the situation was realized. It
is true that under the Manchus access to official papers of the most
private description was always to be obtained at a moderate outlay;
it was thus, for instance, that we were able to appreciate the inmost
feelings of that grim old Manchu, Wo-jen, who, in 1861, presented a
secret memorial to the throne, and stated therein that his loathing
of all foreigners was so great that he longed to eat their flesh and
sleep on their skins.

The guiding spirit of the movement, Sun Yat-sen, is a native of
Kuangtung, where he was born, not very far from Canton, in 1866.
After some early education in Honolulu, he became a student at the
College of Medicine, Hongkong, where he took his diploma in 1892. But
his chief aim in life soon became a political one, and he determined
to get rid of the Manchus. He organized a Young China party in
Canton, and in 1895 made an attempt to seize the city. The plot
failed, and fifteen out of the sixteen conspirators were arrested and
executed; Sun Yat-sen alone escaped. A year later, he was in London,
preparing himself for further efforts by the study of Western forms
of government, a very large reward being offered by the Chinese
Government for his body, dead or alive. During his stay there he was
decoyed into the Chinese Legation, and imprisoned in an upper room,
from which he would have been hurried away to China, probably as a
lunatic, to share the fate of his fifteen fellow-conspirators, but
for the assistance of a woman who had been told off to wait upon him.
To her he confided a note addressed to Dr Cantlie, a personal friend
of long standing, under whom he had studied medicine in Hongkong; and
she handed this to her husband, employed as waiter in the Legation,
by whom it was safely delivered. He thus managed to communicate with
the outer world; Lord Salisbury intervened, and he was released after
a fortnight's detention.

Well might Sun Yat-sen now say--

   "They little thought that day of pain
    That one day I should come again."

More a revolutionary than ever, he soon set to work to collect funds
which flowed in freely from Chinese sources in all quarters of the
world. At last, in September 1911, the train was fired, beginning
with the province of Ss[)u]ch'uan, and within an incredibly short
space of time, half China was ablaze. By the middle of October the
Manchus were beginning to feel that a great crisis was at hand, and
the Regent was driven to recall Yuean Shih-k'ai, whom he had summarily
dismissed from office two years before, on the conventional plea that
Yuean was suffering from a bad leg, but really out of revenge for his
treachery to the late Emperor, which had brought about the latter's
arrest and practical deposition by the old Empress Dowager in 1898.

To this summons Yuean slily replied that he could not possibly leave
home just then, as his leg was not yet well enough for him to be able
to travel, meaning, of course, to gain time, and be in a position to
dictate his own terms. On the 30th October, when it was already too
late, the baby Emperor, reigning under the year-title Hsuean T'ung
(wide control), published the following edict:--

"I have reigned for three years, and have always acted
conscientiously in the interests of the people, but I have not
employed men properly, not having political skill. I have employed
too many nobles in political positions, which contravenes
constitutionalism. On railway matters someone whom I trusted fooled
me, and thus public opinion was opposed. When I urged reform, the
officials and gentry seized the opportunity to embezzle. When old
laws are abolished, high officials serve their own ends. Much of the
people's money has been taken, but nothing to benefit the people has
been achieved. On several occasions edicts have promulgated laws, but
none of them have been obeyed. People are grumbling, yet I do not
know; disasters loom ahead, but I do not see.

"The Ss[)u]ch'uan trouble first occurred; the Wu-ch'ang rebellion
followed; now alarming reports come from Shansi and Hunan. In Canton
and Kiangsi riots appear. The whole empire is seething. The minds of
the people are perturbed. The spirits of our nine late emperors are
unable properly to enjoy sacrifices, while it is feared the people
will suffer grievously.

"All these are my own fault, and hereby I announce to the world that
I swear to reform, and, with our soldiers and people, to carry out
the constitution faithfully, modifying legislation, developing the
interests of the people, and abolishing their hardships--all in
accordance with the wishes and interests of the people. Old laws that
are unsuitable will be abolished."

Nowhere else in the world is the belief that Fortune has a wheel
which in the long run never fails to "turn and lower the proud," so
prevalent or so deeply-rooted as in China. "To prosperity," says the
adage, "must succeed decay,"--a favourite theme around which the
novelist delights to weave his romance. This may perhaps account for
the tame resistance of the Manchus to what they recognized as the
inevitable. They had enjoyed a good span of power, quite as lengthy
as that of any dynasty of modern times, and now they felt that their
hour had struck. To borrow another phrase, "they had come in with the
roar of a tiger, to disappear like the tail of a snake."

On November 3, certain regulations were issued by the National
Assembly as the necessary basis upon which a constitution could be
raised. The absolute veto of the Emperor was now withdrawn, and it
was expressly stated that Imperial decrees were not to over-ride the
law, though even here we find the addition of "except in the event of
immediate necessity." The first clause of this document was confined
to the following prophetic statement: "The Ta Ch'ing dynasty shall
reign for ever."

On November 8, Yuean Shih-k'ai was appointed Prime Minister, and on
December 3, the new Empress Dowager issued an edict, in which she
said:

"The Regent has verbally memorialized the Empress Dowager, saying
that he has held the Regency for three years, and his administration
has been unpopular, and that constitutional government has not been
consummated. Thus complications arose, and people's hearts were
broken, and the country thrown into a state of turmoil. Hence one
man's mismanagement has caused the nation to suffer miserably. He
regrets his repentance is already too late, and feels that if he
continues in power his commands will soon be disregarded. He wept and
prayed to resign the regency, expressing the earnest intention of
abstaining in the future from politics. I, the Empress Dowager,
living within the palace, am ignorant of the state of affairs but I
know that rebellion exists and fighting is continuing, causing
disasters everywhere, while the commerce of friendly nations suffers.
I must enquire into the circumstances and find a remedy. The Regent
is honest, though ambitious and unskilled in politics. Being misled,
he has harmed the people, and therefore his resignation is accepted.
The Regent's seal is cancelled. Let the Regent receive fifty thousand
_taels_ annually from the Imperial household allowances, and
hereafter the Premier and the Cabinet will control appointments and
administration. Edicts are to be sealed with the Emperor's seal. I
will lead the Emperor to conduct audiences. The guardianship of the
holy person of the Emperor, who is of tender age, is a special
responsibility. As the time is critical, the princes and nobles must
observe the Ministers, who have undertaken a great responsibility,
and be loyal and help the country and people, who now must realize
that the Court does not object to the surrender of the power vested
in the throne. Let the people preserve order and continue business,
and thus prevent the country's disruption and restore prosperity."




CHAPTER XII

SUN YAT-SEN


On January 1, 1912, Sun Yat-sen entered the republican capital,
Nanking, and received a salute of twenty-one guns. He assumed the
presidency of the provisional government, swearing allegiance, and
taking an oath to dethrone the Manchus, restore peace, and establish
a government based upon the people's will. These objects
accomplished, he was prepared to resign his office, thus enabling the
people to elect a president of a united China. The first act of the
provisional government was to proclaim a new calendar forthwith,
January 1 becoming the New Year's Day of the republic.

On January 5 was issued the following republican manifesto:--

"To all friendly nations,--Greeting. Hitherto irremediable
suppression of the individual qualities and the national aspirations
of the people having arrested the intellectual, moral, and material
development of China, the aid of revolution was invoked to extirpate
the primary cause. We now proclaim the consequent overthrow of the
despotic sway of the Manchu dynasty, and the establishment of a
republic. The substitution of a republic for a monarchy is not the
fruit of transient passion, but the natural outcome of a
long-cherished desire for freedom, contentment, and advancement. We
Chinese people, peaceful and law-abiding, have not waged war except
in self-defence. We have borne our grievance for two hundred and
sixty-seven years with patience and forbearance. We have endeavoured
by peaceful means to redress our wrongs, secure liberty, and ensure
progress; but we failed. Oppressed beyond human endurance, we deemed
it our inalienable right, as well as a sacred duty, to appeal to arms
to deliver ourselves and our posterity from the yoke to which we have
for so long been subjected. For the first time in history an
inglorious bondage is transformed into inspiring freedom. The policy
of the Manchus has been one of unequivocal seclusion and unyielding
tyranny. Beneath it we have bitterly suffered. Now we submit to the
free peoples of the world the reasons justifying the revolution and
the inauguration of the present government. Prior to the usurpation
of the throne by the Manchus the land was open to foreign
intercourse, and religious tolerance existed, as is shown by the
writings of Marco Polo and the inscription on the Nestorian tablet at
Hsi-an Fu. Dominated by ignorance and selfishness, the Manchus closed
the land to the outer world, and plunged the Chinese into a state of
benighted mentality calculated to operate inversely to their natural
talents, thus committing a crime against humanity and the civilized
nations which it is almost impossible to expiate. Actuated by a
desire for the perpetual subjugation of the Chinese, and a vicious
craving for aggrandizement and wealth, the Manchus have governed the
country to the lasting injury and detriment of the people, creating
privileges and monopolies, erecting about themselves barriers of
exclusion, national custom, and personal conduct, which have been
rigorously maintained for centuries. They have levied irregular and
hurtful taxes without the consent of the people, and have restricted
foreign trade to treaty ports. They have placed the _likin_ embargo
on merchandise, obstructed internal commerce, retarded the creation
of industrial enterprises, rendered impossible the development of
natural resources, denied a regular system of impartial
administration of justice, and inflicted cruel punishment on persons
charged with offences, whether innocent or guilty. They have connived
at official corruption, sold offices to the highest bidder,
subordinated merit to influence, rejected the most reasonable demands
for better government, and reluctantly conceded so-called reforms
under the most urgent pressure, promising without any intention of
fulfilling. They have failed to appreciate the anguish-causing
lessons taught them by foreign Powers, and in process of years have
brought themselves and our people beneath the contempt of the world.
A remedy of these evils will render possible the entrance of China
into the family of nations. We have fought and have formed a
government. Lest our good intentions should be misunderstood, we
publicly and unreservedly declare the following to be our promises:--

"The treaties entered into by the Manchus before the date of the
revolution, will be continually effective to the time of their
termination. Any and all treaties entered into after the commencement
of the revolution will be repudiated. Foreign loans and indemnities
incurred by the Manchus before the revolution will be acknowledged.
Payments made by loans incurred by the Manchus after its commencement
will be repudiated. Concessions granted to nations and their
nationals before the revolution will be respected. Any and all
granted after it will be repudiated. The persons and property of
foreign nationals within the jurisdiction of the republic will be
respected and protected. It will be our constant aim and firm
endeavour to build on a stable and enduring foundation a national
structure compatible with the potentialities of our long-neglected
country. We shall strive to elevate the people to secure peace and to
legislate for prosperity. Manchus who abide peacefully in the limits
of our jurisdiction will be accorded equality, and given protection.

"We will remodel the laws, revise the civil, criminal, commercial,
and mining codes, reform the finances, abolish restrictions on trade
and commerce, and ensure religious toleration and the cultivation of
better relations with foreign peoples and governments than have ever
been maintained before. It is our earnest hope that those foreign
nations who have been steadfast in their sympathy will bind more
firmly the bonds of friendship between us, and will bear in patience
with us the period of trial confronting us and our reconstruction
work, and will aid the consummation of the far-reaching plans, which
we are about to undertake, and which they have long vainly been
urging upon our people and our country.

"With this message of peace and good-will the republic cherishes the
hope of being admitted into the family of nations, not merely to
share its rights and privileges, but to co-operate in the great and
noble task of building up the civilization of the world.

"SUN YAT-SEN,
_President_."

The next step was to displace the three-cornered Dragon flag, itself
of quite modern origin, in favour of a new republican emblem. For
this purpose was designed a flag of five stripes,--yellow, red, blue,
white, black,--arranged at right angles to the flagstaff in the above
order, and intended to represent the five races--Chinese, Manchus,
Mongols, Tibetan, Mussulmans--gathered together under one rule.

On February 12, three important edicts were issued. In the first, the
baby-emperor renounces the throne, and approves the establishment of
a provisional republican government, under the direction of Yuean
Shih-k'ai, in conjunction with the existing provisional government at
Nanking. In the second, approval is given to the terms under which
the emperor retires, the chief item of which was an annual grant of
four million _taels_. Other more sentimental privileges included the
retention of a bodyguard, and the continuance of sacrifices to the
spirits of the departed Manchu emperors. In the third, the people are
exhorted to preserve order and abide by the Imperial will regarding
the new form of government.

Simultaneously with the publication of these edicts, the last scene
of the drama was enacted near Nanking, at the mausoleum of the first
sovereign of the Ming dynasty (A.D. 1368-1644). Sun Yat-sen, as
provisional first president, accompanied by his Cabinet and a
numerous escort, proceeded thither, and after offering sacrifice as
usual, addressed, through a secretary, the following oration to the
tablet representing the names of that great hero:--

"Of old the Sung dynasty became effete, and the Kitan Tartars and
Yuean dynasty Mongols seized the occasion to throw this domain of
China into confusion, to the fierce indignation of gods and men. It
was then that your Majesty, our founder, arose in your wrath from
obscurity, and destroyed those monsters of iniquity, so that the
ancient glory was won again. In twelve years you consolidated the
Imperial sway, and the dominions of the Great Yue were purged of
pollution and cleansed from the noisome Tartar. Often in history has
our noble Chinese race been enslaved by petty frontier barbarians
from the north. Never have such glorious triumphs been won over them
as your Majesty achieved. But your descendants were degenerate, and
failed to carry on your glorious heritage; they entrusted the reins
of government to bad men, and pursued a short-sighted policy. In this
way they encouraged the ambitions of the eastern Tartar savages
(Manchus), and fostered the growth of their power. They were thus
able to take advantage of the presence of rebels to invade and
possess themselves of your sacred capital. From a bad eminence of
glory basely won, they lorded it over this most holy soil, and our
beloved China's rivers and hills were defiled by their corrupting
touch, while the people fell victims to the headsman's axe or the
avenging sword. Although worthy patriots and faithful subjects of
your dynasty crossed the mountain ranges into Canton and the far
south, in the hope of redeeming the glorious Ming tradition from
utter ruin, and of prolonging a thread of the old dynasty's life,
although men gladly perished one after the other in the forlorn
attempt, heaven's wrath remained unappeased, and mortal designs
failed to achieve success. A brief and melancholy page was added to
the history of your dynasty, and that was all.

"As time went on, the law became ever harsher, and the meshes of its
inexorable net grew closer. Alas for our Chinese people, who crouched
in corners and listened with startled ears, deprived of power of
utterance, and with tongues glued to their mouths, for their lives
were past saving. Those others usurped titles to fictitious clemency
and justice, while prostituting the sacred doctrines of the sages:
whom they affected to honour. They stifled public opinion in the
empire in order to force acquiescence in their tyranny. The Manchu
despotism became so thorough and so embracing that they were enabled
to prolong their dynasty's existence by cunning wiles. In Yung
Cheng's reign the Hunanese Chang Hsi and Tseng Ching preached
sedition against the dynasty in their native province, while in Chia
Ch'ing's reign the palace conspiracy of Lin Ching dismayed that
monarch in his capital. These events were followed by rebellions in
Ss[)u]-ch'uan and Shensi; under Tao Kuang and his successor the
T'ai-p'ings started their campaign from a remote Kuangsi village.
Although these worthy causes were destined to ultimate defeat, the
gradual trend of the national will became manifest. At last our own
era dawned, the sun of freedom had risen, and a sense of the rights
of the race animated men's minds. In addition the Manchu bandits
could not even protect themselves. Powerful foes encroached upon the
territory of China, and the dynasty parted with our sacred soil to
enrich neighbouring nations. The Chinese race of to-day may be
degenerate, but it is descended from mighty men of old. How should it
endure that the spirits of the great dead should be insulted by the
everlasting visitation of this scourge?

"Then did patriots arise like a whirlwind, or like a cloud which is
suddenly manifested in the firmament. They began with the Canton
insurrection; then Peking was alarmed by Wu Yueeh's bomb (1905). A
year later Hsue Hsi-lin fired his bullet into the vitals of the Manchu
robber-chief, En Ming, Governor of Anhui. Hsiung Cheng-chi raised the
standard of liberty on the Yang-tsze's banks; rising followed rising
all over the empire, until the secret plot against the Regent was
discovered, and the abortive insurrection in Canton startled the
capital. One failure followed another, but other brave men took the
place of the heroes who died, and the empire was born again to life.
The bandit Manchu court was shaken with pallid terror, until the
cicada threw off its shell in a glorious regeneration, and the
present crowning triumph was achieved. The patriotic crusade started
in Wu-ch'ang; the four corners of the empire responded to the call.
Coast regions nobly followed in their wake, and the Yang-tsze was won
back by our armies. The region south of the Yellow River was lost to
the Manchus, and the north manifested its sympathy with our cause. An
earthquake shook the barbarian court of Peking, and it was smitten
with a paralysis. To-day it has at last restored the government to
the Chinese people, and the five races of China may dwell together in
peace and mutual trust. Let us joyfully give thanks. How could we
have attained this measure of victory had not your Majesty's soul in
heaven bestowed upon us your protecting influence? I have heard say
that triumphs of Tartar savages over our China were destined never to
last longer than a hundred years. But the reign of these Manchus
endured unto double, ay, unto treble, that period. Yet Providence
knows the appointed hour, and the moment comes at last. We are
initiating the example to Eastern Asia of a republican form of
government; success comes early or late to those who strive, but the
good are surely rewarded in the end. Why then should we repine to-day
that victory has tarried long?

"I have heard that in the past many would-be deliverers of their
country have ascended this lofty mound wherein is your sepulchre. It
has served to them as a holy inspiration. As they looked down upon
the surrounding rivers and upward to the hills, under an alien sway,
they wept in the bitterness of their hearts, but to-day their sorrow
is turned into joy. The spiritual influences of your grave at Nanking
have come once more into their own. The dragon crouches in majesty as
of old, and the tiger surveys his domain and his ancient capital.
Everywhere a beautiful repose doth reign. Your legions line the
approaches to the sepulchre; a noble host stands expectant. Your
people have come here to-day to inform your Majesty of the final
victory. May this lofty shrine wherein you rest gain fresh lustre
from to-day's event, and may your example inspire your descendants in
the times which are to come. Spirit! Accept this offering!"

We are told by an eye-witness, Dr Lim Boon-keng, that when this
ceremony was over, Sun Yat-sen turned to address the assembly. "He
was speechless with emotion for a minute; then he briefly declared
how, after two hundred and sixty years, the nation had again
recovered her freedom; and now that the curse of Manchu domination
was removed, the free peoples of a united republic could pursue their
rightful aspirations. Three cheers for the president were now called
for, and the appeal was responded to vigorously. The cheering was
taken up by the crowds below, and then carried miles away by the
thousands of troops, to mingle with the booming of distant guns."




LIST OF WORKS CONSULTED


The _I yue kuo chih_ (costumes of strange nations). Circa 1380.

The _Tung hua lu_ (a history of the Manchus down to A.D. 1735). 1765.

The _Sheng wu chi_ (a history of the earlier wars under the Manchu
dynasty). 1822.

_A History of China_, by REV. J. MACGOWAN, 1897.

_A History of the Manchus_, by REV. J. ROSS, 1880.

_The Chinese Repository._

_The Chinese and their Rebellions_, by T. T. MEADOWS, 1856.

Pamphlets issued by the T'ai-p'ings, 1850-1864.

_The Times_, 1911-12.

_The London and China Telegraph_, 1911-12.




INDEX


Abkhai, 18, 20;
  death of, 19

Aisin Gioro, 118

Akuteng, 4;
  death of, 6

Alabaster, Mr, 93

Albazin, 42

Amherst, Lord, 66

Amiot, Pere, 42

Amoy, 42;
  taken, 77

Amur, River, 17;
  as boundary, 42

Amursana, 55

Ancestral worship, 44

An-ch'ing, 86

Andijani, 100

Anglo-French expedition, 93;
  the second, 94

Annam, 58

Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, 33

Arabtan, 43

Archery, 37

"Arrow" case, the, 92

Artillery, 17

Assemblies, national and provincial, 122

Athalik Ghazi, 100

Audience, the first, 103


Badakshan, 43

Bannermen, 37

Banzai, 15

Baschpa, 11

Baturu, 88

"Blood thicker than water," 95

Bogue Forts taken, 77

Bokhara, Ameer of, 100

Boxers, the, 115

British fleet arrives, 76

"Brother of Christ," the, 82

Burgevine, 89

Burlingame mission, the, 102

Burma, 32, 56

"Button," the, 29


Cagliostro, 66

Calendar, the, 43;
  European adopted, 129

Camoens, 73

Cantlie, Dr, 124

Canton, riot at, 75;
  foreign houses burnt at, 93;
  captured, 93

Cantonese serve on British men-of-war, 78

Catalogue of Imperial Library, 59

Catholic missionaries, 33;
  rank accorded to, 114

Census, the, 48

Chapu taken, 77

Chi Hsiang, 98

Chia Ching, 61

Chia Ch'ing, 61;
  attacked in streets of Peking, 64;
  died, 68

Ch'ien Lung, 54;
  pictures of his victories, 55;
  abdicates, 59

Chihli, 3

Chin dynasty, 4

China proper, 41

"China's sorrow," 47

Chinese language, death for teaching to foreigners, 71

Chinkiang taken, 77;
  captured by T'ai-p'ings, 85

Ch'ing (or Great Pure) dynasty, 20;
  established, 28

Chino-Japanese war, 110

Christianity, 44;
  oppressed, 52;
  forbidden, 54;
  opposed, 112

Ch'ung-hou, 101;
  condemned to death, 101;
  letter of apology to France, 103

Chusan occupied, 77

Cochin-China, 58

Co-hong system, 66

Coinage debased, 86

Concordance, K'ang Hsi's, 50

Concubine thrown down well, 117

Confucian Classics, 59

Confucius, tomb of, 46

Constantine of China, the, 32

Court, flight of the, 116

Cycle, Chinese, 51


Dalai Lama, the, 33, 43

Davis, Sir J., 67

De Quincey, 57

Divine Justice Society, 64

Dominicans, 45

"Dummy Documents," 122

Dungans, 57

Dutch, the, embassy, 33;
  in Formosa, 35

Dwarf-nation, the, 109

Dynastic Histories, 59


Earthquake, 53

East India Company, 42, 67;
  policy of, 71

Edict, against missionaries, 45;
  for slaughter of all foreigners, 116;
  nullification of, 116;
  by baby Emperor, 125

Eighteen provinces, 41

Eleuths, 55

Elgin, Lord, 93, 94

Elliot, Captain, 74;
  retires to Hongkong, 76

Emperor, Chinese, carried off, 6

Empress, suspicious death of, 106

Empress, Eastern, 98;
  death of, 109

Empress, Western, _see_ Empress Dowager

Empress Dowager, _coups d'etat_, 98, 113;
  plot to get rid of, 113;
  flees, 116;
  death of, 121

Encyclopaedia, K'ang Hsi's, 50

Eunuchs, 14; army of, 15;
  restrictions on, 29;
  oppression by, 63

Ever Victorious Army, 89

Ever-White Mountains, 1

Examinations, established, 20;
  in poetical skill, 47;
  system, 112;
  to be changed, 118

Extra-territoriality, 79, 114


Feudatory princes, 29, 40;
  no more Chinese, 41

Flag, the Dragon, 133;
  the republican, 134;
  of truce, violated, 95

Formosa, 34, 56;
  ceded to Japan, 41, 42;
  Japanese land on, 105;
  republic in, 111

Fournier, Captain, 109

France, and Tongking, 109

Franciscans, 45


Galdan, 43

Galdan II., 55

Gao-tchan, 57

Genghis Khan, 7

German priests murdered, 111

Ginseng, 19

Gioros, 118

God, the term for, 46

Golden Dragon, the, 70

Golden dynasty, 5

Gordon, Major, 89;
  resigns, 90;
  resumes command, 90

Grand Canal, the, 47

Great Mogul, 33

Great Wall, the, 17

Gros, Baron, 93

Gurkhas, 58


Han-lin College, presents address, 30

Hangchow, 6, 31, 47

Harashar, 57

Hassan, prince, 104

Heaven and Earth Society, 65

Heavenly city, the, 84

Heavenly dynasty, the, 83

Heavenly king, the, 83;
  death of, 91

Heilungchiang, 8

Hingking, 10

Hongkong, ceded, 77

Hoppo, the, 119

Hsi Tsung, 14

Hsien Feng, 80, 81;
  death of, 96

Hsiung-nu, 11

Hsue Ching-ch'eng, executed, 117

Hsuean T'ung, deposed, 134;
  allowance of four million taels, 134

Hung Hsiu-ch'uean, 81

Hung League, 65

Huns, 11


Ili, 55

Immorality of foreigners, 108

Intermarriage prohibited, 37;
  proposed between Manchus and Chinese, 117

Iquon, 34


Japan, 8;
  and Korea, 110;
  war with China, 110

Japanese, 104

Jehangir, 69

Jehol, 58;
  Emperor flees to, 96, 115

Jesuits, 45, 52; make maps, 56


K'ai-feng, 2;
  siege of, 22

Kalmucks, 43;
  the trek of the, 56

K'ang Hsi, 40;
  leads army, 43;
  as traveller, 46;
  and literature, 49;
  family troubles of, 50;
  death of, 51

K'ang Yu-wei, 113

Kashgaria, 56, 69;
  Ameer of, 100

Khalkas, 43

Khokand, 43

Kiaochow, seized by Germany, 111

Kien Long, 54

Kin dynasty, 4

Kirin, 8

Kitans, 1

Koffler, A., S.J., 32

Kokonor, rebellion in, 53

Korea, 3;
  conquest of, 19;
  and Japan, 110

Kotow, the, 67

Koxinga, 34;
  canonized, 35

Kuan-tung, 8

Kuang Hsue, 106, 107;
  married, 109;
  informally deposed, 113;
  death of, 121

Kublai Khan, 7, 47

Kueichow, etc., aborigines of, 53

Kuldja, 56;
  annexed by Russia, 100;
  regained by Marquis Tseng, 101

Kung, Prince, 96;
  his _coup d'etat_, 116;
  joint regent with Empresses Dowager, 98

Kuo Sung-tao, 108


Laos tribes, 4

Lexicon, K'ang Hsi's, 49

Lhasa, 43

Li Chin-chung, 14

Li Hung-chang, 89;
  treachery of, 90;
  wounded by assassin, 110

Li Tz[)u]-ch'eng, 21;
  loses an eye, 22;
  defeated, 26;
  death of, 26

Liao dynasty, 2, 4

Liao-tung, 8

Liao-yang, 17

Likin, 87

Lim Boon-keng, Dr, 139

Lin, Commissioner, 75;
  destroys opium, 75;
  cashiered, 76;
  further career of, 84;
  death of, 85

Loch, Mr, captured, 95

Long-haired rebels, 84

Loo-choo islands, 104


Macao, 73;
  occupied by Portuguese, 73

Macartney, Lord, 58

Magalhaens, 53

Mahometans, 43;
  discontented, 100;
  crushed by Tso Tsung-t'ang, 101

Mahometanism, tolerated, 112

Man born good, 86

Manchuria, 8

Manchus, the, origin of, 1;
  etymology of name, 8;
  their script, 10;
  name as a title, 12;
  archers, 17;
  religion of, 20, 112;
  established as a dynasty, 29;
  garrisons, 36;
  language spoken at court, 49;
  literature, 49;
  bravery of soldiers, 77;
  England and the dynasty, 91;
  they monopolize fat posts, 110;
  to travel, young, 113;
  standard of education of, 118;
  indictment of rule of, 130

Miao-tz[)u], the, 54;
  how pacified, 70

Mings, the, dynasty of, 8;
  Emperor commits suicide, 24;
  attempts to restore, 31, 32;
  the Tombs, 47 (also under _K'ang Hsi_);
  dynastic history of, 53

Mongolia, conquest of, 19

Mongols, the, 7;
  derivations of name, 7;
  recognize Manchu supremacy, 21

Morrison, Dr R., 67;
  his dictionary, 71;
  his Bible, 72

Mukden, 8; capture of, 16


Nanking, 6;
  treaty of, 79;
  captured by T'ai-p'ings, 84;
  captured from T'ai-p'ings, 91

Nan-yang, 32

Napier, Lord, 72;
  his death, 73

Napoleon, his opinion, 67

National Assembly, 127

Nepal, 56

Nestorians, the, 11;
  Tablet, 44

Nien-fei, 99

"Nine Thousand Years," 15

Ningpo, taken, 77

Ning-yuean, siege of, 17

Nurhachu, 9; death of, 18

Nue-chens, 1

Nue-chih, 5


Oath, written in blood, 18;
  a forced, 94

Ogotai, 7

"Old Buddha," 135

One-eyed rebel, 24

Opaochi, 2

Opium, prohibited, 74;
  smuggled 74;
  smoking of prohibited, 120;
  exception to include Empress Dowager, 120

Ouigours, 11


Palmerston, Lord, 76

Panshen Erdeni, 58

Panthays, the, 103

Parkes, Mr, 92;
  captured, 95

Peacock's feather, 29

Peking, 2, 5;
  attack on, 19;
  captured, 24;
  surrendered, 96

Penal Code, the, 37

'Phagspa, 11

Pope, the, and ancestral worship, 45

Population, 48, 55

Port Arthur, captured by Japanese, 110;
  "leased" to Russia, 111

Ports, five opened to trade, 79

Portuguese mission, 53

Pottinger, Sir Henry, 77

Provinces, number of, 41

Ptolemaic system, 44


Quelpart, 8

Queue, the, 17;
  strictly enforced, 31;
  T'ai-p'ings cut off the, 83


Railway, the Woosung, 108

Railways, ordered by edict, 111

Reform, edicts, 111;
  Empress Dowager pretends to favour, 117;
  constitutional, 122;
  again promised, 127

Regent, the, resigns, 127

Republic, the, authorized by Manchus, 134

"Revolt of the Tartars," 57

Revolution, the, 122

Ricci, 44

Russia, embassy from, 33;
  fear of, 73;
  war with Japan and its influence, 119


"Sam Collinson," 96

Schaal, Adam, 17, 43

Schlegel, Dr, 66

Secret Societies, 61, 65;
  their lodges, 66

Seng-ko-lin-sin, defeated, 96

Shan States, 54

Shanghai, taken, 77

Shengking, 8

Shimonoseki, treaty of, 110

Shun, dynasty, 22

Shun Chih, 29;
  death of, 33

Siege of the Legations, 115

"Slave" and "servant," 37

"Slay" changed to "protect," 117

Society of God, the, 82

Soochow, burnt by Imperialists, 87;
  capitulated, 90

Stanton, Sir George, 67

Su-shen tribe, the, 1

Succession violated, rule of, 106

Suleiman, sultan, 103

Summer palace, 67;
  burnt, 96;
  built on plan of Trianon, 97

Sun Yat-sen, 123;
  kidnapped in London, 123;
  enters Nanking, 129;
  elected first President, 129;
  manifesto by, 129;
  visits tomb of first Ming Emperor, 134;
  announces fall of Manchus, 135

Sungari, river, 3

Sungaria, 43

Sungs, dynasty of, 2;
  Southern, 6

Syriac, 11


T'ai-p'ings, the dynasty, 83;
  manifesto, 83;
  successes, 84;
  advance on Peking, 85;
  slaughter of princes, 90;
  last prince and king murdered, 91;
  end of rebellion, 91

T'ai-shan, ascent of by K'ang Hsi, 46

T'ai Tsu, 18

T'ai Tsung, 20

Taku, forts taken, 94;
  repulse at, 95;
  captured, 95

Ta-li, 103;
  treacherously surrendered, 104

Tan-lo, 8

Tao Kuang, 69;
  death of, 80

Tartar general, 36

Tashilumbo, 58

Tatnell, Commander, 95

Tea, 39;
  mentioned by Pepys, 39;
  export from Foochow, 39

Tibet, 43, 56, 58

Tientsin, reached, 76;
  Treaty of, 94;
  ratification refused, 94;
  ratified, 97;
  massacre, 102

Timour, 57

Tobacco prohibited, 20

Tongking and France, 109

Torture of prisoners, 96

Trade, European, 71

Treaty with Russia, 42

Triad Society, 65

Trimetrical Classic, 86

Tsai Tse's mission, Duke, 119

Tseng Kuo-fan, 86

Tseng, the Marquis, 101

Tsitsihar, 8

Tso Tsung-t'ang, 89;
  his campaign in Central Asia, 101

Tu Wen-hsiu, 103;
  death of, 104

T'ung Chih, 98;
  married, 103;
  died, 106

Turguts, 56

Turkestan, 43, 57

Twist Rebels, 99

Types, movable, 50


Unicorn appears, 15

University for Peking, 112


Verbiest, 44

Viceroy, the, 36


Ward, and his troops, 89;
  death of and shrine to, 89

Wei Chung-hsien, 14

Wei-hai-wei, captured by Japanese, 110;
  "leased" to England, 111

Western Empress, 98

White Feather Society, 64

White Lily Society, 61

Wo-jen, his wish, 123

Wu-ch'ang, 27

Wu K'o-tu, 107

Wu San-kuei, 21, 23;
  joins the Manchus, 26;
  his conditions, 28;
  his rebellion, 40;
  death of, 41


Ya-k'o-sa, 42

Yakoob Beg, 100;
  assassinated, 101

Yang-tsze, the, 6

Yeh, Governor, 92;
  captured and exiled, 93

Yellow girdles, 118

Yellow riding jacket, 88;
  given to Gordon, 91

Yellow river, 2;
  changes its bed, 47

Young China party, 123;
  plot to seize Canton, 123

Yuean Ch'ang, executed, 117

Yuean-ming-yuean, 96

Yuean Shih-k'ai, 124;
  appointed Prime Minister, 127

Yung Cheng, 52;
  his hostility to missionaries, 53;
  his death and character, 53


[Illustration: Sketch Map of the Far East]

========================================
========================================

CHINESE SKETCHES

by Herbert A. Giles




"The institutions of a despised people cannot be judged with fairness."

Spencer's Sociology: The Bias of Patriotism.




DEDICATION

To Warren William de la Rue,
"As a mark of friendship."




PREFACE

The following _Sketches_ owe their existence chiefly to frequent
peregrinations in Chinese cities, with pencil and note-book in hand.
Some of them were written for my friend Mr. F. H. Balfour of Shanghai,
and by him published in the columns of the _Celestial Empire_. These
have been revised and partly re-written; others appear now for the
first time.

It seems to be generally believed that the Chinese, as a nation, are
an immoral, degraded race; that they are utterly dishonest, cruel, and
in every way depraved; that opium, a more terrible scourge than gin,
is now working frightful ravages in their midst; and that only the
forcible diffusion of Christianity can save the Empire from speedy and
overwhelming ruin. An experience of eight years has taught me that,
with all their faults, the Chinese are a hardworking, sober, and happy
people, occupying an intermediate place between the wealth and
culture, the vice and misery of the West.

H. A. G.

Sutton, Surrey, 1st November 1875.





CHINESE SKETCHES




THE DEATH OF AN EMPEROR

His Imperial Majesty, Tsai-Shun, deputed by Heaven to reign over all
within the four seas, expired on the evening of Tuesday the 13th
January 1875, aged eighteen years and nine months. He was erroneously
known to foreigners as the Emperor T'ung Chih; but T'ung Chih was
merely the style of his reign, adopted in order that the people should
not profane by vulgar utterance a name they are not even permitted to
write.[*] Until the new monarch, the late Emperor's cousin, had been
duly installed, no word of what had taken place was breathed beyond
the walls of the palace; for dangerous thoughts might have arisen had
it been known that the State was drifting rudderless, a prey to the
wild waves of sedition and lawless outbreak. The accession of a child
to reign under the style of Kuang Hsu was proclaimed before it was
publicly made known that his predecessor had passed away.

    [*] Either one or all of the characters composing an emperor's name
    are altered by the addition or omission of certain component
    parts; as if, for instance, we were to write an Alb_a_rt chain
    merely because Alb_e_rt is the name of the heir-apparent.
    Similarly, a child will never utter or write its father's name;
    and the names of Confucius and Mencius are forbidden to all alike.

Of the personal history of the ill-fated boy who has thus been
prematurely cut off just as he was entering upon manhood and the
actual government of four hundred million souls, we know next to
nothing. His accession as an infant to the dignities of a sensual,
dissipated father, attracted but little attention either in China or
elsewhere; and from that date up to the year 1872, all we heard about
His Majesty was, that he was making good progress in Manchu, or had
hit the target three times out of ten shots at a distance of about
twenty-five yards. He was taught to ride on horseback, though up to
the day of his death he never took part in any great hunting
expeditions, such as were frequently indulged in by earlier emperors
of the present dynasty. He learnt to read and write Chinese, though
what progress he had made in the study of the Classics was of course
only known to his teachers. Painting may or may not have been an
Imperial hobby; but it is quite certain that the drama received more
perhaps than its full share of patronage. The ladies and eunuchs of
the palace are notoriously fond of whiling away much of their
monotonous existence in watching the grave antics of professional
tragedians and laughing at the broad jokes of the low-comedy man, with
his comic voice and funnily-painted face. Listening to the tunes
prescribed by the Book of Ceremonies, and dining in solemn solitary
grandeur off the eight[*] precious kinds of food set apart for the
sovereign, his late Majesty passed his boyhood, until in 1872 he
married the fair A-lu-te, and practically ascended the dragon throne
of his ancestors. Up to that time the Empresses-Dowager, hidden behind
a bamboo screen, had transacted business with the members of the Privy
Council, signing all documents of State with the vermilion pencil for
and on behalf of the young Emperor, but probably without even going
through the formality of asking his assent. The marriage of the
Emperor of China seemed to wake people up from their normal apathy, so
that for a few months European eyes were actually directed towards the
Flowery Land, and the _Illustrated London News_, with praiseworthy
zeal, sent out a special correspondent, whose valuable contributions
to that journal will be a record for ever. The ceremony, however, was
hardly over before a bitter drop rose in the Imperial cup. Barbarians
from beyond the sea came forward to claim the right of personal
interview with the sovereign of all under Heaven. The story of the
first audience is still fresh in our memories; the trivial
difficulties introduced by obstructive statesmen at every stage of the
proceedings, questions of etiquette and precedence raised at every
turn, until finally the _kotow_ was triumphantly rejected and five
bows substituted in its stead. Every one saw the curt paragraph in the
_Peking Gazette_, which notified that on such a day and at such an
hour the foreign envoys had been admitted to an interview with the
Emperor. We all laughed over the silly story so sedulously spread by
the Chinese to every corner of the Empire, that our Minister's knees
had knocked together from terror when Phaeton-like he had obtained his
dangerous request; that he fell down flat in the very presence,
breaking all over into a profuse perspiration, and that the haughty
prince who had acted as his conductor chid him for his want of course,
bestowing upon him the contemptuous nickname of "chicken-feather."

    [*] These are--bears' paws, deers' tail, ducks' tongues, torpedos'
    roe, camels' humps, monkeys' lips, carps' tails, and beef-marrow.

Subsequently, in the spring of 1874, the late Emperor made his great
pilgrimage to worship at the tombs of his ancestors. He had previous
to his marriage performed this filial duty once, but the mausoleum
containing his father's bones was not then completed, and the whole
thing was conducted in a private, unostentatious manner. But on the
last occasion great preparations were made and vast sums spent (on
paper), that nothing might be wanting to render the spectacle as
imposing as money could make it. Royalty was to be seen humbly
performing the same hallowed rites which are demanded of every child,
and which can under no circumstances be delegated to any other person
as long as there is a son or a daughter living. The route along which
His Majesty was to proceed was lined with closely-packed crowds of
loyal subjects, eager to set eyes for once in their lives upon a being
they are taught to regard as the incarnation of divinity; and when the
Sacred Person really burst upon their view, the excitement was beyond
description. Young and old, women and children, fell simultaneously
upon their knees, and tears and sobs mingled with the blessings
showered upon His Majesty by thousands of his simple-minded,
affectionate people.

The next epoch in the life of this youthful monarch occurred a few
months ago. The Son of Heaven[*] had not availed himself of western
science to secure immunity from the most loathsome in the long
category of diseases. He had not been vaccinated, in spite of the
known prevalence of smallpox at Peking during the winter season. True,
it is but a mild form of smallpox that is there common; but it is easy
to imagine what a powerless victim was found in the person of a young
prince enervated by perpetual cooping in the heart of a city, rarely
permitted to leave the palace, and then only in a sedan-chair, called
out of his bed at three o'clock every morning summer or winter, to
transact business that must have had few charms for a boy, and
possessed of no other means of amusement than such as he could derive
from the society of his wife or concubines. Occasional bulletins
announced that the disease was progressing favourably, and latterly it
was signified that His Majesty was rapidly approaching a state of
convalescence. His death, therefore, came both suddenly and
unexpectedly; happily, at a time when China was unfettered by war or
rebellion, and when all the energies of her statesmen could be
employed in averting either one catastrophe or the other. For one
hundred days the Court went into deep mourning, wearing capes of white
fur with the hair outside over long white garments of various stuffs,
lined also with white fur, but of a lighter kind than that of the
capes. Mandarins of high rank use the skin of the white fox for the
latter, but the ordinary official is content with the curly fleece of
the snow-white Mongolian sheep. For one hundred days no male in the
Empire might have his head shaved, and women were supposed to eschew
for the same period all those gaudy head ornaments of which they are
so inordinately fond. At the expiration of this time the Court
mourning was changed to black, which colour, or at any rate something
sombre, will be worn till the close of the year.

    [*] Such terms as "Brother of the Sun and Moon" are altogether
    imaginary, and are quite unknown in China.

For twelve long months there may be no marrying or giving in marriage,
that is among the official classes; the people are let off more
easily, one hundred days being fixed upon as their limit. For a whole
year it is illegal to renew the scrolls of red paper pasted on every
door-post and inscribed with cherished maxims from the sacred books;
except again for non-officials, whose penance is once more cut down to
one hundred days' duration. In these sad times the birth of a son--a
Chinaman's dearest wish on earth--elicits no congratulations from
thronging friends; no red eggs are sent to the lucky parents, and no
joyous feast is provided in return. Merrymaking of all kinds is
forbidden to all classes for the full term of one year, and the
familiar sound of the flute and the guitar is hushed in every
household and in every street.[*] The ordinary Chinese visiting-card
--a piece of red paper about six inches by three, inscribed with its
owner's name in large characters--changes to a dusky brown; and the
very lines on letter paper, usually red, are printed of a dingy blue.
Official seals are also universally stamped in blue instead of the
vermilion or mauve otherwise used according to the rank of the holder.
Red is absolutely tabooed; it is the emblem of mirth and joy, and the
colour of every Chinese maiden's wedding dress. It is an insult to
write a letter to a friend or stranger on a piece of plain white paper
with black ink. Etiquette requires that the columns should be divided
by red lines; or, if not, that a tiny slip of red paper be pasted on
in recognition of the form. For this reason it is that all stamps and
seals in China are _red_--to enable tradesmen, officials, and others
to use any kind of paper, whether it has already some red about it or
not; and every foreigner in China would do well to exact on all
occasions the same formalities from his employes as they would
consider a matter of duty towards one of their own countrymen, however
low he might be in the social scale.

    [*] Mencius. Book v., part ii., ch. 4.

Certain classes of the people will suffer from the observance of these
ceremonies far more severely than others. The peasant may not have his
head shaved for one hundred days--inconvenient, no doubt, for him, but
mild as compared with the fate of thousands of barbers who for three
whole months will not know where to look to gain their daily rice. Yet
there is a large section of the community much worse off than the
barbers, and this comprises everybody connected in any way with the
theatres. Their occupation is gone. For the space of one year neither
public nor private performance is permitted. During that time actors
are outcasts upon the face of the earth, and have no regular means of
getting a livelihood. The lessees of theatres have most likely
feathered their own nests sufficiently well to enable them to last out
the prescribed term without serious inconvenience; but with us, actors
are proverbially improvident, and even in frugal China they are no
exception to the rule.

Officials in the provinces, besides conforming to the above customs in
every detail, are further obliged on receipt of the "sad announcement"
to mourn three times a-day for three days in a particular chapel
devoted to that purpose. There they are supposed to call to mind the
virtues of their late master, and more especially that act of grace
which elevated each to the position he enjoys. Actual tears are
expected as a slight return for the seal of office which has enabled
its possessor to grow rich at the expense too often of a poor and
struggling population. We fancy, however, that the mind of the mourner
is more frequently occupied with thinking how many friends he can
count among the Imperial censors than in dwelling upon the
transcendent bounty of the deceased Emperor.

We sympathise with the bereaved mother who has lost her only child and
the hope of China; but on the other hand if there is little room for
congratulation, there is still less for regret. The nation has been
deprived of its nominal head, a vapid youth of nineteen, who was
content to lie _perdu_ in his harem without making an effort to do a
little governing on his own responsibility. During the ten years that
foreigners have resided within half a mile of his own apartments in
the palace at Peking, he has either betrayed no curiosity to learn
anything at all about them, or has been wanting in resolution to carry
out such a scheme as we can well imagine would have been devised by
some of his bolder and more vigorous ancestors. And now once more the
sceptre has passed into the hands of a child who will grow up, like
the late Emperor, amid the intrigues of a Court composed of women and
eunuchs, utterly unfit for anything like energetic government.

The splendid tomb which has been for the last twelve years in
preparation to receive the Imperial coffin, but which, according to
Chinese custom, may not be completed until death has actually taken
place, will witness the last scene in the career of an unfortunate
young man who could never have been an object of envy even to the
meanest of his people, and who has not left one single monument behind
him by which he will be remembered hereafter.




THE POSITION OF WOMEN

It is, perhaps, tolerably safe to say that the position of women among
the Chinese is very generally misunderstood. In the squalid huts of
the poor, they are represented as ill-used drudges, drawers of water
and grinders of corn, early to rise and late to bed, their path
through the vale of tears uncheered by a single ray of happiness or
hope, and too often embittered by terrible pangs of starvation and
cold. This picture is unfortunately true in the main; at any rate,
there is sufficient truth about it to account for the element of
sentimental fiction escaping unnoticed, and thus it comes to be
regarded as an axiom that the Chinese woman is low, very low, in the
scale of humanity and civilisation. The women of the poorer classes in
China have to work hard indeed for the bowl of rice and cabbage which
forms their daily food, but not more so than women of their own
station in other countries where the necessaries of life are dearer,
children more numerous, and a drunken husband rather the rule than the
exception. Now the working classes in China are singularly sober;
opium is beyond their means, and few are addicted to the use of
Chinese wine. Both men and women smoke, and enjoy their pipe of
tobacco in the intervals of work; but this seems to be almost their
only luxury. Hence it follows that every cash earned either by the man
or woman goes towards procuring food and clothes instead of enriching
the keepers of grog-shops; besides which the percentage of quarrels
and fights is thus very materially lessened. A great drag on the poor
in China is the family tie, involving as it does not only the support
of aged parents, but a supply of rice to uncles, brothers, and cousins
of remote degrees of relationship, during such time as these may be
out of work. Of course such a system cuts both ways, as the time may
come when the said relatives supply, in their turn, the daily meal;
and the support of parents in a land where poor-rates are unknown, has
tended to place the present high premium on male offspring. Thus,
though there is a great deal of poverty in China, there is very little
absolute destitution, and the few wretched outcasts one does see in
every Chinese town, are almost invariably the once opulent victims of
the opium-pipe or the gaming-table. The relative number of human
beings who suffer from cold and hunger in China is far smaller than in
England, and in this all-important respect, the women of the working
classes are far better off than their European sisters. Wife-beating
is unknown, though power of life and death is, under certain
circumstances, vested in the husband (Penal Code, S. 293); while, on
the other hand, a wife may be punished with a hundred blows for merely
striking her husband, who is also entitled to a divorce (Penal Code,
S. 315). The truth is, that these poor women are, on the whole, very
well treated by their husbands, whom they not unfrequently rule with
as harsh a tongue as that of any western shrew.

In the fanciful houses of the rich, the Chinese woman is regarded with
even more sympathy by foreigners generally than is accorded to her
humbler fellow-countrywoman. She is represented as a mere ornament, or
a soulless, listless machine--something on which the sensual eye of
her opium-smoking lord may rest with pleasure while she prepares the
fumes which will waft him to another hour or so of tipsy
forgetfulness. She knows nothing, she is taught nothing, never leaves
the house, never sees friends, or hears the news; she is,
consequently, devoid of the slightest intellectual effort, and no more
a companion to her husband than the stone dog at his front gate. Now,
although we do not profess much personal acquaintance with the
_gynecee_ of any wealthy Chinese establishment, we think we have
gathered quite enough from reading and conversation to justify us in
regarding the Chinese lady from an entirely different point of
view. In novels, for instance, the heroine is always highly
educated--composes finished verses, and quotes from Confucius; and it
is only fair to suppose that such characters are not purely and wholly
ideal. Besides, most young Chinese girls, whose parents are well off,
are taught to read, though it is true that many content themselves
with being able to read and write a few hundred words. They all learn
and excel in embroidery; the little knick-knacks which hang at every
Chinaman's waist-band being almost always the work of his wife or
sister. Visiting between Chinese ladies is of everyday occurrence, and
on certain fete-days the temples are crowded to overflowing with
"golden lilies"[*] of all shapes and sizes. They give little
dinner-parties to their female relatives and friends, at which they
talk scandal, and brew mischief to their hearts' content. The first
wife sometimes quarrels with the second, and between them they make
the house uncomfortably hot for the unfortunate husband. "Don't you
foreigners also dread the denizens of the inner apartments?" said a
hen-pecked Chinaman one day to us--and we think he was consoled to
hear that viragos are by no means confined to China. One of the
happiest moments a Chinese woman knows, is when the family circle
gathers round husband, brother, or it may be son, and listens with
rapt attention and wondering credulity to a favourite chapter from the
"Dream of the Red Chamber." She believes it every word, and wanders
about these realms of fiction with as much confidence as was ever
placed by western child in the marvellous stories of the "Arabian
Nights."

    [*] A poetical name for the small feet of Chinese women.




ETIQUETTE

If there is one thing more than another, after the possession of the
thirteen classics, on which the Chinese specially pride themselves, it
is _politeness_. Even had their literature alone not sufficed to place
them far higher in the scale of mental cultivation than the unlettered
barbarian, a knowledge of those important forms and ceremonies which
regulate daily intercourse between man and man, unknown of course to
inhabitants of the outside nations, would have amply justified the
graceful and polished Celestial in arrogating to himself the proud
position he now occupies with so much satisfaction to himself. A few
inquiring natives ask if foreigners have any notion at all of
etiquette, and are always surprised in proportion to their ignorance
to hear that our ideas of ceremony are fully as clumsy and complicated
as their own. It must be well understood that we speak chiefly of the
educated classes, and not of "boys" and compradores who learn in a
very short time both to touch their caps and wipe their noses on their
masters' pocket-handkerchiefs. Our observations will be confined to
members of that vast body of men who pore day and night over the
"Doctrine of the Mean," and whose lips would scorn to utter the
language of birds.

And truly if national greatness may be gauged by the mien and carriage
of its people, China is without doubt entitled to a high place among
the children of men. An official in full costume is a most imposing
figure, and carries himself with great dignity and self-possession,
albeit he is some four or five inches shorter than an average
Englishman. In this respect he owes much to his long dress, which, by
the way, we hope in course of time to see modified; but more to a
close and patient study of an art now almost monopolised in Europe by
aspirants to the triumphs of the stage. There is not a single awkward
movement as the Chinese gentleman bows you into his house, or supplies
you from his own hand with the cup of tea so necessary, as we shall
show, to the harmony of the meeting. Not until his guest is seated
will the host venture to take up his position on the right hand of the
former; and even if in the course of an excited conversation, either
should raise himself, however slightly, from a sitting posture, it
will be the bounden duty of the other to do so too. No gentleman would
sit while his equal stood. Occasionally, where it is not intended to
be over-respectful to a visitor, a servant will bring in the tea, one
cup in each hand. Then standing before his master and guest, he will
cross his arms, serving the latter who is at his right hand with his
left hand, his master with the right. The object of this is to expose
the palm--in Chinese, the _heart_--of either hand to each recipient of
tea. It is a token of fidelity and respect. The tea itself is called
"guest tea," and _is not intended for drinking_. It has a more useful
mission than that of allaying thirst. Alas for the red-haired
barbarian who greedily drinks off his cupful before ten words have
been exchanged, and confirms the unfavourable opinion his host already
entertains of the manners and customs of the West! And yet a little
trouble spent in learning the quaint ceremonies of the Chinese would
have gained him much esteem as an enlightened and tolerant man. For
while despising us outwardly, the Chinese know well enough that
inwardly we despise them, and thus it comes to pass that a voluntary
concession on our part to any of their harmless prejudices is always
gratefully acknowledged. To return, "guest tea" is provided to be used
as a signal by either party that the interview is at an end. A guest
no sooner raises the cup to his lips than a dozen voices shout to his
chair-coolies; so, too, when the master of the house is prevented by
other engagements from playing any longer the part of host. Without
previous warning--unusual except among intimate acquaintances--this
tea should never be touched except as a sign of departure.

Strangers meeting may freely ask each other their names, provinces,
and even prospects; it is not so usual as is generally supposed to
inquire a person's age. It is always a compliment to an old man, who
is justly proud of his years, and takes the curious form of "your
venerable teeth?" but middle-aged men do not as a rule care about the
question and their answers can rarely be depended upon. A man may be
asked the number and sex of his children; also if his father and
mother are still "in the hall," i.e., alive. His wife, however, should
never be alluded to even in the most indirect manner. Friends meeting,
either or both being in sedan-chairs, stop their bearers at once, and
get out with all possible expedition; the same rule applies to
acquaintances meeting on horseback. Spectacles must always be removed
before addressing even the humblest individual--sheer ignorance of
which most important custom has often, we imagine, led to rudeness
from natives towards foreigners, where otherwise extreme courtesy
would have been shown. In such cases a foreigner must yield, or take
the chances of being snubbed; and where neither self-respect or
national dignity is compromised, we recommend him by all means to
adopt the most conciliatory course. Chinese etiquette is a wide field
for the student, and one which, we think, would well repay extensive
and methodical exploration.




ETIQUETTE, NO. II

The disadvantages of ignoring alike the language and customs of the
Chinese are daily and hourly exemplified in the unsatisfactory
relations which exist as a rule between master and servant. That the
latter almost invariably despise their foreign patrons, and are only
tempted to serve under them by the remunerative nature of the
employment, is a fact too well known to be contradicted, though why
this should be so is a question which effectually puzzles many who are
conscious of treating their native dependants only with extreme
kindness and consideration. The answer, however, is not difficult for
those who possess the merest insight into the workings of the Chinese
mind; for just as every inhabitant of the eighteen provinces believes
China to be the centre of civilisation and power, so does he infer
that his language and customs are the only ones worthy of attention
from native and barbarian alike. The very antagonism of the few
foreign manners and habits he is obliged by his position to cultivate,
tend rather to confirm him in his own sense of superiority than
otherwise. For who but a barbarian would defile the banquet hour "when
the wine mantles in the cups" with a _white_ table-cloth, the badge of
grief and death? How much more elegant the soft _red_ lacquer of the
"eight fairy" table, with all its associations of the bridal hour! The
host, too, at the _head_ of his own board, sitting in what should be
the seat of the most honoured guest, and putting the latter on his
_right_ instead of his left hand! Truly these red-haired barbarians
are the very scum of the earth.

By the time he has arrived at this conclusion our native domestic has
by a direct process of reasoning settled in his mind another important
point, namely, that any practice of the civilities and ceremonies
which Chinese custom exacts from the servant to the master, would be
entirely out of place in reference to the degraded being whom an
accidental command of dollars has invested with the title, though
hardly with the rights, of a patron. Consequently, little acts of
gross rudeness, unperceived of course by the foreigner, characterise
the everyday intercourse of master and servant in China. The house-boy
presents himself for orders, and even waits at table, in short clothes
--an insult no Chinaman would dare to offer to one of his own
countrymen. He meets his master with his tail tied round his head, and
passes him in the street without touching his hat, that is, without
standing still at the side of the street until his master has passed.
He lolls about and scratches his head when receiving instructions,
instead of standing in a respectful attitude with his hands at his
side in a state of rest; enters a room with his shoes down at heel, or
without socks; omits to rise at the approach of his master, mistress,
or their friends, and commits numerous other petty breaches of decorum
which would ensure his instant dismissal from the house of a Chinese
gentleman. We ourselves take a pride in making our servants treat us
with the same degree of outward respect they would show towards native
masters, and we believe that by strictly adhering to this system we
succeed in gaining, to some extent, their esteem. Inasmuch, however,
as foreign susceptibilities are easily shocked on certain points
ignored by Chinamen of no matter what social standing, we have found
it necessary to introduce a special Bill, known in our domestic circle
as the Expectoration Act. Now it is a trite observation that the
Chinese make capital soldiers if they are well commanded, and what is
the head of a large business establishment but the commander-in-chief
of a small army? The efficiency of his force depends far more upon the
moral agencies brought to bear than upon any system of rewards and
punishments human ingenuity can devise; for Chinamen, like other
mortals, love to have their prejudices respected, and fear of shame
and dread of ridicule are as deeply ingrained in their natures as in
those of any nation under the sun. They have a horror of blows, not so
much from the pain inflicted, as from the sense of injury done to
something more elevated than their mere corporeal frames; and a friend
of ours once lost a good servant by merely, in a hasty fit, _throwing
a sock at him_. We therefore think that, considering the vast extent
of the Chinese empire and its innumerable population, all of whom are
constructed mentally more or less on the same model, their language
and customs are deserving of more attention than is generally paid to
them by foreigners in China.




LITERATURE

It is an almost universally-received creed that behind the suicidal
prejudices and laughable superstitions of the Chinese there is a
mysterious fund of solid learning hidden away in the uttermost
recesses--far beyond the ken of occidentals--of that _terra
incognita_, Chinese literature. Sinologues darkly hint at elaborate
treatises on the various sciences, impartial histories and candid
biographies, laying at the same time extraordinary stress on the
extreme difficulty of the language in which they are written, and
carefully mentioning the number (sometimes fabulous) of the volumes of
which each is composed. Hence, probably, it results that few students
venture to push their reading beyond novels, and remain during the
whole of their career in a state of darkness as to that literary
wealth of China which enthusiasts delight to compare with her
unexplored mines of metal and coal. Inasmuch, however, as it is not
absolutely necessary to read a book from beginning to end to be able
to form a pretty correct judgment as to its value, so, many students
who are sufficiently advanced to read a novel with ease and without
the help of a teacher, might readily gain an insight into a large
enough number of the most celebrated scientific or historical works to
enable them to comprehend the true worth of the whole of this vast
literature. For vast it undoubtedly is, though our own humble efforts
to appraise it justly, in comparison of course with the other
literatures of the world, brought upon us in the first hours of
discovery that some years of assiduous toil had been positively thrown
away. Sir W. Hamilton, if we recollect rightly, said that by so many
more languages as a man knows, by so many more times is he a man--an
apophthegm of but a shallow kind if all he meant to convey was that an
Englishman who can speak French is also a Frenchman by virtue of his
knowledge of the colloquial. The opening up of new fields of thought
through the medium of a new literature, is a result more worthy the
effort of acquiring a foreign language than sparkling in a _salon_
with the purest imaginable accent; and herein Sir W. Hamilton counted
without Chinese. The greater portion of the "Classics," cherished
tomes to which China thinks even now she owes her intellectual
supremacy over the rest of the world, is open through Dr Legge's
translation to all Englishmen, and those who run may read, weighing it
in the balance and determining its status among the ethical systems
either of the past or present. Had we found as much that is solid in
other departments of Chinese literature, as there is mixed up with the
occasional nonsense and obscurity of the Four Books, our protest would
have taken a milder form; as it is, we think it right to condemn any
and all random assertions which tend to strengthen in the minds of
those who have no opportunity of judging, the belief that China is
possessed of a vast and valuable literature, in which, for aught any
one knows to the contrary, there may lie buried gems of purest ray
serene. Can it be supposed that, if true, nothing of all this has yet
been brought to light? There have been, and are now, foreigners
possessing a much wider knowledge of Chinese literature than many
natives of education, but, strange to say, such translations as have
hitherto been given to the world have been chiefly confined to plays
and novels! We hold that all those whom tastes or circumstances have
led to acquire a knowledge of the Chinese language have a great duty
to perform, and this is to contribute each something to the scanty
quota of translations from Chinese now existing. Let us see what the
poets, historians, and especially the scientific men of China have
produced to justify so many in speaking as they have done, and still
do speak, of her bulky literature. Many, we think, will be deterred by
the grave nonsense or childish superstitions which they dare not
submit to foreign judges as the result of their labours in this
fantastic field; but to withhold such is to leave the public where it
was before, at the mercy of unscrupulous or crazed enthusiasts.

We were led into this train of thought by an article in the _North
China Daily News_ of 10th July 1874, in which the writer speaks of
China as "a luxuriant mental oasis amidst the sterility of Eastern
Asia," and "possessing a literature in vastness and antiquarian value
surpassed by no other." He goes on to say that the translations
hitherto made "have conveyed to us a faint notion of the compass,
variety, solidity, and linguistic beauties of that literature." Such
statements as these admit, unfortunately, of rhetorical support,
sufficient to convince outsiders that at any rate there are two sides
to the question, a conviction which could only be effectually
dispelled by placing before them a few thousand volumes translated
into English, and chosen by the writer of the article himself.[*]
When, however, our enthusiast deals with more realisable facts, and
says that in China "there is no organised book trade, nor publishers'
circulars, nor Quaritch's Catalogues, nor any other catalogues whether
of old or new books for sale," we can assure him he knows nothing at
all about the matter; that there is now lying on our table a very
comprehensive list of new editions of standard works lately published
at a large book-shop in Wu-chang Fu, with the price of each work
attached; and that Mr Wylie, in his "Notes on Chinese Literature,"
devotes five entire pages to the enumeration of some thirty well-known
and voluminous catalogues of ancient and modern works.

    [*] Baron Johannes von Gumpach. Died at Shanghai, 31st July 1875.




EDUCATIONAL LITERATURE

A ramble through a native town in China must often have discovered to
the observant foreigner small collections of second-hand books and
pamphlets displayed on some umbrella-shaded stall, or arranged less
pretentiously on the door-step of a temple. If innocent of all claims
to a knowledge of the written language, he may take them for cheap
editions of Confucius, with which literary chair-coolies are wont to
solace their leisure hours; at the worst, some of these myriad novels
of which he has heard so much, and read--in translations--so little.
It possibly never enters our barbarian's head that many of these
itinerant book-sellers are vendors of educational works, much after
the style of Pinnock's Catechisms and other such guides to knowledge.
Buying a handful the other day for a few cash,[*] we were much amused
at the nature of the subjects therein discussed, and the manner in
which they were treated. The first we opened was on Ethnology and
Zoology, and gave an account of the wonderful types of men and beasts
which exist in far-off regions beyond the pale of China and
civilisation. There was the long-legged nation, the people of which
have legs three _chang_ (thirty feet) long to support bodies of no
more than ordinary size, followed by a short account of a cross-legged
race, a term which explains itself. We are next told of a country
where all the inhabitants have a large round hole right through the
middle of their bodies, the officials and wealthy citizens being
easily and comfortably carried _a la_ sedan chair by means of a strong
bamboo pole passed through it. Then there is the feathered or bird
nation, the pictures of which people remind us very much of Lapps and
Greenlanders. A few lines are devoted to a pygmy race of nine-inch
men, also to a people who walk with their bodies at an angle of 45
degrees. There is the one-armed nation, and a three-headed nation,
besides fish-bodied and bird-headed representatives of humanity; last
but not least we have a race of beings without heads at all, their
mouth, eyes, nose, &c., occupying their chests and pit of the stomach!

  "And of the cannibals that each other eat,
  The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
  Do grow beneath their shoulders."

The little work which contains the above valuable information was
published in 1783, and has consequently been nearly one hundred years
before an enlightened and approving public.

    [*] About 24 cash go to a penny.

Not to dwell upon the remaining portion, devoted to Zoology, and
containing wonderful specimens of various kinds of animals and birds
met with by travellers beyond the Four Seas, we would remark that the
geography of the world, notwithstanding some very fair existing
treatises, is little studied by Chinese at the present day. More works
on topography have been written in Chinese than in probably any other
language, but to say that even these are read is quite another matter.
Geography, properly so called, is almost entirely neglected, and in a
rather extensive circle of literary acquaintances, it has never been
our fortune to meet with a single scholar acquainted with the useful
publications of Catholic or Protestant missionaries--the latter have
not contributed much--except perhaps the mutilated edition of
Verbiest's little handbook.

To describe one is to give a fair idea of all such native works for
the diffusion of knowledge. We found in our little parcel a complete
guide (save the mark!) to the _Fauna_ and _Flora_ of the Celestial
Empire, besides a treatise headed "Philosophy for the Young," in which
children are shown that to work for one's living is better than to be
idle, and that the strength of three men is powerless against _Li_.
Now as _Li_ means "abstract right," and as it is an axiom of Chinese
philosophy that "right in the abstract" does exist, we are gravely
informed that neither the moral or physical violence of any three men
acting in concert can hope to prevail against it. So much for the
state of education in China at the present day, the remedy for which
unwholesome condition will by no means readily be found. From time to
time a few scientific treatises are translated by ambitious members of
the missionary body, but such only tend to swell the pastor's fame
amongst his own immediate flock: they do not advance civilisation one
single step. The very fact of their emanating from a missionary would
of itself be enough to deter the better class of Chinese from
purchasing, or even accepting them as a gift.[*]

    [*] "The principal priest . . . declined the gift of some Christian
    books."--From _Glimpses of Travel in the Middle Kingdom_,
    published in the _Celestial Empire_ of July 3d, 1875.




DENTISTRY

Roaming in quest of novelty through that mine of marvels, a Chinese
city, we were a witness the other day of a strange but not uncommon
scene. We had halted in front of the stall of a street apothecary,
surgeon, and general practitioner, and were turning over with our eyes
his stock of simples, dragons' teeth, tigers'-claws, and like drugs
used as ingredients in the native pharmacopoeia, when along came a
man, holding his hand up to his jaw, and apparently in great pain. He
sat down by the doctor and explained to him that he was suffering with
the toothache, to get rid of which he would like to have his tooth
removed. The doctor opened his patient's mouth and inspected the
aching tooth; then he took a small phial from his stock of medicines,
and into the palm of his hand he shook a few scruples of a
pink-coloured powder. He next licked his finger and dipped it into the
powder, and inserting this into the man's mouth, rubbed it on the
aching tooth and gum. He repeated this three or four times, and then
concluded by turning the patient's head upside down; when, to the no
small astonishment of many of the bystanders, among whom was
apparently the man himself, the tooth dropped out and fell upon the
ground. The doctor then asked him if he had felt any pain, to which he
replied that he had not, and the payment of a small fee brought the
_seance_ to a close. At our application the tooth was picked up and
very civilly exhibited to us by the owner himself; it was evidently
fresh from a human jaw, though there had not been the slightest
effusion of blood from the man's mouth. The thought had naturally
suggested itself to us that the whole thing was a hoax, and that the
patient was an accomplice; but if so, the doctor was no novice at
sleight of hand, and the expression of astonishment on the other man's
face when he found his tooth gone, was as perfect a specimen of
histrionic emotion as it has ever been our lot to behold.

That night we had visions of a large establishment in Regent Street,
with an enormous placard announcing "Painless Dentistry" over the
door, and crowds of dukes and duchesses mounting and descending our
stairs to have their teeth extracted by some mysterious process
imported from China, and known to ourselves alone. Next day we
proceeded to rummage through our Chinese medical library and see what
we could hunt up on the subject of dentistry. The result of this
search we generously offer to our readers, thus, perhaps, sacrificing
the chance of securing a colossal fortune.

In the "New Collection of Tried Prescriptions," a sort of domestic
medicine published for the use of families in cases of emergency when
no physician is at hand, we find the following remarks:--

Method for Extracting Aching Teeth.

  "A tooth ought not to be taken out, for by doing so the remaining
  teeth will be loosened. If the pain is very acute and interferes
  with eating or drinking, then the tooth may be extracted;
  otherwise, it should be left. Take a bream about ten ounces in
  weight, rip it open and insert 1/10 of an ounce of powdered
  arsenic. Then sew up the body and hang it up in the wind where it
  is not exposed to the sun or accessible to cats and rats. After
  being thus hung for seven days, a kind of hoar-frost will have
  formed upon the scales of the fish. Preserve this, using for each
  tooth about as much as covers one scale. When required, spread it
  on a piece of any kind of plaster, press it with the finger on to
  the aching place, and let it stick there. Then let the patient
  cough, and the tooth will fall out of itself. This prescription
  has been tested by Dr. Wang."

                           Another Method.

  "Take a head of garlic and pound it up to a pulp. Mix it up
  thoroughly with one or two candareens' weight of white dragon's
  bones, and apply it to the suffering part. In a little while the
  tooth will drop out."

It will be noticed that the above descriptions are neither without one
or other of two characteristics always to be found in the composition
of Chinese remedies. In the first recipe, the ingredients are simple
enough, and all this is required is time, seven days being necessary
for its preparation. Now, as it is very unlikely that any one would
collect the "hoar-frost" deposit from the scales of a bream stuffed
with arsenic, in anticipation of a future toothache, and as he would
probably have got well long before the expiration of the seven days if
he set to work to make his medicine only when the tooth began to ache,
the genius of the physician and the efficacy of the recipe are alike
secure from attack. In the second case, the very existence of one of
the drugs mentioned is, to say the least, apocryphal; and although
such can be purchased at the shops of native druggists, any complaint
on the part of a duped patient would be met by the simple answer, that
the white dragon's bones he bought could not possibly have been
genuine!

A few days after the above incident, we returned to the dentist's
stall, and asked him if he had any powder that would draw out a tooth
by mere application to the gum or to the tooth itself? He replied that
such a powder certainly existed, and was commonly manufactured in all
parts of China, but that he himself was out of it at the moment. He
added, that if we would call again on the 4th of the 4th moon, before
12 o'clock in the day, he should be in a position to satisfy our
demands.

In conclusion, we append a quotation from the _China Review_, which
appeared in print after our own sketch was written:--

  "Despite the oft-repeated assertion as to painless, or at least
  easy, dentistry in China, very few people seem prepared to admit
  that teeth are constantly extracted in the way described by (I
  think) a former correspondent of the _Review_. He stated that a
  white powder was rubbed on the gums of the patient, after which
  the tooth was easily pulled from its socket; and this I can
  substantiate, noting, however, that the action of the powder
  (corrosive sublimate) is not quite so rapid as represented. A
  short time since I witnessed an operation of this kind. The
  operator rubbed the powder on the gum as described, but then
  directed the patient to wait a little. After perhaps ten minutes'
  interval, he again rubbed the gum, and then, introducing his thumb
  into the mouth, pressed heavily against the tooth (which was a
  large molar). The man winced for a second as I heard the 'click'
  of the separation, but almost before he could cry out, the dentist
  gripped the tooth with his forefinger and thumb, and with very
  little violence pulled it out. The gum bled considerably, and I
  examined the tooth so as to satisfy myself that there was no
  deception. It had an abscess at the root of the fang, and was
  undoubtedly what it professed to be. When the operation was over,
  the patient washed his mouth out with _cold_ water, paid fifteen
  cash and departed."




MEDICAL SCIENCE

In spite of the glowing reports issued annually from various foreign
hospitals for natives, and the undeniable good, though desultory and
practically infinitesimal, that is being worked by these institutions,
we cannot blind ourselves to the fact that western medical science is
not making more rapid strides than many other innovations in the great
struggle against Chinese prejudice and distrust. By far the majority
of our servants and those natives who come most in contact with
foreigners never dream of consulting a European doctor; or if they do,
that is quite as much as can be said, for we may pronounce it a fact
that they never take either his advice or his medicine. They still
prefer to appear with large dabs of green plaster stuck on either
temple, and to drink loathsome concoctions of marvellous drugs,
compounded according to eternal principles laid down many centuries
ago. In serious cases, when they employ their own doctors, they are
apt to mark, as Bacon said, the hits but not the misses; and failure
of human skill is generally regarded as resulting from the
interposition of divine will. Directly, however, a foreigner comes
upon the scene they forget at once that medicine is an uncertain
science, and expect not only a sure but an almost instantaneous
recovery; and, unfortunately, a single failure is quite enough to undo
the good of many months of successful practice. One Chinaman bitterly
complained to us of a foreign doctor, and sweepingly denounced the
whole system of western treatment, because the practitioner alluded to
had failed to cure his mother, aged eighty, of a very severe paralytic
stroke. A certain percentage of natives are annually benefited by
advice and medicine, both of which are provided gratis, and go home to
tell the news and exhibit themselves as living proofs of the _foreign
devils'_ skill; but in many instances their friends either believe
that magical arts have been brought to bear, or that after all a
Chinese doctor would have treated the case with equal success, and
accordingly the number of patients increases in a ratio very
disproportionate to the amount of good really effected. Besides, if
faith in European doctors was truly spreading to any great extent, we
should hear of wealthy Chinamen regularly calling them in and
contributing towards the income of those now in full practice at the
Treaty ports. It is absurd to point to isolated cases in a nation of
several hundred millions, and argue that progress is being made
because General This or Prefect That consented to have an abscess
lanced by a foreign surgeon, and sent him a flowery letter of thanks
with a couple of Chinese hams after the operation. The Chinese as a
people laugh at our medical science, and, we are bound to say, with
some show of justice on their side. They have a medical literature of
considerable extent, and though we may condemn it wholesale as a
farrago of utter nonsense, it is not so to the Chinese, who fondly
regard their knowledge in this branch of science as one among many
precious heirlooms which has come down to them from times of the
remotest antiquity.

We alluded in the last Sketch to a work in eight small volumes called
"New Collection of Tried Prescriptions," a book which answers to our
"Domestic Medicine," and professes to supply well-authenticated
remedies for some of the most common ills that flesh is heir to. This
book gives a fair idea of the principles and practice of medical
science in China. It is divided into sections and subdivided into
chapters under such headings as the _eye_, the _teeth_, the _hand_,
the _leg_, &c. &c. We gave a specimen of the prescriptions herein
brought together in our late remarks upon the methods of extracting
teeth, but it would be doing an injustice to the learning of its
author if we omitted to point out that in this book remedies are
provided, not only for such simple complaints as chilblains or the
stomach-ache, but for all kinds of serious complications arising from
the evil influence of demons or devils. One whole chapter is devoted
to "Extraordinary Diseases," and teaches anxious relatives to give
instant relief in cases of "the face swelling as big as a peck
measure, and little men three feet long appearing in the eyes."
"Seeing one thing as if it were two," would hardly be classed by
London doctors as an extraordinary disease, and is not altogether
unknown even amongst foreigners in China. "Seeing things upside down
after drinking wine," belongs in the same category, and may be cited
in proof of a position take up by most observers, namely, that the
Chinese are a sober people. "Seeing kaleidoscopic views which turn to
beautiful women," "the flesh becoming hard as a stone and sounding
like a bell when tapped," "objecting to eat in company," and such
diseases have each a special prescription offered by the learned Dr
Wang with the utmost gravity, and accepted in good faith by many a
confiding patient.

Chinamen look with suspicion on the sober treatment of the West, where
no joss-stick is burnt, and no paper money is offered on the altar of
some favourite P'u-sa; though, if they knew the whole truth, they
would discover that intercessory prayers for the recovery of sick
persons are considered by many of us to be of equal importance with
the administration of pills and draughts. Further, like our own
agricultural classes, they have no faith in medicine of any kind which
does not make its presence felt not only quickly but powerfully. This
last desire was amply fulfilled in the case of one poor coolie who
applied to an acquaintance of ours for some foreign medicine to cure a
sick headache and bilious attack from which he was suffering. Our
friend immediately bethought himself of a Seidlitz powder; but when
all was ready, the acid in one wine-glass of water and the salt in
another, the devil entered into him, and he gave them to his victim to
drink one after the other. The result was indescribable, for the
mixture _fizzed inside_, and the unfortunate coolie passed such a
_mauvais quart d'heure_ as effectually to cure his experimenting
master from any further indulgence in practical jokes of so extremely
dangerous a nature.




MEDICAL SCIENCE, NO. II

Luxuriating in the "mental oasis" of Chinese literature in general,
and the "New Collection of Tried Prescriptions" in particular, we
have been tempted to carry our researches still further in that
last-mentioned valuable work. It would have been sufficient to establish
the reputation of any European treatise on medical science had it
contained one such simple and efficacious method for extracting teeth
as we gave in our chapter on Dentistry; but Chinese readers are not so
easily satisfied, and it takes something more than mere remedies for
coughs, colds, lumbago, or the gout, to ensure a man a foremost place
among the Galens of China. Even a chapter on "Extraordinary Diseases,"
marvellous indeed in the eyes of the sceptical barbarian, is not
enough for the hungry native mind; and nothing less than a whole
section of the most miraculous remedies and antidotes, for and against
all kinds of unheard-of diseases and poisons, would suffice to stamp
the author as a man of genius, and his work as the offspring of
successful toil in the fields of therapeutic science. Thus it comes
about that the author of the "New Collection of Tried Prescriptions"
gathers together at the close of his last volume such items of
experience in his professional career as he has not been able to
introduce into the body of his book, and from this chapter we purpose
to glean a few of the most striking passages.

To begin with: Mr Darwin will be delighted to hear, if this should
ever meet his eye, that the growth of tails among mankind in China is
not limited to the appendage of hair which reposes gracefully on the
back, and saturates with grease the outer garment of every high or low
born Celestial. Elongation of the spine is, at any rate, common enough
for Dr Wang to treat it as a disease and specify the remedy, which
consists in tying a piece of medicated thread tightly round it, and
tightening the thread from time to time until the tail drops off. In
order, however, to guard against its growing again, a course of
medicine has to be taken, whereby any little irregularities of the
_yin_ or female principle[*] may be corrected, and the unpleasant
tendency at once and for ever checked.

    [*] The symbol of the _yin_ and the _yang_, or male and female
    principles, has been used in the beading of the cover to this
    volume. The dark half is the _yin_, the other the _yang_.

We then come to elaborate directions for the extirpation of all kinds
of parasites, white ants, mosquitoes, &c.; but judging from the
plentiful supply of such pests in every part of China, we can only
conclude that the natives are apathetic as regards these trifles, and
do not suffer the same inconvenience therefrom as the more
delicately-nurtured barbarian. The next heading would somewhat
astonish us, accustomed as we are to the vagaries of Chinese
book-makers, were it not that the section upon which we are engaged is
supposed to contain "miscellaneous" prescriptions, which may include
anything, though it is a somewhat abrupt transition for a grave
medical work to pass from the destruction of insects to a remedy
against _fires_!

"Take three fowl's-eggs, and write at the big end of each the word
_warm_, at the small end the word _beautiful_. Then throw them singly
to the spot where the fire is burning brightest, uttering all the time
'fooshefahrun, fooshefahrun.' The fire will then go out." There are
several other methods, but perhaps this one will be found to answer
the purpose.

Further on we find a most practicable way for pedestrians of
discovering the right direction to pursue at a cross road. "Carry with
you a live tortoise, and when you come to a cross road and do not know
which one to choose, put down the tortoise and follow it. Thus you
will not go wrong." For people who are afraid of seeing bogies at
night, the following is recommended:--"With the middle finger of the
right hand trace on the palm of the left hand the words _I am a
devil_, and close your hand up tight. You will then be able to travel
without fear." Sea-sickness may be prevented by drinking the drippings
from a bamboo punt-pole mixed with boiling water, or by inserting a
lump of burnt mortar from a stove into the hair, without letting
anybody know it is there; also by writing the character _earth_ on the
palm of the hand previous to going on board ship. Ivory may be cleaned
to look like new by using the whey of bean-curd, and rice may be
protected from weevils and maggots by inserting the shell of a crab in
the place where it is kept. The presence of bad air in wells may be
detected by letting a fowl's feather drop down; if it falls straight,
the air is pure; if it circles round and round, poisonous. Danger may
be averted by throwing in a quantity of hot vinegar before descending.
A fire may be kept alight from three to five days without additional
fuel by merely putting a walnut among the live ashes; and a method is
also given to make a candle burn many hours with hardly any
perceptible decrease in size.

We close Dr Wang's "New Collection of Tried Prescriptions" with
mingled feelings of admiration and regret: admiration, not indeed for
the genius of its author, or any new light which may have been let in
upon us during our study of this section of the "mental oasis" of
Chinese literature, but for the indomitable energy and skill of those
who have helped to emancipate us from similar trammels of ignorance
and folly; regret, that a nation which carries within its core the
germs of a transcendent greatness should still remain sunk in the
lowest depths of superstitious gloom.




LOAN SOCIETIES

In a country where money is only obtainable at such an exorbitant rate
of interest as in China, it is but natural that some attempt should be
made to obviate the necessity of appealing to a professional
money-lender. Three per cent. per month is the maximum rate permitted by
Chinese law, which cannot be regarded as excessive if the full risk of
the lender is taken into consideration. He has the security of one or
more "middlemen," generally shopkeepers whose solvency is
unimpeachable; but these gentlemen may, and often do, repudiate their
liability without deigning to explain either why or wherefore. His
course is then not so plain as it ought to be under a system of
government which has had some two thousand years to mature. Creditors
as well as debtors shun the painted portals of the magistrate's
yamen[*] as they would the gates of hell. Above them is traced the
same desperate legend that frightened the soul of Dante when he stood
before the entrance to the infernal regions. Truly there is no hope
for those who enter here. Both sides are _squeezed_ by the gate-keeper
--a very lucrative post in all yamens--before they are allowed to
present their petitions. It then becomes necessary for plaintiff and
defendant alike to go through the process of (in Peking slang) "making
a slit," i.e., making a present of money to the magistrate and his
subordinates proportionate to the interests involved. In many yamens
there is a regular scale of charges, answering to our Table of Fees,
but this is almost always exceeded in practice. The case is then
heard: occasionally, on its merits. We say occasionally, because nine
times out of ten one of the parties bids privately for the benefit of
his honour's good opinions. Sometimes both suitors do this, and then
judgment is knocked down to the highest bidder. The loser departs
incontinently cursing the law and its myrmidons to the very top of his
bent, and perhaps meditating an appeal to a higher court, from which
he is only deterred by prospects of further expense and repeated
failure. As to the successful litigant, he would go on his way
rejoicing, but that he has a duty to perform before which he is not a
free man. The "slit" he made on entering the yamen needs to be
repaired, and on him devolves the necessity of "sewing it up." The
case is then at an end, and the prophecy fulfilled, which says:--

  "The yamen doors are open wide
  To those with _money_ on their side."

    [*] Official and private residence, all in one.

Wiser and more determined creditors take the law into their own hands.
With a tea-pot, a pipe, and a mattress, they proceed to the shop of
the recalcitrant debtor or security as circumstances may dictate, and
there take up their abode until the amount is paid. If inability to
meet the debt has been pleaded, then this self-made bailiff will
insist on taking so much per cent. out of the daily receipts; if it is
a mere case of obstinacy, a desire to shirk a just responsibility, the
place is made so hot for its owner that he is glad to get rid of his
visitor at any price whatever. Were manual violence resorted to, the
interference of the local officials would be absolutely necessary; and
in all cases where personal injuries are an element, their action is
not characterised by the same tyranny and corruption as where only
property is at stake. The chances are that the aggressor would come
off worst.

To protect themselves, however, from such a prohibitive rate of usury
as that mentioned above, Chinese merchants are in the habit of
combining together and forming what are called Loan Societies for the
mutual benefit of all concerned. Such a society may be started in the
first instance by a deposit of so much per member, which sum, in the
absence of a volunteer, is handed over to a manager, elected by a
throw of dice, whose business it is to lay out the money during the
ensuing month to the best possible advantage. Frequently one of the
members, being himself in want of funds, will undertake the job; and
he, in common with all managers, is held responsible for the safety of
the loan. At the end of the month there is a meeting at which the past
manager is bound to produce the entire sum entrusted to his charge,
together with any profits that may have accrued meanwhile. Another
member volunteers, or is elected manager, and so the thing goes on, a
running fund from which any member may borrow, paying interest at a
very low rate indeed. Dividends are never declared, and consequently
some of these clubs are enormously rich; but any member is at liberty
to withdraw whenever he likes, and he takes with him his share of all
moneys in the hands of the Society at the moment of his retirement. To
outsiders, the market rate of interest is charged, or perhaps a trifle
less, but loans are only made upon the very best securities.




GUILDS

In every large Chinese city are to be found several spacious buildings
which are generally reckoned among the sights of the place, and are
known by foreigners under the name of guilds. Globe-trotters visit
them, and admire the maximum of gold-leaf crowded into the minimum of
space, their huge idols, and curious carving; of course passing over
those relics which the natives themselves prize most highly, namely,
sketches and scrolls painted or written by the hand of some departed
celebrity. Foreign merchants regard them with a certain amount of awe,
for they are often made to feel keenly enough the influence which
these institutions exert over every branch of trade. They come into
being in the following manner. If traders from any given province
muster in sufficient numbers at any of the great centres of commerce,
they club together and form a guild. A general subscription is first
levied, land is bought, and the necessary building is erected.
Regulations are then drawn up, and the tariff on goods is fixed, from
which the institution is to derive its future revenue. For all the
staples of trade there are usually separate guilds, mixed
establishments being comparatively rare. It is the business of the
members as a body to see that each individual contributes according to
the amount of merchandise which passes through his hands, and the
books of suspected defaulters are often examined at a moment's notice
and without previous warning. The guild protects its constituents from
commercial frauds by threatening the accused with legal proceedings
which an individual plaintiff would never have dared to suggest; and
the threat is no vain one when a mandarin, however tyrannical and
rapacious, finds himself opposed by a body of united and resolute men.
On the other hand, these guilds deal fairly enough with their own
members, and not only refuse to support a bad case, but insist on just
and equitable dealings with the outside world. To them are frequently
referred questions involving nice points of law or custom, and one of
the chief functions of a guild is that of a court of arbitration. In
addition to this they fix the market rates of all kinds of produce,
and woe be to any one who dares to undersell or otherwise disobey the
injunctions of the guild. If recalcitrant, he is expelled at once from
the fraternity, and should his hour of need arrive he will find no
helping hand stretched out to save him from the clutches of the law.
But if he acknowledges, as he almost always does, his breach of faith,
he is punished according to the printed rules of the corporation. On a
large strip of red paper his name and address are written, the offence
of which he has been convicted, and the fine which the guild has
determined to impose. This latter generally takes the form of a dinner
to all members, to be held on some appointed day and accompanied by a
theatrical entertainment, after which the erring brother is admitted
as before to the enjoyment of those rights and privileges he would
otherwise infallibly have lost.

On certain occasions, such as the birthday of a patron saint, the
guild spends large sums from the public purse in providing a banquet
for its members and hiring a theatrical troupe, with their everlasting
tom-toms, to perform on the permanent stage to be found in every one
of these establishments. The Anhui men celebrate the birthday of Chu
Hsi, the great commentator, whose scholarship has won eternal honours
for his native province; Swatow men hold high festival in memory of
Han Wen-Kung, whose name is among the brightest on the page of Chinese
history. All day long the fun goes on, and as soon as it begins to
grow dusk innumerable paper lanterns are hung in festoons over the
whole building. The crowd increases, farce succeeds farce without a
moment's interval, and many a kettle of steaming wine warms up the
spectators to the proper pitch of enthusiasm and delight. Before
midnight the last song has been sung, a considerable number of people
have quietly dispersed without accident of any kind, and the courtyard
of the guild is once more deserted and still.

It is open to any trader to join the particular institution which
represents his own province or trade without being either proposed,
seconded, or balloted for. He is expected to make some present to the
resources of the guild, in the shape of a new set of glass lanterns, a
pair of valuable scrolls, some new tables, chairs, or in fact anything
that may be needed for either use or ornament. Should he be in want of
money, a loan will generally be issued to him even on doubtful
security. Should he die in an impoverished condition, a coffin is
always provided, the expenses of burial undertaken, and his wife and
children sent to their distant home, with money voted for that purpose
at a general meeting of the members. Were it not for the action of
these guilds in regard to fire, life and property in Chinese cities
would be more in danger than is now the case. Each one has its own
fire-engine, which is brought out at the first alarm, no matter where
or whose the building attacked. If belonging to one of themselves, men
are posted round the scene of the conflagration to prevent looting on
the part of the crowd, and the efforts of the brigade are stimulated
by the reflection that their position and that of the present
sufferers may at any moment be reversed. Picked men are appointed to
perform the most important task of all, that of rescuing from the
flames relics more precious to a respectable Chinaman than all the
jade that K'un-kang has produced. For it often happens that an
obstructive geomancer will reject site after site for the interment of
some deceased relative, or perhaps that the day fixed upon as a lucky
one for the ceremony of burial may be several months after death.
Meanwhile a fire breaks out in the house where the body lies in its
massive, air-tight coffin, and all is confusion and uproar. The first
thought is for the corpse; but who is to lift such a heavy weight and
carry it to a place of safety without the dreaded jolting, almost as
painful to the survivors as would be cremation itself? Such harrowing
thoughts are usually cut short by the entrance of six or eight sturdy
men from the nearest guild, who, armed with the necessary ropes and
poles, bear away the coffin through flame and smoke with the utmost
gentleness and care.




PAWNBROKERS

Few probably among our readers have had much experience on the subject
of the present sketch--a Chinese pawnshop. Indeed, for others than
students of the manners and customs of China, there is not much that
is attractive in these haunts of poverty and vice. The same mighty
misery, which is to be seen in England passing in and out of
mysterious-looking doors distinguished by a swinging sign of three
golden balls, is not wanting to the pawnshop in China, though the act
of pledging personal property in order to raise money is regarded more
in the light of a business transaction than it is with us, and less as
one which it is necessary to conceal from the eyes of the world at
large. Nothing is more common than for the owner of a large wardrobe
of furs to pawn them one and all at the beginning of summer and to
leave them there until the beginning of the next winter. The
pawnbrokers in their own interest take the greatest care of all
pledges, which, if not redeemed, will become their own property,
though they repudiate all claims for damage done while in their
possession; and the owner of the goods by payment of the interest
charged is released from all trouble and annoyance.

Pawnshops in China are divided into three classes, one of which has
since the days of the T'ai-p'ings totally disappeared from all parts
over which the tide of rebellion passed. This is the _tien tang_,
where property could be left for three years without forfeit, and to
establish which it was necessary to obtain special authority from the
Board of Revenue in Peking. At present there are the _chih tang_ and
the _ssu ya_, both common to all parts of China, and to these we shall
confine our remarks. The former, which may be considered as the
pawnshop proper, is a private institution as far as its business is
concerned, but licensed on payment of a small fee by the local
officials, and regulated in its workings by certain laws which emanate
from the Emperor himself. A limit of sixteen months is assigned,
within which pledges must be redeemed or they become the property of
the pawnbroker; and the interest charged, formerly four per cent., is
now fixed at three per cent. _per month_. Before the license
above-mentioned can be obtained, security must be provided for the
existence of sufficient capital to guard against a sudden or a
fraudulent collapse. For any article not forthcoming when the owner
desires to redeem it, double the amount of the original loan is
recoverable from the pawnbroker. Should any owner of a pledge chance
to lose his ticket by theft or otherwise, he may proceed to the
pawnshop with two substantial securities, and if he can recollect the
number, date, and amount of the transaction, another ticket is issued
to him with which he may recover his property at once, or at any time
within the original sixteen months. Pawn-tickets are not unseldom
offered as pledges, and are readily received, as the loan is never
more than half the value of the deposit; and tickets thus obtained are
often sold either to a third person or perhaps to the pawnbroker who
issued them in the first instance. Formerly, when the interest payable
was four per cent. per month, it was a standing rule that during the
last three months in every year, i.e., the winter season, pledges
might be redeemed at a diminished rate, so that poor people should
have a better chance of getting back their wadded clothes to protect
them from the inclemency of frost and cold. But since the rate of
interest has been reduced to three per cent. this custom has almost
passed away; its observance is, however, sometimes called for by a
special proclamation of the local magistrate when the necessaries of
life are unusually dear, and the times generally are bad. The
following is a translation of a ticket issued by one of these shops,
which may often be recognised in a Chinese city by the character for
_pawn_ painted on an enormous scale in some conspicuous position:--"In
accordance with instructions from the authorities, interest will be
charged at the rate of three per cent. [per month] for a period of
sixteen months, at the expiration of which the pledge, if not
redeemed, will become the property of the pawnbroker, to be disposed
of as he shall think fit. All damages to the deposit arising from war,
the operations of nature, insects, rats, mildew, &c., to be accepted
by both sides as the will of Heaven. Deposits will be returned on
presentation of the proper ticket without reference to the possession
of it by the applicant." Besides this, the name and address of the
pawnshop, a number, description of the article pledged, amount lent,
and finally the date, are entered in their proper places upon the
ticket, which is stamped as a precaution against forgery with the
private stamp of the pawnshop. Jewels are not received as pledges, and
gold and silver only under certain restrictions.

The other class is not recognised by the authorities, and its very
existence is illegal, though of course winked at by a venial
executive. Shops of this kind, which may be known by the character for
_keep_, are very much frequented by the poor. A more liberal loan is
obtainable than at the licensed pawnbroker's, but on the other hand
the rate of interest charged is very much more severe. Pledges are
only received for three months, and on the ticket issued there is no
stipulation about damage to the deposit. No satisfaction is to be got
in case of fraud or injustice to either side: a magistrate would
refuse to hear a case either for or against one of these unlicensed
shops. They carry on their trade in daily fear of the rowdies who
infest every Chinese town, granting loans to these ruffians on
valueless articles, which in many cases are returned without payment
either of interest or principal, thereby securing themselves from the
disturbances which "bare poles" who have nothing to lose are ever
ready to create at a moment's notice, and which would infallibly hand
them over to the clutches of hungry and rapacious officials. The
counters over which all business is transacted are from six to eight
feet high, strongly made, and of such a nature that to scale them
would be a very difficult matter, and to grab anything with the view
of making a bolt for the street utterly and entirely impossible. In a
Chinese city, where there is no police force to look after the safety
of life and property, and where everybody prefers to let a thief pass
rather than risk being called as a witness before the magistrate, it
becomes necessary to guard against such contingencies as these. As
things are now, pawnshops may be considered the most flourishing
institutions in the country; and in these establishments many even of
the highest officials invest savings squeezed from the districts
entrusted to their paternal care.




POSTAL SERVICE

Many residents in China are profoundly ignorant of the existence of a
native postal service; and even the few who have heard of such an
institution, are not aware of the comparative safety and speed with
which even a valuable letter may be forwarded from one end of the
Empire to the other. Government despatches are conveyed to their
destinations by a staff of men specially employed for the purpose, and
under the control of the Board of War in Peking. They ride from
station to station at a fair pace, considering the sorry, ill-fed nags
upon which they are mounted; important documents being often carried
to great distances, at a rate of two hundred miles a-day. The people,
however, are not allowed to avail themselves of this means of
communication, but the necessities of trade have driven them to
organise a system of their own.

In any Chinese town of any pretensions whatever, there are sure to be
several "letter offices," each monopolising one or more provinces, to
and from which they make it their special business to convey letters
and small parcels. The safety of whatever is entrusted to their care
is guaranteed, and its value made good if lost; at the same time, the
contents of all packets must be declared at the office where posted,
so that a corresponding premium may be charged for their transmission.
The letter-carriers travel chiefly on foot, sometimes on donkeys, to
be found on all the great highways of China, and which run with
unerring accuracy from one station to another, unaccompanied by any
one except the hirer. There is little danger of the donkeys being
stolen, unless carried off bodily, for heaven and earth could no more
move them from their beaten track than the traveller who, desirous of
making two stages without halting, could induce them to pass the door
of the station they have just arrived at. Carrying about eighty or
ninety pounds weight of mail matter, these men trudge along some five
miles an hour till they reach the extent of their tether; there they
hand over the bag to a fresh man, who starts off, no matter at what
hour of the day or night, and regardless of good or bad weather alike,
till he too has quitted himself of his responsibility by passing on
the bag to a third man. They make a point of never eating a full meal;
they eat themselves, as the Chinese say, six or seven tenths full,
taking food as often as they feel at all hungry, and thus preserve
themselves from getting broken-winded early in life. Recruited from
the strongest and healthiest of the working-classes, it is above all
indispensable that the Chinese letter-carrier should not be afraid of
any ghostly enemy, such as bogies or devils. In this respect they must
be tried men before they are entrusted with a mail; for an ordinary
Chinaman is so instinctively afraid of night and darkness, that the
slightest rustle by the wayside would be enough to make him fling down
the bag and take to his heels as if all the spirits of darkness had
been loosed upon him at one and the same moment.

The scale of charges is very low. The cost of sending a letter from
Peking to Hankow--650 miles, as the crow flies--being no more than
eight cents, or four pence. About thirty per cent. of the postage is
always paid by the sender, to secure the office against imposition and
loss; the balance is recoverable from the person to whom the letter is
addressed. These offices are largely used by merchants in the course
of trade, and bills of exchange are constantly being thus sent, while
the banks forward the foil or other half to the house on which it is
drawn, receipt of which is necessary before the draft can be cashed.
Such documents, together with small packets of sycee, make up a
tolerably valuable bag, and would often fall a prey to the highwaymen
which infest many of the provinces, but that most offices anticipate
these casualties by compounding for a certain annual sum which is paid
regularly to the leader of the gang. For this blackmail the robbers of
the district not only agree to abstain from pilfering themselves, but
also to keep all others from doing so too. The arrangement suits the
local officials admirably, as they escape those pains and penalties
which would be exacted if it came to be known that their rule was too
weak, and their example powerless to keep the district free from the
outrages of thieves and highwaymen. Large firms, which supply carts to
travellers between given points, are also often in the habit of
contracting with the brigands of the neighbourhood for the safe
passage of their customers. In some parts soldiers are told off by the
resident military officials to escort travellers who leave the inns
before daybreak, until there is enough light to secure them against
the dangers of a sudden attack. In others, there are bands of trained
men who hire themselves out in companies of three to five to convey a
string of carts with their dozen passengers across some dangerous part
of the country, where it is known that foot-pads are on the look-out
for unwary travellers. The escort consists of this small number only,
for the reason that each man composing it is supposed to be equal to
five or six robbers, not in mere strength, but in agility and
knowledge of sword-exercise. To accustom themselves to the attacks of
numbers, and to acquire the requisite skill in fighting more than one
adversary at a time, these men practise in the following remarkable
manner. In a lofty barn heavy bags of sand are hung in a circle by
long ropes to the roof, and in the middle of these the student takes
up his position. He then strikes one of the bags a good blow with his
fist, sending it flying to a distance from him, another in the same
way, then another, and so on until he has them all swinging about in
every possible direction. By the time he has hit two or three it is
time to look out for the return of the first, and sometimes two will
come down on him at once from opposite quarters; his part is to be
ready for all emergencies, and keep the whole lot swinging without
ever letting one touch him. If he fails in this, he must not aspire to
escort a traveller over a lonesome plain; and, besides, the ruthless
sand-bag will knock him head over heels into the bargain.




SLANG

Although native scholars in China have not deemed it worth while to
compile such a work as the "Slang Dictionary," it is no less a fact
that slang occupies quite as important a position in Chinese as in any
language of the West. Thieves have their _argot_, as with us,
intelligible only to each other; and phrases constantly occur, even in
refined conversation, the original of which can be traced infallibly
to the kennel. _Why so much paint?_ is the equivalent of _What a swell
you are!_ and is specially expressive in China, where beneath a
flowered blue silk robe there often peeps out a pair of
salmon-coloured inexpressibles of the same costly material. _They have
put down their barrows_, means that certain men have struck work, and
is peculiarly comprehensible in a country where so much transport is
effected in this laborious way. Barrows are common all over the
Empire, both for the conveyance of goods and passengers; and where
long distances have to be traversed, donkeys are frequently harnessed
in front. The traditional sail is also occasionally used: we ourselves
have seen barrows running before the wind between Tientsin and Taku,
of course with a man pushing behind. _The children have official
business_, is understood to mean they are laid up with the small-pox;
the metaphor implying that their _turn_ has come, just as a turn of
official duty comes round to every Manchu in Peking, and in the same
inevitable way. Vaccination is gradually dispelling this erroneous
notion, but the phrase we have given is not likely to disappear.

A magistrate who has _skinned the place clean_, has extorted every
possible cash from the district committed to his charge--a "father and
mother" of the people, as his grasping honour is called. _That horse
has a mane_, says the Chinese housebreaker, speaking of a wall well
studded at the top with pieces of broken glass or sharp iron spikes.
_You'll have to sprinkle so much water_, urges the friend who advises
you to keep clear of law, likening official greed to dust, which
requires a liberal outlay of water in the shape of banknotes to make
it lie. A _flowery bill_ is understood from one end of China to the
other as that particular kind in which our native servants delight to
indulge, namely, an account charging twice as much for everything as
was really paid, and containing twice as much in quantity as was
actually supplied. A _flowery suit_ is a case in which women play a
prominent part. _You scorched me yesterday_ is a quiet way of
remarking that an appointment was broken, and implying that the rays
of the sun were unpleasantly hot. _Don't pick out the sugar_ is a very
necessary injunction to a servant sent to market to buy food, &c., the
metaphor being taken from a kind of sweet dumpling consumed in great
quantities by rich and poor alike. Another phrase is, _Don't ride the
donkey_, which may be explained by the proverbial dislike of Chinamen
for walking exercise, and the temptation to hire a donkey, and squeeze
the fare out of the money given them for other purposes. _That house
is not clean inside_, signifies that devils and bogies, so dreaded by
the Chinese, have taken up their residence therein; in fact, that the
house is haunted. _He's all rice-water_, i.e., gives one plenty of the
water in which rice has been boiled, but none of the rice itself, is
said of a man who promises much and does nothing. _One load between
the two_ is very commonly said of two men who have married two
sisters. In China, a coolie's "load" consists of two baskets or
bundles slung with ropes to the end of a flat bamboo pole about five
feet in length, and thus carried across the shoulder. Hence the
expression. Apropos of marriage, _the guitar string is broken_, is an
elegant periphrasis by which it is understood that a man's wife is
dead, the verb "to die" being rarely used in conversation, and never
of a relative or friend. He will not _put a new string to his guitar_
is, of course, a continuation of the same idea, more coarsely
expressed as _putting on a new coat_. His father has been _gathered to
the west_--a phrase evidently of Buddhistic import--_is no more, has
gone for a stroll, has bid adieu to the world_, may all be employed to
supply the place of the tabooed verb, which is chiefly used of animals
and plants. After a few days' illness _he kicked_, is a vulgar way of
putting it and analogous to the English slang idiom. The Emperor
_becomes a guest on high_, riding up to heaven on the dragon's back,
with flowers of rhetoric ad nauseam; Buddhist priests _revolve into
emptiness_, i.e., are annihilated; the soul of the Taoist priest
_wings its flight away_.

_Only a candle-end left_ is said of an affair which nears completion;
_red_ and _white matters_ are marriages and deaths, so called from the
colour of the clothes worn on these important occasions. A blushing
person _fires up_, or literally, _ups fire_, according to the Chinese
idiom. To be fond of _blowing_ resembles our modern term _gassing_. A
_lose-money-goods_ is a daughter as compared with a son who can go out
in the world and earn money, whereas a daughter must be provided with
a dowry before any one will marry her. A more genuine metaphor is a
_thousand ounces of silver_; it expresses the real affection Chinese
parents have for their daughters as well as their sons. To _let the
dog out_ is the same as our letting the cat out; to _run against a
nail_ is allied to kicking against the pricks. A man of superficial
knowledge is called _half a bottle of vinegar_, though why vinegar, in
preference to anything else, we have not been able to discover. He has
always _got his gun in his hand_ is a reproach launched at the head of
some confirmed opium debauchee, one of those few reckless smokers to
whom opium is indeed a curse. They have _burnt paper together_, makes
it clear to a Chinese mind that the persons spoken of have gone
through the marriage service, part of which ceremony consists in
burning silver paper, made up to resemble lumps of the pure metal. _We
have split_ is one of those happy idioms which lose nothing in
translation, being word for word the same in both languages, and with
exactly the same meaning. _A crooked stick_ is a man whose
eccentricities keep people from associating freely with him; he won't
lie conveniently in a bundle with the other sticks.

We will bring this short sketch to a close with one more example,
valuable because it is old, because the date at which it came into
existence can be fixed with unerring certainty, and because it is
commonly used in all parts of China, though hardly one educated man in
ten would be able to tell the reason why. A jealous woman is said _to
drink vinegar_, and the origin of the term is as follows:--Fang
Hsuan-ling was the favourite Minister of the Emperor T'ai Tsung, of the
T'ang dynasty. He lived A.D. 578-648. One day his master gave him a
maid of honour from the palace as second wife, but the first or real
wife made the place too hot for the poor girl to live in. Fang
complained to the Emperor, who gave him a bowl of poison, telling him
to offer his troublesome wife the choice between death and peaceable
behaviour for the future. The lady instantly chose the former, and
drank up the bowl of _vinegar_, which the Emperor had substituted to
try her constancy. Subsequently, on his Majesty's recommendation, Fang
sent the young lady back to resume her duties as tire-woman to the
Empress. But the phrase lived, and has survived to this day.




FORTUNE-TELLING

Everybody who has frequented the narrow, dirty streets of a Chinese
town must be familiar with one figure, unusually striking where all is
novel and much is grotesque. It is that of an old man, occasionally
white-bearded, wearing a pair of enormous spectacles set in clumsy
rims of tortoiseshell or silver, and sitting before a small table on
which are displayed a few mysterious-looking tablets inscribed with
characters, paper, pencils, and ink. We are in the presence of a
fortune-teller, a seer, a soothsayer, a vates; or better, a quack who
trusts for his living partly to his own wits, and partly to the want
of them in the credulous numskulls who surround him. These men are
generally old, and sometimes blind. Youth stands but a poor chance
among a people who regard age and wisdom as synonymous terms; and it
seems to be a prevalent belief in China that those to whom everything
in the present is a sealed book, can for this very reason see deeper
and more clearly into the destinies of their fellows. It is not until
age has picked out the straggling beard with silver that the
vaticinations of the seer are likely to spread his reputation far
beyond the limits of the street in which he practises. Younger
competitors must be content to scrape together a precarious existence
by preying on the small fry which pass unheeded through the meshes of
the old man's net. Just as there is no medical diploma necessary for a
doctor in China, so any man may be a fortune-teller who likes to start
business in that particular line. The ranks are recruited generally
from unsuccessful candidates at the public examinations; but all that
is really necessary is the minimum of education, some months' study of
the art, and a good memory. For there really are certain principles
which guide every member of the fraternity. These are derived from
books written on the subject, and are absolutely essential to success,
or nativities cast in two different streets would be so unlike as to
expose the whole system at once. The method is this. A customer takes
his seat in front of the table and consults the wooden tablet on which
is engraved a scale of charges as follows:--

  Foretelling any single event  . . . . . . . .  8 cash
  Foretelling any single event with joss-stick, 16 cash
  Telling a fortune . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 cash
  Telling a fortune in detail . . . . . . . . . 50 cash
  Telling a fortune by reading the stars  . . . 50 cash
  Fixing the marriage day . . . . . . . According to agreement

In case he merely wants an answer on a given subject, he puts his
question and receives the reply at once on a slip of paper. But if he
desires to have his fortune told, he dictates the year, month, day,
and hour of his birth, which are written down by the sage in the
particular characters used by the Chinese to express times and
seasons. From the combinations of these and a careful estimate of the
proportions in which the five elements--gold, wood, water, fire, and
earth--make their appearance, certain results are deduced upon which
details may be grafted according to the fancy of the fortune-teller.
The same combinations of figures, i.e., characters, will always give
the same resultant in the hands of any one who has learned the first
principles of his art; it is only in the reading, the explanation
thereof, that any material difference can be detected between the
reckonings of any two of these philosophers, which amounts to saying
that whoever makes the greatest number of happy hits beyond the mere
technicalities common to all, is esteemed the wisest prophet and will
drive the most flourishing trade.

Fully believing in the Chinese household word which says "Ignorance of
any one thing is always one point to the bad," we have several times
read our destiny through the medium of some dirty old Chinaman. On the
last occasion we received the following advice in return for our 50
cash, paid as per tablet for a destiny in detail:--"Beware the odd
months of this year: you will meet with some dangers and slight
losses. Three male phoenixes (sons) will be accorded to you. Your
present lustrum is not a fortunate one; but it has nearly expired, and
better days are at hand. Fruit cannot thrive in the winter. (We had
placed our birthday in the 12th moon.) Conflicting elements oppose:
towards life's close prepare for trials. Wealth is beyond your grasp;
but nature has marked you out to fill a lofty place." How the above
was extracted from the eight characters which represented the year,
month, day, and hour of our birth, is made perfectly clear by a sum
showing every step in the working of the problem, though we must
confess it appeared to us a humbugging jumble, the most prominent part
of which was the answer. We found among other things that _earth_
predominated in the combination: hence our inability to grasp wealth.
_Water_ was happily deficient, and on this datum we were blessed in
anticipation with three sons, to say nothing of daughters.

And this is the sort of trash that is crammed down the throats of
China's too credulous children--the "babies," as the Mandarins are so
fond of calling them. For this rubbish they freely spend their
hard-earned wages, consulting some favourite prophet on most of their
domestic and other affairs with the utmost gravity and confidence. Few
Chinamen make a money venture without first applying to the oracle,
and certainly never marry without arranging a lucky day for the event.
Ignorance and credulity combine to support a numerous class of the
most consummate adepts in the art of swindling; the supply, however,
is not more than adequate to the demand, albeit they swarm in every
street and thoroughfare of a Chinese city.




GAMES AND GAMBLING

Chinamen suffer horribly from _ennui_--especially the first of the
four classes into which the non-official world has been subdivided.[*]
They have no rational amusements wherewith to fill up the intervals of
work. They hate physical exercise; more than that, they despise it as
fit only for the ignorant and low. Yet they have not supplied its
place with anything intellectual, and the most casual observer cannot
fail to notice that China has no national game. Fencing, rowing, and
cricket, are alike unknown; and archery, such as it is, claims the
attention chiefly of candidates for official honours. Within doors
they have chess, but it is not the game Europeans recognise by that
name, nor is it even worthy of being mentioned in the same breath.
There is also another game played with three hundred and sixty black
and white pips on a board containing three hundred and sixty-one
squares, but this is very difficult and known only to the few. It is
said to have been invented by His Majesty the Emperor Yao who lived
about two thousand three hundred and fifty years before Christ, so
that granting an error of a couple of thousand years or so, it is
still a very ancient pastime. Dominoes are known, but not much
patronised; cards, on the other hand, are very common, the favourite
games being those in which almost everything is left to chance. As to
open-air amusements, youths of the baser sort indulge in battledore
and shuttlecock without the battledore, and every resident in China
must have admired the skill with which the foot is used instead, at
this foot-shuttlecock game. Twirling heavy bars round the body, and
gymnastics generally, are practised by the coolie and horse-boy
classes; but the disciple of Confucius, who has already discovered how
"pleasant it is to learn with a constant perseverance and
application,"[+] would stare indeed if asked to lay aside for one
moment that dignified carriage on which so much stress has been laid
by the Master. Besides this, finger-nails an inch and a half long,
guarded with an elaborate silver sheath, are decidedly _impedimenta_
in the way of athletic success. No,--when the daily quantum of reading
has been achieved, a Chinese student has very little to fall back upon
in the way of amusement. He may take a stroll through the town and
look in at the shops, or seek out some friend as _ennuye_ as himself,
and while away an hour over a cup of tea and a pipe. Occasionally a
number of young men will join together and form a kind of literary
club, meeting at certain periods to read essays or poems on subjects
previously agreed upon by all. We heard of one youth who, burning for
the poet's laurel, produced the following quatrain on _snow_, which
had been chosen as the theme for the day:--

  The north-east wind blew clear and bright,
    Each hole was filled up smooth and flat:
  The black dog suddenly grew white,
    The white dog suddenly grew--

"And here," said the poet, "I broke down, not being able to get an
appropriate rhyme to _flat_." A wag who was present suggested _fat_,
pointing out that the dog's increased bulk by the snow falling on his
back fully justified the meaning, and, what is of equal importance in
Chinese poetry, the antithesis.

    [*] Namely, (1) the literati, (2) agriculturists, (3) artisans, and
    (4) merchants or tradesmen.

    [+] The first sentence of the Analects or Confucian Gospels.

Riddles and word-puzzles are largely used for the purpose of killing
time, the nature of the written language offering unlimited facilities
for the formation of the latter. Chinese riddles, by which term we
include conundrums, charades, _et hoc genus omne_, are similar to our
own, and occupy quite as large a space in the literature of the
country. They are generally in doggerel, of which the following may be
taken as a specimen, being like the last a word-for-word
translation:--

  Little boy red-jacket, whither away?
    To the house with the ivory portals I stray.
  Say will you come back, little red-coat, again?
    My bones will return, but my flesh will remain.

In the present instance the answer is so plain that it is almost
insulting to our readers to mention that it is "a cherry," but this is
by no means the case with all Chinese riddles, many being exceedingly
difficult of solution. So much so that it is customary all over the
Empire to copy out any particularly puzzling conundrum on a paper
lantern, and hang it in the evening at the street door, with the
promise of a reward to any comer who may succeed in unravelling it.
These are called "lamp riddles," and usually turn upon the name of
some tree, fruit, animal, or book, the direction in which the answer
is to be sought being usually specified as a clue.

Were it only in such innocent pastimes as these that the Chinese
indulged, we might praise the simplicity of their morals, and contrast
them favourably with the excitement of European life. But there is
just one more little solace for leisure, and too often business hours,
of which we have not yet spoken. Gambling is, of course, the
distraction to which we allude; a vice ten times more prevalent than
opium-smoking, and proportionately demoralising in its effect upon the
national character. In private life, there is always some stake
however small; take it away, and to a Chinaman the object of playing
any game goes too. In public, the very costermongers who hawk cakes
and fruit about the streets are invariably provided with some means
for determining by a resort to chance how much the purchaser shall
have for his money. Here, it is a bamboo tube full of sticks, with
numbers burnt into the concealed end, from which the customer draws;
at another stall dice are thrown into an earthenware bowl, and so on.
Every hungry coolie would rather take his chance of getting nothing at
all, with the prospect of perhaps obtaining three times his money's
worth, than buy a couple of sausage-rolls and satisfy his appetite in
the legitimate way. The worst feature of gambling in China is the
number of hells opened publicly under the very nose of the magistrate,
all of which drive a flourishing trade in spite of the frequent
_presents_ with which they are obliged to conciliate the venal
official whose duty it is to put them down. To such an extent is the
system carried that any remissness on the part of the keepers of these
dens in conveying a reasonable share of the profits to his honour's
treasury, is met by _a brutum fulmen_ in the shape of a proclamation,
setting forth how "it having come to my ears that, regardless of law,
and in the teeth of my frequent warnings, certain evil-disposed
persons have dared to open public gambling-houses, be it hereby made
known," &c., &c., the whole document being liberally interspersed with
allusions to the men of old, the laws of the reigning dynasty, and
filial piety _a discretion_. The upshot of this is that within
twenty-four hours after its appearance his honour's wrath is appeased,
and croupiers and gamblers go on in the same old round as if nothing
whatever had happened.




JURISPRUDENCE

Law,[*] as we understand the term, with all its paradoxes and
refinements, is utterly unknown to the Chinese, and it was absolutely
necessary to invent an equivalent for the word "barrister," simply
because no such expression was to be found ready-made in the language.
Further, it would be quite impossible to persuade even the most
enlightened native that the Bar is an honourable profession, and that
its members are men of the highest principles and integrity. They
cannot get it out of their heads that western lawyers must belong to
the same category as a certain disreputable class among themselves, to
be met with in every Chinese town of importance, and generally
residing in the vicinity of a magistrate's or judge's yamen. These
fellows are always ready to undertake for a small remuneration the
conduct of cases, in so far as they are able to do this by the
preparation of skilfully-worded petitions or counter-petitions, and by
otherwise giving their advice. Of course they do not appear in court,
for their very existence is forbidden, but their services are largely
availed of by the people, especially the poor and ignorant. At the
trial, prosecutor and accused must each manage his own case, the
magistrate himself doing all the cross-examination. We say
_prosecutor_ and _accused_ advisedly, for as a matter of fact civil
cases are rare in China, such questions as arise in the way of trade
being almost invariably referred to some leading guild, whose
arbitration is accepted without appeal. Now, we know of no such book
as "Laws of Evidence" in the whole range of Chinese literature; yet we
believe firmly that the intellects which adorn our own bench are not
more keen in discriminating truth from falsehood, and detecting at a
glance the corrupt witness, than the semi-civilised native functionary
--that is, when no silver influences have been brought to bear upon
his judgment. The Chinese have a penal code which, allowing for the
difference in national customs and habits of thought, stands almost
unrivalled; and with this solitary work their legal literature begins
and ends. It is regarded by the people as an inspired book, though few
know much beyond the title, and seems to answer its purpose well.

    [*] Civil law.

But inasmuch as in China as elsewhere _summum jus_ is not infrequently
_summa injuria_, a clever magistrate never hesitates to set aside law
or custom, and deal out Solomonic justice with an unsparing hand,
provided always he can shew that his course is one which _reason_
infallibly dictates. Such an officer wins golden opinions from the
people, and his departure from the neighbourhood is usually signalised
by the presentation of the much-coveted testimonial umbrella. In the
reign of the last Emperor but one, less than twenty years ago, there
was an official of this stamp employed as "second Prefect" in the
department of Han-yang. Many and wonderful are the stories told of his
unerring acumen, and his memory is still fondly cherished by all who
knew him in his days of power. We will quote one from among numerous
traditions of his genius which have survived to the present day.

A poor man, passing through one of the back thoroughfares in Hankow,
came upon a Tls. 50[*] note lying in the road and payable to bearer.
His first impulse was to cash it, but reflecting that the sum was
large and that the loser might be driven in despair to commit suicide,
the consequences of which might be that he himself would perhaps get
into trouble, he determined to wait on the spot for the owner and rest
content with the "thanks money" he was entitled by Chinese custom to
claim as a right. Very shortly he saw a stranger approaching, with his
eyes bent on the ground, evidently in search of something; whereupon
he made up to him and asked at once if anything was the matter.
Explanations followed, and the Tls. 50 note was restored to its lawful
possessor, who, recovering himself instantaneously, asked where the
other one was, and went on to say that he had lost _two_ notes of the
same value, and that on recovery of the other one he would reward the
finder as he deserved, but that unless that was also forthcoming he
should be too great a loser as it was. His benefactor was protesting
strongly against this ungenerous behaviour when the "second Prefect"
happened to come round the corner, who, seeing there was a row,
stopped his chair, and inquired there and then into the merits of the
case. The result was that he took the Tls. 50 note and presented it to
the honest finder, telling him to go on his way rejoicing; while,
turning to the ungrateful loser, he sternly bade him wait till he met
some one who had found _two_ notes of that value, and from him
endeavour to recover his lost property.

    [*] Fifty taels, equal to about 15 pounds.




JURISPRUDENCE, NO. II

From the previous sketch it may readily be gathered that the state of
Chinese law, both civil[*] and criminal, is a very important item in
the sum of those obstacles which bar so effectually the admission of
China--not into the cold and uncongenial atmosphere euphuistically
known as the "comity of nations"--but into closer ties of
international intercourse and friendship on a free and equal footing.
For as long as we have ex-territorial rights, and are compelled to
avail ourselves thereof, we can regard the Chinese nation only _de
haut en bas_; while, on the other hand, our very presence under such,
to them abnormal conditions, will continue to be neither more or less
than a humiliating eye-sore. Till foreigners in China can look with
confidence for an equitable administration of justice on the part of
the mandarins, we fear that even science, with all its resources, will
be powerless to do more than pave the way for that wished-for moment
when China and the West will shake hands over all the defeats
sustained by the one, and all the insults offered to the other.

    [*] That is, local custom.

It is in the happily unfrequent cases of homicide where a native and a
foreigner play the principal parts, that certain discrepancies between
Chinese and Western law, rules of procedure and evidence, besides
several other minor points, stand out in the boldest and most
irreconcilable relief. To begin with, the Penal Code and all its
modifications of murder, answering in some respects to our distinction
between murder and manslaughter, is but little known to the people at
large. Nay, the very officials who administer these laws are generally
as grossly ignorant of them as it is possible to be, and in every
judge's yamen in the Empire there are one or two "law experts," who
are always prepared to give chapter and verse at a moment's
notice,--in fact, to guide the judge in delivering a proper verdict,
and one such as must meet with the approbation of his superiors. The
people, on the other hand, know but one leading principle in cases of
murder--a life for a life. Under extenuating circumstances cases of
homicide are compromised frequently enough by money payments, but if
the relatives should steadily refuse to forego their revenge, few
officials would risk their own position by failing to fix the guilt
somewhere. As a rule, it is not difficult to obtain the conviction and
capital punishment of any native, or his substitute, who has murdered
a foreigner, and we might succeed equally well in many instances of
justifiable homicide or manslaughter: it is when the case is reversed
that we call down upon our devoted heads all the indignation of the
Celestial Empire. Of course any European who could be proved to have
murdered a native would be hanged for it; but he may kill him in
self-defence or by accident, in both of which instances the Chinese
would clamour for the extreme penalty of the law. Further, _hearsay_
is evidence in a Chinese court of justice, and if several witnesses
appeared who could only say that some one else told them that the
accused had committed the murder, it would go just as far to
strangling or beheading him, as if they had said they saw the deed
themselves. The accused is, moreover, not only allowed to criminate
himself, but no case being complete without a full confession on the
part of the guilty man, torture might be brought into play to extort
from him the necessary acknowledgment. It is plain, therefore, that
Chinese officials prosecuting on behalf of their injured countrymen,
are quite at sea in an English court, and their case often falling
through for want of proper evidence, they return home cursing the
injustice done to them by the hated barbarians, and longing for the
day which will dawn upon their extermination from the Flowery Land.

On the other hand, the examination of Chinese witnesses, either in a
civil or criminal case, is one of the most trying tests to which the
forbearance of foreign officials is exposed in all the length and
breadth of their intercourse with the slippery denizens of the middle
kingdom. Leaving out of the question the extreme difficulty of the
language, now gradually yielding to methodical and persevering study,
the peculiar bent of the Chinese mind, with all its prejudices and
superstitions, is quite as much an obstacle in the way of eliciting
truth as any offered by the fantastic, but still amenable, varieties
of Chinese syntax. We believe that native officials have the power,
though it does not always harmonise with their interests to exercise
it, of arriving at as just and equitable decisions in the majority of
cases brought before them, as any English magistrate who knows
"Taylor's Law of Evidence" from beginning to end. They accomplish this
by a knowledge of character, unparalleled perhaps in any country on
the globe, which enables them to distinguish readily, and without such
constant recourse to torture as is generally supposed, between the
false and honest witness. The study of mankind in China is, beyond all
doubt--man and his motives for action on every possible occasion, and
under every possible condition. Thus it is, we may remark, that the
Chinese fail to appreciate the efforts made for their good by
missionaries and others, because the motives of such a course are
utterly beyond the reach of native investigation and thought. They are
consequently suspicious of the Greeks--_et dona ferentes_. The
self-denial of missionaries who come out to China to all the hardships
of Oriental life--though, as a facetious writer in the _Shanghai
Courier_ lately remarked, they live in the best houses, and seem to
lead as jolly lives as anybody else out here--to say nothing of
gratuitous medical advice and the free distribution of all kinds of
medicine--all this is entirely incomprehensible to the narrow mind of
the calculating native. Their observations have been confined to
the characters and habits of thought which distinguish their
fellow-countrymen, and with the result above-mentioned; of the
European mind they know absolutely nothing.

As regards the evidence of Chinese taken in a foreign court of
justice, the first difficulty consists generally in swearing the
witnesses. Old books on China, which told great lies without much
danger of conviction, mention cock-killing and saucer-breaking as
among the most binding forms of Chinese oaths. The common formula,
however, which we consider should be adopted in preference to any
hybrid expression invented for the occasion, is an invocation to
heaven and earth to listen to the statements about to be made, and to
punish the witness for any deviation from the truth. This is sensible
enough, and is moreover not without weight among a superstitious
people like the Chinese. The witness then expects the magistrate to
ask him the name of his native district, his own name, his age, the
age of his father and mother (if alive), the maiden name of his wife,
her age, the number and the ages of his children, and many more
questions of similar relevancy and importance, before a single effort
is made towards eliciting any one fact bearing upon the subject under
investigation. With a stereotyped people like the Chinese, it does not
do to ignore these trifles of form and custom; on the contrary, the
witness should rather be allowed to wander at will through such
useless details until he has collected his scattered thoughts, and may
be safely coaxed on to divulge something which partakes more of the
nature of evidence. Under proper treatment, a Chinese witness is by no
means doggedly stubborn or doltishly stupid; he may be either or both
if he has previously been tampered with by native officials, but even
then it is not absolutely impossible to defeat his dishonesty.
Occasionally a question will be put by a foreigner to an
unsophisticated boor, never dreamt of in the philosophy of the latter,
and such as would never have fallen from the lips of one of his own
officials; the answers given under such circumstances are usually
unique of their kind. We know of an instance where a boatman was
asked, in reference to a collision case, at what rate he thought the
tide was running. The witness hesitated, looked up, down, on either
side, and behind him; finally he replied:--"I am a poor boatman; I
only earn one hundred and fifty cash a day, and how can you expect me
to know at what rate the tide was running?"




BUDDHIST PRIESTS

There are few more loathsome types of character either in the East or
West than the Buddhist priest of China. He is an object of contempt to
the educated among his countrymen, not only as one who has shirked the
cares and responsibilities to which all flesh is heir, but as a
misguided outcast who has voluntarily resigned the glorious title and
privileges of that divinely-gifted being represented by the symbol
_man_. With his own hands he has severed the five sacred ties which
distinguish him from the brute creation, in the hope of some day
attaining what is to most Chinamen a very doubtful immortality. Paying
no taxes and rendering no assistance in the administration of the
Empire, his duty to his sovereign is incomplete. Marrying no wife, his
affinity, the complement of his earthly existence, sinks into a
virgin's grave. Rearing no children, his troubled spirit meets after
death with the same neglect and the same absence of cherished rites
which cast a shadow upon his parents' tomb. Renouncing all fraternal
ties, he deprives himself of the consolation and support of a
brother's love. Detaching himself from the world and its vanities,
friendship spreads its charms for him in vain. Thus he is in no
Chinese sense a man. He has no name, and is frequently shocked by some
western tyro in Chinese who, thinking to pay the everyday compliment
bandied between Chinamen, asks to his intense disgust--"What is your
honourable name?" The unfortunate priest has substituted a "religious
designation" for the patronymic he discarded when parents, brethren,
home, and friends were cast into oblivion at the door of the temple.

But it is not on such mere sentimental grounds that the Chinese nation
has condemned in this wholesale manner the clergy of China. Did the
latter carry out even to a limited extent their vows of celibacy and
Pythagorean principles of diet, they would probably obtain a fair
share of that questionable respect which is meted out to enthusiasts
in most countries on the globe. The Chinese hate them as double-dyed
hypocrites who extort money from the poor and ignorant, work upon the
fears of, and frequently corrupt, their wives or daughters; proclaim
in bold characters at the gates of each temple--"no meat or wine may
enter here"--while all the time they dine off their favourite pork as
often as most Chinamen, and smoke or drink themselves into a state of
beastly intoxication a great deal more so. Opium pipes are to be found
as frequently as not among the effects of these sainted men, who, with
all the abundant leisure at their command, are rarely of sufficient
education to be mentioned in the same breath with an ordinary
graduate. Occasionally there have been exceptions to the rule, but the
phenomenon is seldom met with in modern times. We have read of a lame
old priest so renowned for self-denying liberality that the great
Emperor Ch'ien Lung actually paid him a visit. After some conversation
Ch'ien Lung presented him with a valuable pearl, which the old man
immediately bestowed upon a beggar he espied among the crowd. His
Majesty was somewhat taken aback at this act of rudeness, and asked
him if he always gave away everything in the same manner. On receiving
an affirmative reply, the Emperor added, "Even down to the crutch on
which you lean?" "Ah," said the priest, "it is written that the
superior man does not covet what his friend cannot spare." "But
supposing," said the Emperor, "he was not a superior man." "In that
case," answered the priest, "you could not expect me to be his
friend."

Cleanliness, again, is an especial attribute of Buddhism, and in a few
temples in the south there is an attempt to make some show in this
direction; but as regards the person, priests are dirtier if anything
than the humblest members of their flock. It is laughable indeed to
hear them chant the _Ching_, ignorant as ninety-nine per cent. are of
every word they are saying, for of late the study of Sanskrit has been
utterly and entirely neglected. Their duties, however, in this respect
are as much curtailed as possible, except when wafting with their
prayers some spirit of the dead to the realms of bliss above. In such
cases it is a matter of business, a question of money; and the
unctuous air of solemn faith they then put on contrasts curiously with
the bored and sleepy look apparent on their faces as they gabble
through a midnight mass, in the presence of some such limited and
unimportant audience as a single and perhaps a red-haired barbarian.

It is pleasant to dismiss from our thoughts this lying, shameless,
debauched class; and we do so, wondering how Buddhism has retained its
hold so long over an intellectual people possessed of an elaborate
moral code, which has been for centuries the acknowledged standard of
right and wrong, and which condemns all fear or hope of an unknown and
unseen world.




RESPECT FOR THE WRITTEN CHARACTER

One of the most curious and harmless customs of the Chinese is that of
carefully burning every scrap of paper inscribed with the cherished
characters which, as far as calligraphy goes, justly take precedence
of those of any other language on the globe. Not content with mere
reduction by fire, a conscientious Chinaman will collect the ashes
thus produced, and sealing them up in some earthen vessel, will bury
them deep in the earth or sink them to the bottom of a river. Then
only does he consider that he has fully discharged his duty towards
paper which has by mere accident become as sacred in the eyes of all
good men as the most precious relic of any martyred saint in the
estimation of a Catholic priest. Rich men are constantly in the habit
of paying _chiffoniers_ to collect such remnants of written paper as
they may find lying about the streets, and in all Chinese towns there
are receptacles at the most frequented points where the results of
their labours may be burned. The above facts are pretty generally
known to foreigners in China and elsewhere, but we do not think that
native ideas on the subject have ever been brought forward otherwise
than indirectly. We therefore give the translation of a short essay
published in 1870 by an enthusiastic scholar, and distributed gratis
among his erring countrymen:--

  "From of old down to the present time our sages have devoted
  themselves to the written character--that fairest jewel in heaven
  above or earth beneath. Those, therefore, who are stimulated by a
  thirst for _fame_, strive to attain their end by the excellency of
  their compositions; others, attracted by desire for wealth, pursue
  their object with the help of day-book and ledgers. In both cases
  men would be helpless without a knowledge of the art of writing.
  How, indeed, could despatches be composed, agreements drawn up,
  letters exchanged, and genealogies recorded, but for the
  assistance of the written character? By what means would a man
  chronicle the glory of his ancestors, indite the marriage deed, or
  comfort anxious parents when exiled to a distant land? In what way
  could he secure property to his sons and grandchildren, borrow or
  lend money, enter into partnership, or divide a patrimony, but
  with the testimony of written documents? The very labourer in the
  fields, tenant of a few acres, must have his rights guaranteed in
  black and white; and household servants require more than verbal
  assurance that their wages will not fail to be paid. The
  prescription of the physician, about to call back some suffering
  patient from the gates of death, is taken down with pen and ink;
  and the prognostication of the soothsayer, warning men of evil or
  predicting good fortune, exemplifies in another direction the use
  of the written character. In a word, the art of writing enriches
  and ennobles man, hands him over to life or death, confers upon
  him honours and distinctions, or covers him with abuse and shame.

  "Of late, however, our schools have turned out an arrogant and
  ignorant lot--boys who venture to use old books for wrapping
  parcels or papering windows, for boiling water, or wiping the
  table; boys, I say, who scribble over their books, who write
  characters on wall or door, who chew up the drafts of their poems,
  or throw them away on the ground. Let all such be severely
  punished by their masters that they may be saved, while there is
  yet time, from the wrath of an avenging Heaven. Some men use old
  pawn-tickets for wrapping up things--it may be a cabbage or a
  pound of bean-curd. Others use lottery-tickets of various
  descriptions for wrapping up a picked vegetable or a slice of
  pork, with no thought of the crime they are committing as long as
  there is a cash to be made or saved. So also there are those who
  exchange their old books for pumeloes or ground-nuts, to be
  defiled with the filth of the waste-paper basket, and passed from
  hand to hand like the cheques of the barbarian. Alas, too, for
  women when they go to fairs, for children who are sent to market!
  They cannot read one single character: they know not the priceless
  value of written paper. They drop the wrapping of a parcel in the
  mire for every passer-by to tread under foot. Their crime,
  however, will be laid at the door of those who erred in the first
  instance (i.e., those who sold their old books to the
  shopkeepers). For they hoped to squeeze some profit, infinitesimal
  indeed, out of tattered or incomplete volumes; forgetting in their
  greed that they were dishonouring the sages, and laying up for
  themselves certain calamity. Why then sacrifice so much for such
  trifling gain? How much better a due observance of time-honoured
  custom, ensuring as it would a flow of prosperity continuous and
  everlasting as the waves of the sea! O ye merchants and
  shopkeepers, know that in heaven as on earth written words are
  esteemed precious as the jade, and whatever is marked therewith
  must not be cast aside like stones and tiles. For happiness,
  wealth, honours, distinctions, and old age, may be one and all
  secured by a proper respect for written paper."




SUPERSTITION

Educated Chinamen loudly disclaim any participation in the
superstitious beliefs which, to a European eye, hang like a dark cloud
over an otherwise intellectually free people. There never has been a
State religion in China, and it has always been open to every man to
believe and practise as much or as little as he likes of Buddhism,
Taoism, or Mahomedanism, without legal interference or social stigma
of any kind. Of course it is understood that such observances must be
purely self-regarding, and that directly they assume--as lately in the
case of Mahomedanism--anything of a political character, the Chinese
Government is not slow to protect the unity of the Empire by the best
means in its power. And so, but for the suicidal zeal of Christian
missions and their supporters, who have effected an unnatural
amalgamation of religion and politics, and carried the Bible into
China at the point of the bayonet, the same toleration might now be
accorded to Christianity which the propagators of other religions have
hitherto been permitted to enjoy.

As to religion in China, it is only of the ethics of Confucius that
the State takes any real cognizance. His is what John Stuart Mill
alluded to as "the best wisdom they possess;" and, as he further
observed, the Chinese have secured "that those who have appropriated
most of it shall occupy the posts of honour and power." His maxims are
entirely devoid of the superstitious element. He recognises a
principle of right beyond the ken of man; but though he once said that
this principle was conscious of his existence and his work on earth,
it never entered his head to endow it with anything like retributory
powers. Allusions to an unseen world were received by him with scorn;
and as regards a future state, he has preserved a most discreet
silence. "While you do not know life, how can you know about death?"
was the rebuke he administered to a disciple who urged some utterance
on the problem of most interest to mankind. And yet, in spite of the
extreme healthiness of Confucian ethics, there has grown up, around
both the political and social life of the Chinese, such a tangled maze
of superstition, that it is no wonder if all intellectual advancement
has been first checked, and has then utterly succumbed. The ruling
classes have availed themselves of its irresistible power to give them
a firmer hold over their simple-hearted, credulous subjects; they have
practised it in its grossest forms, and have written volumes in
support of absurdities in which they cannot really have the slightest
faith themselves. It was only a year or two ago that the most powerful
man in China, a distinguished scholar, statesman, and general,
prostrated himself before a diminutive water-snake, in the hope that
by humble intercession with the God of Floods he might bring about a
respite from the cruel miseries which had been caused by inundations
over a wide area of the province of Chihli. The suppliant was no other
than the celebrated Viceroy, Lu Hung-chang, who has recently armed the
forts at the mouth and on the banks of the Peiho with Krupp's best
guns, instead of trusting, as would be consistent, the issue of a
future war to the supernatural efforts of some Chinese Mars.

Turning now to the literature of China, we cannot but be astonished at
the mass of novels which are one and all of the same tendency; in
fact, not only throughout the entire stratum of Chinese fiction, but
even in that of the gravest philosophical speculations, has the
miraculous been introduced as a natural and necessary element. The
following passage, taken from the writings of Han Wen-kung, whose name
has been pronounced to be "one of the most venerated," is a fair
specimen of the trash to be met with at every turn in that trackless,
treeless desert, which for want of a more appropriate term we are
obliged to call the literature of China:--

  "There are some things which possess form but are devoid of sound,
  as for instance jade and stones; others have sound but are without
  form, such as wind and thunder; others again have both form and
  sound, such as men and animals; and lastly, there is a class
  devoid of both, namely, _devils and spirits_."

Descending to the harmless superstition of domestic life, we find that
the cat washing her face is not, as with us, a sign of rain, but that
a stranger is coming. On the other hand, "strangers" in tea portend,
as with us, the arrival of some unlooked-for guest, tall or short, fat
or lean, according to the relative proportions of the prophetic twig.
Aching corns denote the approach of wet weather--we do not quote this
as a superstition--and for a girl to spill water on fowls or dogs will
ensure a downpour of rain on her wedding-day. Any one who hears a crow
caw should shatter his teeth three times and blow; and two brooms
together will bring joy and sorrow at the same time, as a birth and a
death on the same day. "Crows' feet" on the face are called "fishes'
tails," and in young men mean what the widower's peak is supposed to
signify with us.

Superstition is China's worst enemy--a shadow which only the pure
light of science will be able to dispel. There are many amongst us who
would give her more: but they will not succeed.




NATURAL PHENOMENA

It is a question of more than ordinary interest to those who regard
the Chinese people as a worthy object of study, What are the
speculations of the working and uneducated classes concerning such
natural phenomena as it is quite impossible for them to ignore? Their
theory of eclipses is well known, foreign ears being periodically
stunned by the gonging of an excited crowd of natives, who are
endeavouring with hideous noises to prevent some imaginary dog of
colossal proportions from banqueting, as the case may be, upon the sun
or moon. At such laughable exhibitions of native ignorance it will be
observed that there is always a fair sprinkling of well-to-do,
educated persons, who not only ought to know better themselves, but
should be making some effort to enlighten their less fortunate
countrymen instead of joining in the din. Such a hold, however, as
superstition on the minds of the best informed in a Chinese community,
that under the influence of any real or supposed danger, philosophy
and Confucius are scattered to the four winds of Heaven, and the
proudest disciple of the Master proves himself after all but a man.

Leaving the literati to take care of themselves, and confining our
attention to the good-tempered, joyous, hospitable working-classes of
China, we find many curious beliefs on subjects familiar among western
nations to every national school-boy. The earth, for instance, is
popularly believed to be square; and the heavens a kind of shell or
covering, studded with stars and revolving round the earth. We
remember once when out of sight of land calling the notice of our
native valet to the masts of a vessel sinking below the horizon. We
pointed out to him that were the earth a perfectly flat surface its
disappearance would not be so comparatively sudden, nor would the ship
appear to sink. But at the last moment, when we felt that conviction
was entering into his soul and that another convert had been made to
the great cause of scientific truth, he calmly replied that it was
written--"Heaven is round, earth is square," and he didn't very well
understand how books could be wrong!

The sun is generally supposed to pass at sunset into the earth, and to
come out next morning at the other side. The moon is supposed to rise
from and set in the ocean. Earthquakes are held to result from
explosions of sulphur in the heart of the earth; rain is said to be
poured down by the Dragon God who usually resides on the other side of
the clouds, and the rainbow is believed to be formed by the breath of
an enormous oyster which lives somewhere in the middle of the sea, far
away from land. Comets and eclipses of the sun are looked upon as
special warnings to the throne, and it is usual for some distinguished
censor to memorialise the Emperor accordingly. The most curious
perhaps of all these popular superstitions are those which refer to
thunder, lightning, and hail, regarded in China as the visitation of
an angry and offended god. In the first place it is supposed that
people are struck by thunder and not by lightning--a belief which was
probably once prevalent in England, as evidenced by the English word
_thunderstruck_. Sir Philip Sydney writes:--"I remained as a man
thunder-stricken." Secondly, death by thunder is regarded as a
punishment for some secret crime committed against human or divine
law, and consequently a man who is not conscious of anything of the
kind faces the elements without fear. Away behind the clouds during a
storm or typhoon sit the God of Thunder armed with his terrible bolts,
and the Goddess of Lightning, holding in her hand a dazzling mirror.
With this last she throws a flash of lightning over the guilty man
that the God of Thunder may see to strike his victim; the pealing
crash which follows is caused by the passage through the air of the
invisible shaft--and the wrongs of Heaven are avenged. Similarly, hail
is looked upon as an instrument of punishment in the hands of the Hail
God, directed only against the crops and possessions of such mortals
as have by their wicked actions exposed themselves to the slow but
certain visitation of divine vengeance.

Each province, nay, each town, has its own particular set of
superstitions on a variety of subjects; the above, however, dealing
with the most important of all natural phenomena, will be found common
to every village and household in the Chinese Empire. The childlike
faith with which such quaint notions are accepted by the people at
large is only equalled by the untiring care with which they are
fostered by the ruling classes, who are well aware of their value in
the government of an excitable people. The Emperor himself prays loud
and long for rain, fine weather, or snow, according as either may be
needed by the suffering crops, and never leaves off until the elements
answer his prayers. But here we are ridiculing a phase of superstition
from which nations with greater advantages than China are not yet
wholly free.




CELEBRATION OF THE NEW YEAR

China New Year!--What a suggestive ring have those three words for
"the foreigner in far Cathay."[*] What visions do they conjure up of
ill-served tiffins, of wages forestalled, of petty thefts and
perhaps a burglary; what thoughts of horrid tom-toms and ruthless
fire-crackers, making day hideous as well as night; what apparitions of
gaudily-dressed butlers and smug-faced coolies, their rear brought up
by man's natural enemy in China--the cook, for once in his life clean,
and holding in approved Confucian style[+] some poisonous indigestible
present he calls a cake!

    [*] The title of Mr Medhurst's work.

    [+] "In presenting gifts, his countenance wore a placid appearance."--
    Analects: ch. x.

New Year's Day is the one great annual event in Chinese social and
political life. An Imperial birthday, even an Imperial marriage, pales
before the important hour at which all sublunary affairs are supposed
to start afresh, every account balanced and every debt paid. About ten
days previously the administration of public business is nominally
suspended; offices are closed, official seals carefully wrapped up and
given into the safe keeping of His Honour's or His Excellency's
wife.[*] The holidays last one month, and during that time inaction is
the order of the day, it being forbidden to punish criminals, or even
to stamp, and consequently to write, a despatch on any subject
whatever. The dangerous results, however, that might ensue from a too
liberal observance of the latter prohibition are nearly anticipated by
stamping beforehand a number of blank sheets of paper, so that, if
occasion requires, a communication may be forwarded without delay and
without committing an actual breach of law or custom.

    [*] A universal custom which may be quoted with countless others
    against the degradation-of-women-in-China doctrine.

The New Year is the season of presents. Closely-packed boxes of
Chinese cake, biscuits, and crystallised fruit, are presented as
tributes of respect to the patriarchs of the family; grapes from
Shansi or Shan-tung, hams from Foochow, and lichees from Canton, all
form fitting vehicles for a declaration of friendship or of love. Now,
too, the birthday gifts offered by every official in the Empire to his
immediate superior, are supplemented by further propitiatory
sacrifices to the powers that be, without which tenure of office would
be at once troublesome and insecure. Such are known as _dry_, in
contradistinction to the _water_ presents exchanged between relatives
and friends. The latter are wholly, or at any rate in part, articles
of food prized among the Chinese for their delicacy or rarity, perhaps
both; and so to all appearance are the baskets of choice oranges, &c.,
sent for instance by a District Magistrate with compliments of the
season to His Excellency the Provincial Judge. But the Magistrate and
the Judge know better, for beneath that smiling fruit lie concealed
certain bank-notes or shoes of silver of unimpeachable touch, which
form a unit in the sum of that functionary's income, and enable him in
his turn to ingratiate himself with the all-powerful Viceroy, while he
lays by from year to year a comfortable provision against the time
when sickness or old age may compel him to resign both the duties and
privileges of government.

To "all between the four seas," patrician and plebeian[*] alike, the
New Year is a period of much intensity. On the 23rd or 24th of the
preceding moon it is the duty of every family to bid farewell to the
Spirit of the Hearth, and to return thanks for the protection
vouchsafed during the past year to each member of the household. The
Spirit is about to make his annual journey to heaven, and lest aught
of the disclosures he might make should entail unpleasant
consequences, it is adjudged best that he shall be rendered incapable
of making any disclosures at all. With this view, quantities of a very
sticky sweetmeat are prepared and presented as it were in sacrifice,
on eating which the unwary god finds his lips tightly glued together,
and himself unable to utter a single syllable. Beans are also offered
as fodder for the horse on which he is supposed to ride. On the last
day of the old year he returns and is regaled to his heart's content
on brown sugar and vegetables. This is the time _par excellence_ for
cracker-firing, though, as everybody knows, these abominations begin
some days previously. Every one, however, may not be aware that the
object of letting off these crackers is to rid the place of all the
evil spirits that may have collected together during the twelve months
just over, so that the influences of the young year may be
uncontaminated by their presence. New Year's eve is no season for
sleep: in fact, Chinamen almost think it obligatory on a respectable
son of Han to sit up all night. Indeed, unless his bills are paid, he
would have a poor chance of sleeping even if he wished. His
persevering creditor would not leave his side, but would sit there
threatening and pleading by turns until he got his money or effected a
compromise. Even should it be past twelve o'clock, the wretched debtor
cannot call it New Year's Day until his unwelcome dun has made it so
by blowing out the candle in his lantern. Of course there are
exceptions, but as a rule all accounts in China are squared up before
the old year has become a matter of history and the new year reigns in
its stead. Then, with the first streaks of dawn, begins that incessant
round of visits which is such a distinguishing feature of the whole
proceedings. Dressed out in his very best, official hat and boots,
button and peacock's feather, if lucky enough to possess them,[+]
every individual Chinaman in the Empire goes off to call on all his
relatives and friends. With a thick wad of cards, he presents himself
first at the houses of the elder branches of the family, or visits the
friends of his father; when all the seniors have been disposed of, he
seeks out his own particular cronies, of his own age and standing. If
in the service of his country, he does not omit to call at the yamen
and leave some trifling souvenir of his visit for the officer
immediately in authority over him. Wherever he goes he is always
offered something to eat, a fresh supply of cakes, fruit, and wine,
being brought in for each guest as he arrives. While thus engaged his
father, or perhaps brother, will be doing the honours at home, ready
to take their turn as occasion may serve. "New joy, new joy; get rich,
get rich," is the equivalent of our "Happy New Year," and is bandied
about from mouth to mouth at this festive season, until petty
distinctions of nationality and creed vanish before the conviction
that, at least in matters of sentiment, Chinamen and Europeans meet
upon common ground. Yet there is one solitary exception to the
rule--an unfortunate being whom no one wishes to see prosperous, and
whom nobody greets with the pleasant phrase, "Get rich, get rich." It
is the coffin-maker.

    [*] Chinese society is divided into two classes--officials and
    non-officials.

    [+] No matter whether by merit or by purchase.




THE FEAST OF LANTERNS

A great Chinese festival is the Feast of Lanterns, one which is only
second in importance to New Year's Day. Its name is not unfamiliar
even to persons in England who have never visited China, and whose
ideas about the country are limited to a confused jumble of pigtails,
birds'-nest soup, and the _kotow_. Its advent may or may not be
noticed by residents in China; though if they know the date on which
it falls, we imagine that is about as much as is generally known by
foreigners of the Feast of Lanterns.

This festival dates from the time of the Han dynasty, or, in round
numbers, about two thousand years ago. Originally it was a ceremonial
worship in the temple of the First Cause, and lasted from the 13th to
the 16th of the first moon, bringing to a close on the latter date all
the rejoicings, feastings, and visitings consequent upon the New Year.
In those early days it had no claim to its present title, for lanterns
were not used; pious supplicants performed their various acts of
prayer and sacrifice by the light of the full round moon alone. It was
not till some eight hundred years later that art came to the
assistance of nature, and the custom was introduced of illuminating
the streets with many a festoon of those gaudy paper lanterns, without
which now no nocturnal fete is thought complete. Another three hundred
years passed away without change, and then two more days were added to
the duration of the carnival, making it six days in all. For this it
was necessary to obtain the Imperial sanction, and such was ultimately
granted to a man named Ch'ien, in consideration of an equivalent
which, as history hints, might be very readily expressed in taels. The
whole thing now lasts from the 13th of the moon, the day on which it
is customary to light up for the first time, to the 18th inclusive,
when all the fun and jollity is over and the serious business of life
begins anew. The 15th is the great time, work of every kind being as
entirely suspended as it is with us on Christmas Day. At night the
candles are lighted in the lanterns, and crackers are fired in every
direction. The streets are thronged with gaping crowds, and cut-purses
make small fortunes with little or no trouble. There being no
policemen in a Chinese mob, and as the cry of "stop thief" would meet
with no response from the bystanders, a thief has simply to look out
for some simple victim, snatch perhaps his pipe from his hand, or his
pouch from his girdle, and elbow his way off as fast as he can go.

Plenty of lights and plenty of joss-stick would be enough of
themselves to make up a festival for Chinamen; in the present instance
there should be an extra abundance of both, though for reasons not
generally known to uneducated natives. Ask a coolie why he lights
candles and burns joss-stick at the Feast of Lanterns, and he will
probably be unable to reply. The idea is that the spirits of one's
ancestors choose this occasion to come back _dulces revisere natos_,
and that in their honour the hearth should be somewhat more swept and
garnished than usual. Therefore they consume bundle upon bundle of
well-scented joss-stick, that the noses of the spirits may run no risk
of being offended by mundane smells. Candles are lighted, that these
disembodied beings may be able to see their way about; and their sense
of the beautiful is consulted by a tasteful arrangement of the pretty
lamps in which the dirty Chinese dips are concealed. Worship on this
occasion is tolerably promiscuous; the Spirit of the Hearth generally
comes in for his share, and Heaven and Earth are seldom left out in
the cold. One very important part of the fun consists in eating
largely of a kind of cake prepared especially for the occasion. Sugar,
or some sweet mince-meat, is wrapped up in snow-white rice flour until
about the size of a small hen's egg, only perfectly round, and these
are eaten by hundreds in every household. Their shape is typical of a
complete family gathering, for every Chinaman makes an effort to spend
the Feast of Lanterns at home.

Under the mournful circumstances of the late Emperor's death, the 15th
of the 1st Chinese moon was this year (1875) hardly distinguishable
from any other day since the rod of empire passed from the hands of a
boy to those of a baby. No festivities were possible; it was of course
unlawful to hang lamps in any profusion, and all Chinamen have been
prohibited by Imperial edict from wearing their best clothes. The
utmost any one could do in the way of enjoyment was to gorge himself
with the rice-flour balls above-mentioned, and look forward to gayer
times when the days of mourning shall be over.




OPIUM SMOKING

Many writers on Chinese topics delight to dwell upon the slow but sure
destruction of morals, manners, and men, which is being gradually
effected throughout the Empire by the terrible agency of opium.
Harrowing pictures are drawn of once well-to-do and happy districts
which have been reduced to know the miseries of disease and poverty by
indulgence in the fatal drug. The plague itself could not decimate so
quickly, or war leave half the desolation in its track, as we are told
is the immediate result of forgetting for a few short moments the
cares of life in the enjoyment of a pipe of opium. To such an extent
is this language used, that strangers arriving in China expect to see
nothing less than the stern reality of all the horrors they have heard
described; and they are astonished at the busy, noisy sight of a
Chinese town, the contented, peaceful look of China's villagers, and
the rich crops which are so readily yielded to her husbandmen by many
an acre of incomparable soil. Where, then, is this scourge of which
men speak? Evidently not in the highways, the haunts of commerce, or
in the quiet repose of far-off agricultural hamlets. Bent on search,
and probably determined to discover something, our seeker after truth
is finally conducted to an opium den, one of those miserable hells
upon earth common to every large city on the globe. Here he beholds
the vice in all its hideousness; the gambler, the thief, the beggar,
and such outcasts from the social circle, meet here to worship the god
who grants a short nepenthe from suffering and woe. This, then, is
China, and travellers' tales are but too true. A great nation has
fallen a prey to the insidious drug, and her utter annihilation is but
an affair of time!

We confess, however, we have looked for these signs in vain; but our
patience has been rewarded by the elucidation of facts which have led
us to brighter conclusions than those so generally accepted. We have
not judged China as a nation from the inspection of a few low
opium-shops, or from the half dozen extreme cases of which we may have
been personally cognizant, or which we may have gleaned from the
reports of medical missionaries in charge of hospitals for native
patients. We do not deny that opium is a curse, in so far as a large
number of persons would be better off without it; but comparing its
use as a stimulant with that of alcoholic liquors in the West, we are
bound to admit that the comparison is very much to the disadvantage of
the latter. Where opium kills its hundreds, gin counts its victims by
thousands; and the appalling scenes of drunkenness so common to a
European city are of the rarest occurrence in China. In a country
where the power of corporal punishments is placed by law in the hands
of the husband, wife-beating is unknown; and in a country where an
ardent spirit can be supplied to the people at a low price, _delirium
tremens_ is an untranslateable term. Who ever sees in China a tipsy
man reeling about a crowded thoroughfare, or lying with his head in a
ditch by the side of some country road? The Chinese people are
naturally sober, peaceful, and industrious; they fly from
intoxicating, quarrelsome samshoo, to the more congenial opium-pipe,
which soothes the weary brain, induces sleep, and invigorates the
tired body.

In point of fact, we have failed to find but a tithe of that real vice
which cuts short so many brilliant careers among men who, with all the
advantages of education and refinement, are euphemistically spoken of
as addicted to the habit of "lifting their little fingers." Few
Chinamen seem really to love wine, and opium, by its very price, is
beyond the reach of the blue-coated masses. In some parts, especially
in Formosa, a great quantity is smoked by the well-paid chair-coolies,
to enable them to perform the prodigies of endurance so often required
of them. Two of these fellows will carry an ordinary Chinaman, with
his box of clothes, thirty miles in from eight to ten hours on the
hottest days in summer. They travel between five and six miles an
hour, and on coming to a stage, pass without a moment's delay to the
place where food and opium are awaiting their arrival. After smoking
their allowance and snatching as much rest as the traveller will
permit, they start once more upon the road; and the occupant of the
chair cannot fail to perceive the lightness and elasticity of their
tread, as compared with the dull, tired gait of half an hour before.
They die early, of course; but we have trades in civilised England in
which a man thirty-six years of age is pointed at as a patriarch.

It is also commonly stated that a man who has once begun opium can
never leave it off. This is an entire fallacy. There is a certain
point up to which a smoker may go with impunity, and beyond which he
becomes a lost man in so far as he is unable ever to give up the
practice. Chinamen ask if an opium-smoker has the _yin_ or not;
meaning thereby, has he gradually increased his doses of opium until
he has established a _craving_ for the drug, or is he still a free man
to give it up without endangering his health. Hundreds and thousands
stop short of the _yin_; a few, leaving it far behind them in their
suicidal career, hurry on to premature old age and death. Further,
from one point of view, opium-smoking is a more self-regarding vice
than drunkenness, which entails gout and other evils upon the third
and fourth generation. Posterity can suffer little or nothing at the
hands of the opium-smoker, for to the inveterate smoker all chance of
posterity is denied. This very important result will always act as an
efficient check upon an inordinately extensive use of the drug in
China, where children are regarded as the greatest treasures life has
to give, and blessed is he that has his quiver full.

Indulgence in opium is, moreover, supposed to blunt the moral feelings
of those who indulge; and to a certain extent this is true. If your
servant smokes opium, dismiss him with as little compunction as you
would a drunken coachman; for he can no longer be trusted. His wages
being probably insufficient to supply him with his pipe and leave a
balance for family expenses, he will be driven to squeeze more than
usual, and probably to steal. But to get rid of a writer or a clerk
merely because he is a smoker, however moderate, would be much the
same as dismissing an employe for the heinous offence of drinking two
glasses of beer and a glass of sherry at his dinner-time. An
opium-smoker may be a man of exemplary habits, never even fuddled,
still less stupefied. He may take his pipe because he likes it, or
because it agrees with him; but it does not follow that he must
necessarily make himself, even for the time being, incapable of doing
business. Wine and moonlight were formerly considered indispensables
by Chinese bards; without them, no inspiration, no poetic fire. The
modern poetaster who pens a chaste ode to his mistress's eyebrow,
seeks in the opium-pipe that flow of burning thoughts which his
forefathers drained from the wine-cup. We cannot see that he does
wrong. We believe firmly that a moderate use of the drug is attended
with no dangerous results; and that moderation in all kinds of eating,
drinking, and smoking, is just as common a virtue in China as in
England or anywhere else.[*]

    [*] Sir Edmund Hornley, after nine years' service as chief judge of
    the Supreme Court at Shanghai, delivered an opinion on the anti-
    opium movement in the following remarkable terms:--"Of all the
    nonsense that is talked, there is none greater than that talked
    here and in England about the immorality and impiety of the opium
    trade. It is simply sickening. I have no sympathy with it, neither
    have I any sympathy with the owner of a gin-palace; but as long as
    China permits the growth of opium throughout the length and
    breadth of the land, taxes it, and pockets a large revenue from
    it,--sympathy with her on the subject is simply ludicrous and
    misplaced."--(J. W. Walker v. Malcolm, 28th April 1875.)

    But the following extract from a letter to the _London and China
    Express_, of 5th July 1875, part of which we have ventured to
    reproduce in italics, surpasses, both in fiction and naivete,
    anything it has ever been our lot to read on either side of this
    much-vexed question:--"The fact is, that this tremendous evil is
    utterly beyond the control of politicians, or even
    philanthropists. Nothing but the divine power of Christian life
    can cope with it, and though this process may be slow, it is sure.
    Christian missions alone can deal with the opium traffic, now that
    it has attained such gigantic dimensions, and the despised
    missionaries are solving a problem which to statesmen is
    insoluble. Those, therefore, who recognise the evils of opium-
    smoking will most effectually stay the plague _by supporting
    Christian Protestant Missions in China_.--Yours faithfully,

    "An Old Residenter in China.

    "London, June 28, 1875."




THIEVING

Nowhere can the monotony of exile be more advantageously relieved by
studying dense masses of humanity under novel aspects than in China,
where so much is still unknown, and where the bulk of which is
generally looked upon as fact requires in most cases a leavening
element of truth, in others nothing more nor less than flat
contradiction. The days are gone by for entertaining romances
published as if they were _bona fide_ books of travel, and the opening
of China has enabled residents to smile at the audacity of the too
mendacious Huc. It has enabled them at the same time to view millions
of human beings working out the problem of existence under conditions
which by many persons in England are deemed to be totally incompatible
with the happiness of the human race. They behold all classes in China
labouring seven days in every week, taking holidays as each may
consider expedient with regard both to health and means, but without
the mental and physical demoralisation supposed to be inseparable from
a non-observance of the fourth commandment. They see the unrestricted
sale of spirituous liquors, unaccompanied by the scenes of brutality
and violence which form such a striking contrast to the intellectual
advancement of our age. They notice that charity has no place among
the virtues of the people, and that nobody gives away a cent he could
possibly manage to keep; the apparent result being that every one
recognises the necessity of working for himself, and that the
mendicants of a large Chinese city would barely fill the casual ward
of one of our smallest workhouses. They have a chance of studying a
competitive system many hundred years old, with the certainty of
concluding that, whatever may be its fate in England or elsewhere, it
secures for the government of China the best qualified and most
intelligent men. Amongst other points, the alleged thievishness of the
Chinese is well worth a few moments' consideration, were it only out
of justice to the victims of what we personally consider to be a very
mischievous assertion. For it is a not uncommon saying, even among
Europeans who have lived in China, that the Chinese are a nation of
thieves. In Australia, in California, and in India, Chinamen have
beaten their more luxurious rivals by the noiseless but irresistible
competition of temperance, industry, and thrift: yet they are a nation
of thieves. It becomes then an interesting question how far a low tone
of morality on such an important point is compatible with the
undisputed practice of virtues which have made the fortunes of so many
emigrating Celestials. Now, as regards the amount of theft daily
perpetrated in China, we have been able to form a rough estimate, by
very careful inquiries, as to the number of cases brought periodically
before the notice of a district magistrate or his deputies, and we
have come to a conclusion unfavourable in the extreme to western
civilisation, which has not hesitated to dub China a nation of
thieves. We have taken into consideration the fact that many petty
cases never come into court in China, which, had the offence been
committed in England, would assuredly have been brought to the notice
of a magistrate. We have not forgotten that more robberies are
probably effected in China without detection than in a country where
the police is a well-organised force, and detectives trained men and
keen. We know that in China many cases of theft are compromised, by
the stolen property being restored to its owner on payment of a
certain sum, which is fixed and shared in by the native constable who
acts as middleman between the two parties, and we are fully aware that
under circumstances of hunger or famine, and within due limits, the
abstraction of anything in the shape of food is not considered theft.
With all these considerations in mind, our statistics (save the mark!)
would still compare most favourably with the records of theft
committed over an area in England equal in size and population to that
whence our information was derived. The above refers specially to
professional practice, but when we descend to private life, and view
with an impartial eye the pilfering propensities of servants in China,
we shall have even less cause to rejoice over our boasted morality and
civilisation. In the first place, squeezing of masters by servants is
a recognised system among the Chinese, and is never looked upon in the
light of robbery. It is _commission_ on the purchase of goods, and is
taken into consideration by the servant when seeking a new situation.
Wages are in consequence low; sometimes, as in the case of official
runners and constables, servants have to make their living as best
they can out of the various litigants, very often taking bribes from
both parties. As far as slight raids upon wine, handkerchiefs, English
bacon, or other such luxuries dear to the heart of the Celestial, we
might ask any one who has ever kept house in England if pilfering is
quite unknown among servants there. If it were strictly true that
Chinamen are such thieves as we make them out to be, with our eastern
habits of carelessness and dependence, life in China would be next to
impossible. As it is, people hire servants of whom they know
absolutely nothing, put them in charge of a whole house many rooms in
which are full of tempting kickshaws, go away for a trip to a port
five or six hundred miles distant, and come back to find everything in
its place down to the most utter trifles. Merchants as a rule have
their servants _secured_ by some substantial man, but many do not take
this precaution, for an honest Chinaman usually carries his integrity
written in his face. Confucius gave a wise piece of advice when he
said, "If you employ a man, be not suspicious of him; if you are
suspicious of a man, do not employ him"--and truly foreigners in China
seem to carry out the first half to an almost absurd degree, placing
the most unbounded confidence in natives with whose antecedents they
are almost always unacquainted, and whose very names in nine cases out
of ten they actually do not know! And what is the result of all this?
A few cash extra charged as commission on anything purchased at
shop or market, and a steady consumption of about four dozen
pocket-handkerchiefs per annum. Thefts there are, and always will be,
in China as elsewhere; but there are no better grounds for believing
that the Chinese are a nation of thieves than that their own tradition
is literally true which says, "In the glorious days of old, if
anything was seen lying in the road, nobody would pick it up!" On the
contrary, we believe that theft is not one whit more common in China
than it is in England; and we are fully convinced that the imputation
of being a nation of thieves has been cast, with many others, upon the
Chinese by unscrupulous persons whose business it is to show that
China will never advance without the renovating influence of
Christianity-an opinion from which we here express our most
unqualified dissent.




LYING

We have stated our conviction that the Chinese as a nation are not
more addicted to thieving than the inhabitants of many countries for
whom the same excuses are by no means so available. That no
undiscerning persons may be led to regard us as panegyrists of a
stationary civilisation, we hasten to counterbalance our somewhat
laudatory statements by the enunciation of another proposition less
startling, but if anything more literally true. _The Chinese are a
nation of liars._ If innate ideas were possible, the idea of lying
would form the foundation of the Chinese mind. They lie by instinct;
at any rate, they lie from imitation, and improve their powers in this
respect by the most assiduous practice. They seem to prefer lying to
speaking the truth, even when there is no stake at issue; and as for
shame at being found out, the very feeling is unfamiliar to them. The
gravest and most serious works in Chinese literature abound in lies;
their histories lie; and their scientific works lie. Nothing in China
seems to have escaped this taint.

Essentially a people of fiction, the Chinese have given up as much
time to the composition and perusal of romances as any other nation on
the globe; and this phase of lying is harmless enough in its way.
Neither can it be said to interfere with the happiness of foreigners
either in or out of China that Chinese medical, astrological,
geomantic, and such works, pretend to a knowledge of mysteries we know
to be all humbug. On the other hand, they ought to keep their lying to
themselves and for their own special amusement. They have no right to
circulate written and verbal reports that foreigners dig out babies'
eyes and use them in their pharmacopoeia. They have no right to
publish such hideous, loathsome pamphlets, as the one which was some
years ago translated into too faithful English by an American
missionary, who had better have kept his talents to himself, or to
post such inflammatory placards as the one which is placed at the end
of this volume. Self-glorification, when no one suffers therefrom, is
only laughable; and we shall take the liberty of presenting here the
translation of an article which appeared in the _Shun Pao_ of the 19th
September 1874, as a specimen of the manner in which Chinamen delight
to deceive even themselves on certain little points connected with the
honour and glory of China. The writer says:--

  "I saw yesterday in the _Peking Gazette_ of the 10th September
  1874 that the Prince of Kung had been degraded,--a fact received
  with mingled feelings of surprise and regret by natives of the
  Middle and Western kingdoms alike. For looking back to the last
  year of the reign Hsien Feng, we find that not only internal
  trouble had not been set at rest when external difficulties began
  to spring up around us, and war and battle were the order of the
  day. To crown all, His Majesty became a guest in the realm above,
  leaving only a child of tender years, unable to hold in his hands
  the reins of government. Then, with our ruler a youth and affairs
  generally in an unsettled state, sedition within and war without,
  although their Majesties the Empresses-Dowager directed the
  administration of government from behind the bamboo screen, the
  task of wielding the rod of empire must have been arduous indeed.
  Since that time, ten years and more, the Eighteen Provinces have
  been tranquillised; without, _western nations have yielded
  obedience and returned to a state of peace_; within, the empire
  has been fixed on a firm basis and has recovered its former
  vitality. Never, even in the glorious ages of the Chou or Hsia
  dynasties, has our national prosperity been so boundless as it is
  to-day. Whenever I have seen one among the people patting his
  stomach or carolling away in the exuberance of his joy, and have
  asked the cause of his satisfaction, he has replied, 'It is
  because of the loving-kindness of this our dynasty.' I ask what
  and whence is this loving-kindness of which he speaks? He answers
  me, 'It is the beneficent rule of their Majesties the Empresses-
  Dowager; it is the unspeakable felicity vouchsafed by Heaven to
  the Emperor; it is the loyalty and virtue of those in high places,
  of Tseng Kuo-fan, of Li Hung-chang, of Tso Tsung-t'ang.' These,
  however, are all provincial officials. Within the palace we have
  the Empresses-Dowager, and His Majesty the Emperor, toiling away
  from morn till dewy eve; but among the ministers of state who
  transact business, receiving and making known the Imperial will,
  working early and late in the Cabinet, the Prince of Kung takes
  the foremost place; and it is through his agency, as natives and
  foreigners well know, that for many years China has been regaining
  her old status, so that any praise of their Imperial Majesties
  leads naturally on to eulogistic mention of our noble Premier.
  Hearing now that the Prince has incurred his master's displeasure,
  there are none who do not fear lest his previous services may be
  overlooked, hoping at the same time that the Emperor will be
  graciously pleased to take them into consideration and cancel his
  present punishment."

Lying, under any circumstances, is a very venial offence in China; it
is, in fact, no offence at all, for everybody is prepared for lies
from all quarters, and takes them as a matter of course.

It is strange, however, that such a practical people should not have
discovered long ago the mere expediency of telling the truth, in the
same way that they have found mercantile honesty to be unquestionably
the best policy, and that trade is next to impossible without it. But
to argue, as many do, that China is wanting in morality, because she
has adopted a different standard of right and wrong from our own, is,
_mutato nomine_, one of the most ridiculous traits in the character of
the Chinese themselves. They regard us as culpable in the highest
degree because our young men choose their own partners, marry, and set
up establishments for themselves, instead of bringing their wives to
tend their aged parents, and live all together in harmony beneath the
paternal roof. We are superior to the Chinese in our utter abhorrence
of falsehood: in the practice of filial piety they beat us out of the
field. "Spartan virtue" is a household word amongst us, but Sparta's
claims to pre-eminence certainly do not rest upon her children's love
either for honesty or for truth. The profoundest thinker of the
nineteenth century has said that insufficient truthfulness "does more
than any one thing that can be named to keep back civilisation,
virtue, everything on which human happiness, on the largest scale,
depends"--an abstract proposition which cannot be too carefully
studied in connection with the present state of public morality in
China, and the general welfare of the people. Dr Legge, however, whose
logical are apparently in an inverse ratio to his linguistic powers,
rushes wildly into the concrete, and declares that every falsehood
told in China may be traced to the example of Confucius himself. He
acknowledges that "many sayings might be quoted from him, in which
'sincerity' is celebrated as highly and demanded as stringently as
ever it has been by any Christian moralist," yet, on the strength of
two passages in the Analects, and another in the "Family Sayings," he
does not hesitate to say that "the example of him to whom they bow
down as the best and wisest of men, encourages them to act, to
dissemble, to sin." And what are these passages? In the first,
Confucius applauds the modesty of an officer who, after boldly
bringing up the rear on the occasion of a retreat, refused all praise
for his gallant behaviour, attributing his position rather to the
slowness of his horse. In the second, an unwelcome visitor calling on
Confucius, the Master sent out to say he was sick, at the same time
seizing his harpsichord and singing to it, "in order that Pei might
hear him." Dr Legge lays no stress on the last half of this
story--though it is impossible to believe that its meaning can have
escaped his notice altogether. Lastly, when Confucius was once taken
prisoner by the rebels, he was released on condition of not proceeding
to Wei. "Thither, notwithstanding, he continued his route," and when
asked by a disciple whether it was right to violate his oath, he
replied, "It was a forced oath. The spirits do not hear such."

We shall not attempt to defend Confucius on either of these
indictments, taken separately and without reference to his life and
teachings; neither do we wish to temper the accusations we ourselves
have made against the Chinese, of being a nation of liars. But when it
is gravely asserted that the great teacher who made truthfulness and
sincerity his daily texts, is alone responsible for a vicious national
habit which, for aught any one knows to the contrary, may be a growth
of comparatively modern times, we call to mind the Horatian poetaster,
who began his account of the Trojan war with the fable of Leda and the
swan.




SUICIDE

Suicide, condemned among western nations by human and divine laws
alike, is regarded by the Chinese with very different eyes. Posthumous
honours are even in some cases bestowed upon the victim, where death
was met in a worthy cause. Such would be suicide from grief at the
loss of a beloved parent, or from fear of being forced to break a vow
of eternal celibacy or widowhood. Candidates are for the most part
women, but the ordinary Chinaman occasionally indulges in suicide,
urged by one or other of two potent causes. Either he cannot pay his
debts and dreads the evil hour at the New Year, when coarse-tongued
creditors will throng his door, or he may himself be anxious to settle
a long-standing score of revenge against some one who has been
unfortunate enough to do him an injury. For this purpose he commits
suicide, it may be in the very house of his enemy, but at any rate in
such a manner as will be sure to implicate him and bring him under the
lash of the law. Nor is this difficult to effect in a country where
the ends of justice are not satisfied unless a life is given for a
life, where magistrates are venal, and the laws of evidence lax.
Occasionally a young wife is driven to commit suicide by the harshness
of her mother-in-law, but this is of rare occurrence, as the
consequences are terrible to the family of the guilty woman. The blood
relatives of the deceased repair to the chamber of death, and in the
injured victim's hand they place a broom. They then support the corpse
round the room, making its dead arm move the broom from side to side,
and thus sweep away wealth, happiness, and longevity from the accursed
house for ever.

The following extract from the _Peking Gazette_ of 14th September
1874, being a memorial by the Lieutenant Governor of Kiangsi, will
serve to show--though in this case the act was not consummated--that
under certain circumstances suicide is considered deserving of the
highest praise. In any case, public opinion in China has every little
to say against it:--

  "The magistrate of the Hsin-yu district has reported to me that in
  the second year of the present reign (1863) a young lady, the
  daughter of a petty official, was betrothed to the son of
  an expectant commissioner of the Salt Gabelle, and a day was fixed
  upon for the marriage. The bridegroom, however, fell ill and died,
  on which his _fiancee_ would have gone over to the family to see
  after his interment, and remain there for life as an unmarried
  wife. As it was, her mother would not allow her to do so, but
  beguiled her into waiting till her father, then away on business,
  should return home. Meanwhile, the old lady betrothed her to
  another man belonging to a different family, whereupon she took
  poison and nearly died. On being restored by medical aid, she
  refused food altogether; and it was not until she was permitted to
  carry out her first intentions that she would take nourishment at
  all. Since then she has lived with her father and mother-in-law,
  tending them and her late husband's grandmother with the utmost
  care. They love her dearly, and are thus in a great measure
  consoled for the loss of their son. Long thorns serve her for
  hair-pins;[*] her dress is of cotton cloth; her food consists of
  bitter herbs. Such privations she voluntarily accepts, and among
  her relatives there is not one but respects her.

  "The truth of the above report having been ascertained, I would
  humbly recommend this virtuous lady, although the full time
  prescribed by law has not yet expired,[+] for some mark[:] of Your
  Majesty's approbation." Rescript:--Granted!

    [*] Instead of the elaborate gold and silver ornaments usually worn by
    Chinese women.

    [+] A woman must be a widow before she is thirty years old, and remain
    so for thirty years before she is entitled to the above reward.
    This is both to guard against a possible relapse from her former
    virtuous resolution, and to have some grounds for believing that
    she was prompted so to act more by a sense of right than by any
    ungallant neglect on the part of the other sex.

    [:] Generally a tablet or banner, inscribed with well-chosen words of
    praise.

The only strange part in this memorial is that the girl's mother was
not censured for trying to prevent her from acting the part of a
virtuous wife and filial daughter-in-law. It is also more than
probable that her early attempts at suicide, rather than any
subsequent household economy or dutiful behaviour, have secured for
this lady the coveted mark of Imperial approbation.

Suicide, while in an unsound state of mind, is rare; insanity itself,
whether temporary or permanent, being extremely uncommon in China.
Neither does the eye detect any of the vast asylums so numerous in
England for the reception of lunatics, idiots, deaf-mutes, cripples,
and the blind. There are a few such institutions here and there, but
not enough to constitute a national feature as with us. They are only
for the poorest of the poor, and are generally of more benefit to
dishonest managers than to anybody else. And yet in the streets of a
Chinese town we see a far less number of "unfortunates" than among our
own highly civilised communities. Blindness is the most common of the
above afflictions, so many losing their sight after an attack of
small-pox. But a Chinaman with a malformation of any kind is very
seldom seen; and, as we have said before, lunacy appears to be almost
unknown. Such suicides as take place are usually well-premeditated
acts, and are committed either out of revenge, or in obedience to the
"despotism of custom." Statistics are impossible, and we offer our
conclusions, founded upon observation alone, subject to whatever
correction more scientific investigators may hereafter be enabled to
produce.




TORTURE

Torture is commonly supposed to be practised by Chinese officials upon
each and every occasion that a troublesome criminal is brought before
them. The known necessity they are under of having a prisoner's
confession before any "case" is considered complete, coupled with some
few isolated instances of unusual barbarity which have come to the
notice of foreigners, has probably tended to foster a belief that such
scenes of brutality are daily enacted throughout the length and
breadth of China as would harrow up the soul of any but a soulless
native. The curious part of it all is that Chinamen themselves regard
their laws as the quintessence of leniency, and themselves as the
mildest and most gentle people of all that the sun shines upon in his
daily journey across the earth--and back again under the sea. The
truth lies of course somewhere between these two extremes. For just as
people going up a mountain complain to those they meet coming down of
the bitter cold, and are assured by the latter that the temperature is
really excessively pleasant--so, from a western point of view certain
Chinese customs savour of a cruelty long since forgotten in Europe,
while the Chinese enthusiast proudly compares the penal code of this
the Great Pure dynasty with the scattered laws and unauthorised
atrocities of distant and less civilised ages.

The Han dynasty which lasted from about B.C. 200 to A.D. 200 has been
marked by the historian as the epoch of change. Before that time
punishments of all kinds appear to have been terribly severe, and the
vengeance of the law pursued even the nearest and most distant
relatives of a criminal devoted perhaps to death for some crime in
which they could possibly have had no participation. It was then
determined that in future only rebellion should entail extirpation
upon the families of such seditious offenders, and at the same time
legal punishments were limited to five, viz.: bambooing of two degrees
of severity, banishment to a certain distance for a certain time or
for life, and death. These were, however, frequently exceeded by
independent officers against whose acts it would have been vain to
appeal, and it was not until the Sui dynasty (589-618 A.D.) that
mutilation of the body was absolutely forbidden. It may, indeed, be
said to have survived to the present day in the form of the "lingering
death" which is occasionally prescribed for parricides and matricides,
but that we now know that this hideous fate exists only in words and
form. When it was first held to be inconsistent with reason to mete
out the same punishment to a highway robber who kills a traveller for
his purse, and to the villain who takes away life from the author of
his being, a distinction was instituted accordingly, but we can only
rest in astonishment that any executioner could be found to put such a
horrible law into execution as was devised to meet the requirements of
the case. First an arm was chopped off, then the other; the two legs
in the same way. Two slits were made transversely on the breast, and
the heart was torn out; decapitation finished the proceedings. Now, a
slight gash only is made across each collar-bone, and three gashes
across the breast in the shape of the character meaning _one
thousand_, and indicative of the number of strokes the criminal ought
properly to have received. Decapitation then follows without delay.
The absurd statement in the Shanghai _Daily News_ of the 16th January
last, that this punishment "is the most frightful inflicted, even in
any of the darkest habitations of cruelty, at the present day," is
utterly unworthy of that respectable journal, but only of a piece with
the general ignorance that prevails among foreigners generally on
topics connected with China and the Chinese. At the same time, it may
fairly be pleaded that the error in question was due to
disingenuousness on the part of the translator from the _Peking
Gazette_ who, mentioning that such a sentence had been lately passed
upon two unhappy beings, adds that, "they have been publicly sliced to
death accordingly, with the usual formalities,"--which certainly might
lead a mere outsider to conclude that the horrible decree had actually
been put into execution. We may notice in passing that this so-called
"lingering death" is now almost invariably coupled with the name of
some poor lunatic who in a frenzy of passion has killed either father
or mother, sometimes both. Vide _Peking Gazette_, two or three times
every year. This is one of those pleasant fictions of Chinese official
life, which every one knows and every one winks at. In nine cases out
of ten, the unhappy criminal is not mad at all; but he is always
entered as such in the report of the committing magistrate, who would
otherwise himself be exposed to censure and degradation for not having
brought his district to estimate at their right value the five[*]
cardinal relationships of mankind.

    [*] Between, (1) sovereign and subject, (2) husband and wife, (3)
    parent and child, (4) brothers, and (5) friends.

Under the present dynasty the use of torture is comparatively rare,
and mutilation of the person quite unknown. Criminals are often thrust
into filthy dungeons of the most revolting description, and are there
further secured by a chain; but except in very flagrant cases,
ankle-beating and finger-squeezing, to say nothing of kneeling on
chains and hanging up by the ears, belong rather to the past than to
the present. The wife and children of a rebel chief may pass their
days in peace and quietness; innocent people are no longer made to
suffer with the guilty. A criminal under sentence of death for any
crime except rebellion may save his life and be released from further
punishment, if he can prove that an aged parent depends upon him for
the necessaries of daily existence. The heavy bamboo, under the
infliction of which sufferers not uncommonly died, has given place to
the lighter instrument of punishment, which may be used severely
enough for all practical purposes while it does not endanger life. The
Emperor K'ang Hsi, whose name is inseparably connected with one of the
most valuable lexicons that have ever been compiled, forbade bambooing
across the upper part of the back and shoulders. "Near the surface,"
said this benign father of his people, "lie the liver and the lungs.
For some trivial offence a man might be so punished that these organs
would never recover from the effects of the blows." The ruling system
of bribery has taken away from the bamboo its few remaining terrors
for those whose means are sufficient to influence the hand which lays
it on. Petty offences are chiefly expiated by a small payment of money
to the gaoler, who lets the avenging bamboo fall proportionately
light, or assists the culprit by every means in his power to shirk the
degradation and annoyance of a week in the cangue.[*] These two are
the only ordinary punishments we hear much about; torture, properly so
called, is permitted under certain circumstances, but rarely if ever
practised.

    [*] A heavy wooden collar, taken off at night only if the sentence is
    a long one, or on payment of a bribe.

In further support of this most heterodox position, we beg to offer a
translation of two chapters from "Advice to Government Officials," a
native work of much repute all over the Empire:--

"CHAPTER V.

  "The infliction of the bamboo is open to abuse in various ways.
  For instance, the knots in the wood may not have been smoothed
  off; blows may be given inside the joints, instead of above the
  knees; the tip end instead of the flat of the bamboo may be used;
  each stroke may be accompanied by a drawing movement of the hand,
  or the same spot may be struck again after the skin has been
  broken, whereby the suffering of the criminal is very much
  increased. Similarly, the 'squeezing' punishment depends entirely
  for its severity on the length of the sticks employed, whether
  these are wet or dry, as well as upon the tightness of the string.
  Such points should be carefully looked to by the magistrate
  himself, and not left to his subordinates. At the time of
  infliction still greater precautions should be taken to prevent
  the possibility of any accident, and where the offence was
  committed under venial circumstances, some part of the punishment
  may be remitted if it is considered that enough has already been
  inflicted. Such punishments as pressing the knees to the ground,
  making prisoners kneel on chains, or burning their legs with hot
  irons, adopted under the specious pretence of not using the
  'squeezing' torture, are among the most barbarous of prohibited
  practices, and are on no account to be allowed."

"CHAPTER VI.

  "Lu Hsin-wu says, There are five classes of people who must be
  exempted from the punishment of the bamboo. (1) The aged. (2) The
  young. (3) The sick. [It is laid down expressly by statute that
  the aged and the young must not be thus coerced into giving
  evidence, but there is a danger of overlooking this in a moment of
  anger.] (4) The hungry and naked. [For thus to punish a beggar
  half dead with cold and hunger and destitute of friends to nurse
  him afterwards, would be equivalent to killing him outright.] (5)
  Those who have already been beaten. [Whether in a brawl or by
  other officials. A second beating might result in death for which
  the presiding magistrate would be responsible.]

  "There are five classes of people not to be hastily sentenced to
  the bamboo. (1) Members of the Imperial family. [The relatives of
  his Majesty, even though holding no rank, are not, says the
  statute, to be hastily punished in this way. The case must be laid
  before the proper authorities.] (2) Officials. [However low down
  in a scale, they are still part of the scheme of government;
  besides, it affects their good name ever afterwards.] (3)
  Graduates. (4) The official servants of your superiors. [Look out
  for the vase when you throw at the rat. Though you may be actually
  in the right, yet the dignity of your superiors might be
  compromised. A plain statement of the facts should be made out and
  privately handed to the official in question, leaving punishment
  in his hands. But to refrain from such a course through fear of
  the consequences would be weak indeed.] (5) Women.

  "There are also five cases in which temporary suspension of
  punishment is necessary. (1) When the prisoner is under the
  influence of excitement, or (2) anger. [The working classes are an
  obstinate lot and beating only increases their passion, so that
  they would die rather than yield. Arguments should first be used
  to show them their error, and then corporal punishment may be used
  without fear.] (3) Or drink. [A drunken man doesn't know heaven
  from earth, how can he be expected to distinguish right from
  wrong? Besides he feels no pain, and further there is a risk of
  his insulting the magistrate. He ought to be confined until he is
  sober and then punished; but not in a cold place for fear of
  endangering his life.] (4) Or when a man has just completed a
  journey, or (5) when he is out of breath with running.

  "There are also five instances in which it is well for your own
  sake to put off punishment for a time. (1) When you are in a rage.
  (2) When you are drunk. (3) When you are unwell. [For in the
  latter case the system is heated, and not only would you be more
  liable to improper infliction of punishment, but also to lose your
  temper; and thus injury would be done both to yourself and the
  prisoner.] (4) When you can't see your way clearly as to the facts
  of the case. (5) When you can't make up your mind as to the proper
  punishment. [For in difficult cases and when the prisoner in
  question is no ordinary man, it is just as well to look forward a
  little as to how the case is likely to end before you apply the
  bamboo. It would never do to take such measures without some
  consideration, or you might suddenly find that you had by no means
  heard the last of it.]

  "There are three classes of people who should not be beaten in
  addition to what they are to suffer. (1) Those who are to have
  their fingers squeezed. (2) Those who are to have the ankle frame
  applied. (3) Those who are to be exposed in the cangue. [For if
  previously beaten they might be almost unable to move, or their
  sores might not heal, and death might perhaps ensue. The statute
  provides that they shall be beaten on release, but this might
  easily be forgotten in a moment of anger.]

  "There are three instances in which compassion should save the
  prisoners from the bamboo. (1) When the weather is extremely cold
  or hot. (2) When a festival is being celebrated. (3) When the
  prisoner has lately been bereaved. [A man who is mourning for his
  father, mother, wife, or child, should not be punished
  corporeally; it might endanger his life.]

  "There are three cases in which a beating deserved should
  nevertheless be remitted. (1) When one of the litigants is
  considerably older than the other, he should not be beaten. (2)
  When one of the litigants is an official servant, the other should
  not be beaten. [For although the former may be in the right, his
  opponent should be treated with leniency, for fear of people
  saying you protect your Yamen servants; and lest in future, when
  the servant is in the wrong, no one will dare come forward to
  accuse him.] (3) Workmen and others employed by the magistrate
  himself should not be bambooed by him, even if they deserve it.

  "Three kinds of bambooing are forbidden. (1) With the greater
  bamboo. [One stroke of the _greater_ bamboo is counted as ten;
  three with the _middle-sized_, and five with the _smaller_.
  Officials are often too free with, never too chary of, their
  punishments. With the smaller bamboo, used even to excess, life is
  not endangered. Besides, if the punishment is spread over a longer
  time, the magistrate has a longer interval in which to get calm.
  But with the heavy bamboo, there is no saying what injuries might
  be done even with a few blows.] (2) It is forbidden to strike too
  low down. (3) It is forbidden to allow petty officers to use
  unauthorised instruments of punishment. These five preceding
  clauses refer to cases in which there is no doubt that punishment
  ought to be inflicted, but which officials are apt to punish too
  indiscriminately without due investigation of circumstances,
  whereby they infallibly stir up a feeling of discontent and
  insubordination. As regards those instances where punishment is
  deserved but should be temporarily suspended, a remission of part
  or the whole of the sentence may be granted as the magistrate sees
  fit. The great point is to admit an element of compassion, as
  thereby alone the due administration of punishment can be
  ensured."




FENG-SHUI

"Feng-shui" has of late years grown to be such a common expression in
the mouths of foreigners resident in China that it stands no poor
chance of becoming gradually incorporated in the languages of more
than one nation of the West. And yet, in spite of Dr Eitel's little
hand-book, we may venture to assert that a very small percentage of
those who are constantly using this phrase really have a distinct and
correct idea as to the meaning of the words they employ. It is vaguely
known that Feng-shui is a powerful weapon in the hands of Chinese
officials whereby they successfully oppose all innovations which
savour of progress, and preserve unbroken that lethargic sleep in
which China has been wrapt for so many centuries: beyond this all is
mystery and doubt. Some say the natives themselves do not believe in
it; others declare they do; others again think that the masses have
faith, but that enlightened and educated Chinese scout the whole thing
as a bare-faced imposture. Most Chinamen will acknowledge they are
entirely ignorant themselves on the subject, though at the same time
they will take great pains to impress on their hearers that certain
friends, relatives, or acquaintances as the case may be, have devoted
much time and attention to this fascinating study and are downright
professors of the art. They will further express their conviction of
its infallibility, with certain limitations; and assert that there are
occasions in life, when to call in the assistance of Feng-shui is not
only advisable but indispensable to human happiness.

For those who will not be at the trouble of reading for themselves Dr
Eitel's valuable little book, we may explain that Feng is the Chinese
word for _wind_ and Shui for _water_; consequently, Feng-shui is
wind-water; the first half of which, _wind_, cannot be comprehended, the
latter half, _water_, cannot be grasped. It may be defined as a system
of geomancy, by the _science_ of which it is possible to determine the
desirability of sites whether of tombs, houses, or cities, from the
configuration of such natural objects as rivers, trees, and hills, and
to foretell with certainty the fortunes of any family, community, or
individual, according to the spot selected; by the _art_ of which it
is in the power of the geomancer to counteract evil influences by good
ones, to transform straight and noxious outlines into undulating and
propitious curves, rescue whole districts from the devastations of
flood or pestilence, and "scatter plenty o'er a smiling land" which
might otherwise have known the blight of poverty and the pangs of
want. To perform such miracles it is merely necessary to build pagodas
at certain spots and of the proper height, to pile up a heap of
stones, or round off the peak of some hill to which nature's rude hand
has imparted a square and inharmonious aspect. The scenery round any
spot required for building or burial purposes must be in accordance
with certain principles evolved from the brains of the imaginative
founders of the science. It is the business of the geomancer to
discover such sites, to say if a given locality is or is not all that
could be desired on this head, sometimes to correct errors which
ignorant quacks have committed, or rectify inaccuracies which have
escaped the notice even of the most celebrated among the fraternity.
There may be too many trees, so that some must be cut down; or there
may be too few, and it becomes necessary to plant more. Water-courses
may not flow in proper curves; hills may be too high, too low, and of
baleful shapes, or their relative positions one with another may be
radically bad. Any one of these causes may be sufficient in the eyes
of a disciple of Feng-shui to account for the sudden outbreak of a
plague, the gradual or rapid decay of a once flourishing town. The
Feng-shui of a house influences not only the pecuniary fortunes of its
inmates, but determines their general happiness and longevity. There
was a room in the British Legation at Peking in which two persons died
with no great interval of time between each event; and subsequently
one of the students lay there _in articulo mortis_ for many days. The
Chinese then pointed out that a tall chimney had been built opposite
the door leading into this room, thereby vitiating the Feng-shui, and
making the place uninhabitable by mortal man.

From the above most meagre sketch it is easy to understand that if the
natural or artificial configuration of surrounding objects is really
believed by the Chinese to influence the fortunes of a city, a family,
or an individual, they are only reasonably averse to the introduction
of such novelties as railways and telegraph poles, which must
inevitably sweep away their darling superstition--never to rise again.
And they _do_ believe; there can be no doubt of it in the mind of any
one who has taken the trouble to watch. The endless inconvenience a
Chinaman will suffer without a murmur rather than lay the bones of a
dear one in a spot unhallowed by the fiat of the geomancer; the sums
he will subscribe to build a protecting pagoda or destroy some harmful
combination; the pains he will be at to comply with well-known
principles in the construction and arrangement of his private
house--all prove that the iron of Feng-shui has entered into his soul,
and that the creed he has been suckled in is the very reverse of
outworn. The childlike faith of his early years gradually ripens into
a strong and vigorous belief against which ridicule is perhaps the
worst weapon that can possibly be used. Nothing less than years of
contact with foreign nations and deep draughts of that real science
which is even now stealing imperceptibly upon them, will bring the
Chinese to see that Feng-shui is a vain shadow, that it has played its
allotted part in the history of a great nation, and is now only fit to
be classed with such memories of by-gone glory as the supremacy of
China, the bow and arrow, the matchlock, and the junk.




MONEY

Few things are more noticeable in China than the incessant chattering
kept up by servants, coolies, and members of the working classes. It
is rare to meet a string of porters carrying their heavy burdens along
some country road, who are not jabbering away, one and all, as if in
the very heat of some exciting discussion, and afraid that their
journey will come to an end before their most telling arguments are
exhausted. One wonders what ignorant, illiterate fellows like these
can possibly have to talk about to each other in a country where
beer-shop politics are unknown, where religious disputations leave no
sting behind, and want of communication limits the area of news to
half-a-dozen neighbouring streets in a single agricultural village.
Comparing the uncommunicative deportment of a bevy of English
bricklayers, who will build a house without exchanging much beyond an
occasional pipe-light, with the vivacious gaiety of these
light-hearted sons of Han, the problem becomes interesting enough to
demand a solution of the question--What is it these Chinamen talk
about? And the answer is, _Money_. It may be said they talk, think,
dream of nothing else. They certainly live for little besides the hope
of some day compassing, if not wealth, at any rate a competency. The
temple of Plutus--to be found in every Chinese city--is rarely without
a suppliant; but there is no such hypocrisy in the matter as that of
the Roman petitioner who would pray aloud for virtue and mutter
"gold." And yet a rich man in China is rather an object of pity than
otherwise. He is marked out by the officials as their lawful prey, and
is daily in danger of being called upon to answer some false, some
trumped-up accusation. A subscription list, nominally for a charitable
purpose, for building a bridge, or repairing a road, is sent to him by
a local magistrate, and woe be to him if he does not head it with a
handsome sum. A ruffian may threaten to charge him with murder unless
he will compromise instantly for Tls. 300; and the rich man generally
prefers this course to proving his innocence at a cost of about Tls.
3000. He may be accused of some trivial disregard of prescribed
ceremonies, giving a dinner-party, or arranging the preliminaries of
his son's marriage, before the days of mourning for his own father
have expired. No handle is too slight for the grasp of the greedy
mandarin, especially if he has to do with anything like a recalcitrant
millionaire. But this very mandarin himself, if compelled by age and
infirmities to resign his place, is forced in his turn to yield up
some of the ill-gotten wealth with which he had hoped to secure the
fortunes of his family for many a generation to come. The young hawks
peck out the old hawks' e'en without remorse. The possession of money
is therefore rather a source of anxiety than happiness, though this
doesn't seem to diminish in the slightest degree the Chinaman's
natural craving for as much of it as he can secure. At the same time,
the abominable system of official extortion must go far to crush a
spirit of enterprise which would otherwise most undoubtedly be rife.
Everybody is so afraid of bringing himself within the clutch of the
law, that innovation is quite out of the question.

Neither in the private life of a rich Chinese merchant do we detect
the same keen enjoyment of his wealth as is felt by many an affluent
western, to whom kindly nature has given the intellect to use it
rightly. The former indulges in sumptuous feasts, but he does not
collect around his table men who can only give him wit in return for
his dinner; he rather seeks out men whose purses are as long as his
own, from amongst whose daughters he may select a well-dowried mate
for his dunderheaded son. He accumulates vast wardrobes of silk,
satin, and furs; but he probably could not show a copy of the first
edition of K'ang Hsi, or a single bowl bearing the priceless stamp of
six hundred years ago. These articles are collected chiefly by
scholars, who often go without a meal or two in order to obtain the
coveted specimen; the rich merchant spends his money chiefly on
dinners, dress, and theatrical entertainments, knowing and caring
little or nothing about art. His conversation is also, like that of
his humbler countrymen, confined to one topic; if he is a banker,
rates of exchange haunt him day and night; whatever he is, he lives in
daily dread of the next phase of extortion to which he will be obliged
to open an unwilling purse. How different from the literati of China
who live day by day almost from hand to mouth, eking out a scanty
subsistence by writing scrolls for door-posts, and perhaps presenting
themselves periodically at the public examinations, only to find that
their laboured essays are thrown out amongst the ruck once more! Yet
these last are undeniably the happier of the two. Having no wealth to
excite the rapacious envy of their rulers, they pass through life in
rapt contemplation of the sublime attributes of their Master,
forgetting even the pangs of hunger in the elucidation of some obscure
passage in the Book of Changes, and caring least of all for the idol
of their unlettered brethren, except in so far as it would enable them
to make more extensive purchases of their beloved books, and provide a
more ample supply of the "four jewels" of the scholar. Occasionally to
be seen in the streets, these literary devotees may be known by their
respectable but poverty-stricken appearance, generally by their
spectacles, and always by their stoop, acquired in many years of
incessant toil. These are the men who hate us with so deep a hate, for
we have dared to set up a rival to the lofty position so long occupied
by Confucius alone. If we came in search of trade only, they would
tolerate, because they could understand our motives, and afford to
despise; but to bring our religion with us, to oppose the precepts of
Christ to the immortal apophthegms of the Master, this is altogether
too much for the traditions in which they have been brought up.




A DINNER-PARTY

It is a lamentable fact that although China has now been open for a
considerable number of years both to trade and travellers, she is
still a sealed book to the majority of intelligent Europeans as
regards her manners and customs, and the mode of life of her people.
Were it not so, such misleading statements as those lately published
by a young gentleman in the service of H.I.M. the Emperor of China,
and professing to give an account of a Chinese dinner, could never
have been served up by half-a-dozen London newspapers as a piece of
valuable information on the habits of Chinamen. There is so much that
is really quaint, interesting, and worthy of record in the social
etiquette observed by the natives of China, that no one with eyes to
see and ears to hear need ever draw upon his imagination in the
slightest degree. We do not imply that this has been done in the
present instance. The writer has only erred through ignorance. He has
doubtless been to a Chinese dinner where he "sat inside a glass door,
and cigars were handed round after the repast," as many other brave
men have been before him,--at Mr Yang's, the celebrated Peking
pawn-broker. But had he been to more than that one, or taken the
trouble to learn something about the subject on which he was writing,
he would have found out that glass doors and cigars are not natural
and necessary adjuncts to a Chinese dinner. They are in fact only to
be found at the houses of natives who have mixed with foreigners and
are in the habit of inviting them to their houses. The topic is an
interesting one, and deserves a somewhat elaborate treatment, both for
its own sake as a study of native customs, and also to aid in
dispelling a host of absurd ideas which have gathered round these
everyday events of Chinese life. For it is an almost universal belief
that Chinamen dine daily upon rats, puppy-dogs, and birds'-nest soup;
whereas the truth is that, save among very poor people, the first is
wholly unknown, and the two last are comparatively expensive dishes.
Dog hams are rather favourite articles of food in the south of China,
but the nests from which the celebrated soup is made are far too
expensive to be generally consumed.

A dinner-party in China is a most methodical affair as regards
precedence among guests, the number of courses, and their general
order and arrangement. We shall endeavour to give a detailed and
accurate account of such a banquet as might be offered to half-a-dozen
friends by a native in easy circumstances. In the first place, no
ladies would be present, but men only would occupy seats at the
square, four-legged "eight fairy" table. Before each there will be
found a pair of chopsticks, a wine-cup, a small saucer for soy, a
two-pronged fork, a spoon, a tiny plate divided into two separate
compartments for melon seeds and almonds, and a pile of small pieces
of paper for cleaning these various articles as required. Arranged
upon the table in four equidistant rows are sixteen small dishes or
saucers which contain four kinds of fresh fruits, four kinds of dried
fruits, four kinds of candied fruits, and four miscellaneous, such as
preserved eggs, slices of ham, a sort of sardine, pickled cabbage, &c.
These four are in the middle, the other twelve being arranged
alternately round them. Wine is produced the first thing, and poured
into small porcelain cups by the giver of the feast himself. It is
polite to make a bow and place one hand at the side of the cup while
this operation is being performed. The host then gives the signal to
drink and the cups are emptied instantaneously, being often turned
bottom upwards as a proof there are no heel-taps. Many Chinamen,
however, cannot stand even a small quantity of wine; and it is no
uncommon thing when the feast is given at an eating-house, to hire one
of the theatrical singing-boys to perform vicariously such heavy
drinking as may be required by custom or exacted by forfeit. The
sixteen small dishes above-mentioned remain on the table during the
whole dinner and may be eaten of promiscuously between courses. Now we
come to the dinner, which may consist of eight large and eight small
courses, six large and six small, eight large and four small, or six
large and four small, according to the means or fancy of the host,
each bowl of food constituting a course being placed in the middle of
the table and dipped into by the guests with chopsticks or spoon as
circumstances may require. The first is the commonest, and we append a
bill of fare of an ordinary Chinese dinner on that scale, each course
coming in its proper place.

     I. Sharks' fins with crab sauce.
        1. Pigeons' eggs stewed with mushrooms.
        2. Sliced sea-slugs in chicken broth with ham.
    II. Wild duck and Shantung cabbage.
        3. Fried fish.
        4. Lumps of pork fat fried in rice flour.
   III. Stewed lily roots.
        5. Chicken mashed to pulp, with ham.
        6. Stewed bamboo shoots.
    IV. Stewed shell-fish.
        7. Fried slices of pheasant.
        8. Mushroom broth.
    Remove--Two dishes of fried pudding, one sweet and the other salt,
        with two dishes of steamed puddings, also one sweet and one
        salt. [These four are put on the table together and with them
        is served a cup of almond gruel.]
     V. Sweetened duck.
    VI. Strips of boned chicken fried in oil.
   VII. Boiled fish (of any kind) with soy.
  VIII. Lumps of parboiled mutton fried in pork-fat.

These last four large courses are put on the table one by one and are
not taken away. Subsequently a fifth, a bowl of soup, is added, and
small basins of rice are served round, over which some of the soup is
poured. The meal is then at an end. A _rince-bouche_ is handed to each
guest and a towel dipped in boiling water but well wrung out. With the
last he mops his face all over, and the effect is much the same as
half a noggin of Exshare diluted with a bottle of Schweppe. Pipes and
tea are now handed round, though this is not the first appearance of
tobacco on the scene. Many Chinamen take a whiff or two at their
hubble-bubbles between almost every course, as they watch the
performance of some broad farce which on grand occasions is always
provided for their entertainment. Opium is served when dinner is over
for such as are addicted to this luxury; and after a few minutes,
spent perhaps in arranging the preliminaries of some future banquet,
the party, which has probably lasted from three to four hours, is no
longer of the present but in the past.




FEMALE CHILDREN

A great deal of trash has been committed to writing by various
foreigners on the subject of female children in China. The prevailing
belief in Europe seems to be that the birth of a daughter is looked
upon as a mournful event in the annals of a Chinese family, and that a
large percentage of the girls born are victims of a wide-spread system
of infanticide, a sufficient number, however, being spared to prevent
the speedy depopulation of the Empire. It became our duty only the
other day to correct a mistake, on the part of a reverend gentleman
who has been some twelve years a missionary in China, bearing on this
very subject. He observed that "the Chinese are always profuse in
their congratulations on the birth of a _son_; but if a girl is born,
the most hearty word they can afford to utter is, 'girls too are
necessary.'" Such a statement is very misleading, and cannot, in these
days of enlightenment on Chinese topics, be allowed to pass
unchallenged. "I hear you have obtained one thousand ounces of gold,"
is perhaps the commonest of those flowery metaphors which the Chinese
delight to bandy on such an auspicious occasion; another being, "You
have a bright pearl in your hand," &c., &c. The truth is that parents
in China are just as fond of all their children as people in other and
more civilised countries, where male children are also eagerly desired
to preserve the family from extinction. The excess in value of the
male over the female is perhaps more strongly marked among the
Chinese, owing of course to the peculiarity of certain national
customs, and not to any want of parental feeling; but, on the other
hand, a very fair share both of care and affection is lavished upon
the daughters either of rich or poor. They are not usually taught to
read as the boys are, because they cannot enter any condition of
public life, and education for mere education's sake would be
considered as waste of time and money by all except very wealthy
parents. Besides, when a daughter is married, not only is it necessary
to provide her with a suitable dowry and trousseau, but she passes
over to the house of her husband, there to adopt his family name in
preference to her own, and contract new obligations to a father- and
mother-in-law she may only have seen once or twice in her life, more
binding in their stringency than those to the father and mother she
has left behind. A son remains by his parents' side in most cases till
death separates them for ever, and on him they rely for that due
performance of burial rites which alone can ensure to their spirits an
eternal rest. When old age or disease comes upon them, a son can go
forth to earn their daily rice, and protect them from poverty, wrong,
and insult, where a daughter would be only an additional encumbrance.
It is no wonder therefore that the birth of a son is hailed with
greater manifestations of joy than is observable among western
nations; at the same time, we must maintain that the natural love of
Chinese parents for their female offspring is not thereby lessened to
any appreciable degree. No _red eggs_ are sent by friends and
relatives on the birth of a daughter as at the advent of the first
boy, the hope and pride of the family; but in other respects the
customs and ceremonies practised on these occasions are very much the
same. On the third day the milk-name is given to the child, and if a
girl her ears are pierced for earrings. A little boiled rice is rubbed
upon the lobe of the ear, which is then subjected to friction between
the finger and thumb until it gets quite numb: it is next pierced with
a needle and thread dipped in oil, the latter being left in the ear.
No blood flows. Boys frequently have one ear pierced, as some people
say, to make them look like little girls; and up to the age of
thirteen or fourteen, girls often wear their hair braided in a tail to
make them look like little boys. But the end of the tail is always
tied with _red_ silk--the differentiating colour between youths and
maids in China. And here we may mention that the colour of the silk
which finishes off a Chinaman's tail differs according to
circumstances. Black is the ordinary colour, often undistinguishable
from the long dresses in which they take such pride; _white_ answers
to deep crape with us, and proclaims that either the father or mother
of the wearer has bid adieu to this sublunary sphere;[*] _green_,
_yellow_, and _blue_, are worn for more distant relatives, or for
parents after the first year of mourning has expired.

    [*] The verb "to die" is rarely used by the Chinese of their
    relatives. Some graceful periphrasis is adapted instead.

We will conclude with a curious custom which, as far as our inquiries
have extended, seems to be universal. The first visitor, stranger,
messenger, coolie, or friend, who comes to the house where a new-born
baby lies, ignorant that such an event has taken place, is on no
account allowed to go away without having first eaten a full meal.
This is done to secure to the child a peaceful and refreshing night's
rest; and as Chinamen are always ready at a moment's notice to dispose
of a feed at somebody else's expense, difficulties are not likely to
arise on a score of a previous dinner.




TRAVEL

Books of travel are eagerly read by most classes of Chinese who have
been educated up to the requisite standard, and long journeys have
often been undertaken to distant parts of the Empire, not so much from
a thirst for knowledge or love of a vagrant life, as from a desire to
be enrolled among the numerous contributors to the deathless
literature of the Middle Kingdom. Such travellers start with a full
knowledge of the tastes of their public, and a firm conviction that
unless they can provide sufficiently marvellous stories out of what
they have seen and heard, the fame they covet is not likely to be
accorded. No European reader who occupies himself with these works can
fail to discover that in every single one of them invention is brought
more or less into play; and that when fact is not forthcoming, the
exigencies of the book are supplemented from the convenient resources
of fiction. Of course this makes the accounts of Chinese travellers
almost worthless, and often ridiculous; though strange to say, amongst
the Chinese themselves, even to the grossest absurdities and most
palpable falsehoods, there hardly attaches a breath of that suspicion
which has cast a halo round the name of Bruce.

We have lately come across a book of travels, in six thin quarto
volumes, written by no less a personage than the father of Ch'ung-hou.
It is a very handsome work, being well printed and on good paper,
besides being provided with numerous woodcuts of the scenes and
scenery described in the text. The author, whose name was Lin-ch'ing,
was employed in various important posts; and while rising from the
position of Prefect to that of Acting Governor-General of the two
Kiang, travelled about a good deal, and was somewhat justified in
committing his experiences to paper. We doubt, however, if his
literary efforts are likely to secure him a fraction of the notoriety
which the Tientsin Massacre has conferred upon his son. He never saw
the moon shining upon the water, but away he went and wrote an ode to
the celestial luminary, always introducing a few pathetic lines on the
hardships of travel and the miseries of exile. One chapter is devoted
to the description of a curious rock called the _Loom Rock_. It is
situated in the Luhsi district of the Chang-chou prefecture in Hunan,
and is perfectly inaccessible to man, as it well might be, to judge
from the drawing of it by a native artist. From a little distance,
however, caves are discernible hollowed out in the cliff, and in these
the eye can detect various articles used in housekeeping, such as a
teapot, &c.; and amongst others a _loom_. On a ledge of smooth rock a
boat may be seen, as it were hauled up out of the water. How these got
there, and what is the secret of the place, nobody appears to know,
but our author declares that he saw them with his own eyes. We have
given the above particulars as to the whereabouts of the rock, in the
hope that any European meditating a trip into Hunan may take the
trouble to make some inquiries about this wonderful sight. The late Mr
Margary must have passed close to it in his boat, probably without
being aware of its existence--if indeed it does exist at all.

We cannot refrain from translating verbatim one passage which has
reference to the English, and of which we fancy Ch'ung-hou himself
would be rather ashamed since his visit to the Outside Nations. Here
it is:--

  "When the English barbarians first began to give trouble to the
  Inner Nation, they relied on the strength of their ships and the
  excellence of their guns. It was therefore proposed to build large
  ships and cast heavy cannon in order to oppose them. I
  represented, however, that vessels are not built in a day, and
  pointed out the difficulties in the way of naval warfare. I showed
  that the power of a cannon depends upon the strength of the
  powder, and the strength of the powder upon the sulphur and
  saltpetre; the latter determining the explosive force forwards and
  backwards, and the former, the same force towards either side.
  Therefore to ensure powder being powerful, there should be seven
  parts saltpetre out of ten. The English barbarians have got rattan
  ash which they can use instead of sulphur, but saltpetre is a
  product of China alone. Accordingly, I memorialised His Majesty to
  prohibit the export of saltpetre, and caused some thirty-seven
  thousand pounds to be seized by my subordinates."




PREDESTINATION

Theoretically, the Chinese are fatalists in the fullest sense of the
word. Love of life and a desire to enjoy the precious boon as long as
possible, prevent them from any such extended application of the
principle as would be prejudicial to the welfare of the nation; yet
each man believes that his destiny is pre-ordained, and that the whole
course of his life is mapped out for him with unerring exactitude.
Happily, when the occasion presents itself, his thoughts are generally
too much occupied with the crisis before him, to be able to indulge in
any dangerous speculations on predestination and free-will; his
practice, therefore, is not invariably in harmony with his theory.

On the first page of a Chinese almanack for the current year, we have
a curious woodcut representing a fly, a spider, a bird, a sportsman, a
tiger, and a well. Underneath this strange medley is a legend couched
in the following terms:--"Predestination in all things!" The
letterpress accompanying the picture explains that the spider had just
secured a fat fly, and was on the point of making a meal of him, when
he was espied by a hungry bird which swooped down on both. As the bird
was making off to its nest with this delicious mouthful, a sportsman
who happened to be casting round for a supper, brought it down with
his gun, and was stooping to pick it up, when a tiger, also with an
empty stomach, sprang from behind upon the man, and would there and
then have put an end to the drama, but for an ugly well, on the brink
of which the bird had dropped, and into which the tiger, carried on by
the impetus of his spring, tumbled headlong, taking with him man,
bird, spider, and fly in one fell career to the bottom. This fable
embodies popular ideas in China with regard to predestination, by
virtue of which calamity from time to time overtakes doomed victims,
as a punishment for sins committed in their present or a past state of
existence. Coupled with this belief are many curious sayings and
customs, the latter of which often express in stronger terms than
language the feelings of the people. For instance, at the largest
centre of population in the Eighteen Provinces, there is a regulation
with regard to the porterage by coolies of wine and oil, which
admirably exemplifies the subject under consideration. If on a wet and
stormy day, or when the ground is covered with snow, a coolie laden
with either of the above articles slips and falls, he is held
responsible for any damage that may be done; whereas, if he tumbles
down on a fine day when the streets are dry, and there is no apparent
cause for such an accident, the owner of the goods bears whatever loss
may occur. The idea is that on a wet and slippery day mere exercise of
human caution would be sufficient to avert the disaster, but happening
in bright, dry weather, it becomes indubitably a manifestation of the
will of Heaven. In the same way, an endless run of bad luck or some
fearful and overwhelming calamity, against which no mortal foresight
could guard, is likened to the burning of an _ice-house_, which, from
its very nature, would almost require the interposition of Divine
power to set it in a blaze. In such a case, he who could doubt the
reality of predestination would be ranked, in Chinese eyes, as little
better than a fool. And yet when these emergencies arise we do not
find the Chinese standing still with their hands in their sleeves (for
want of pockets), but working away to stop whatever mischief is going
on, as if after the all the will of Heaven may be made amenable to
human energy. It is only when an inveterate gambler or votary of the
opium-pipe has seen his last chance of solace in this life cut away
from under him, and feels himself utterly unable any longer to stem
the current, that he weakly yields to the force of his destiny, and
borrows a stout rope from a neighbour, or wanders out at night to the
brink of some deep pool never to return again.

There is a charming episode in the second chapter of the "Dream of the
Red Chamber," where the father of Pao-yu is anxious to read the
probable destiny of his infant son. He spreads before the little boy,
then just one year old, all kinds of different things, and declares
that from whichever of these the baby first seizes, he will draw an
omen as to his future career in life. We can imagine how he longed for
his boy to grasp the manly _bow_, in the use of which he might some
day rival the immortal archer Pu:--the _sword_, and live to be
enrolled a fifth among the four great generals of China:--the _pen_,
and under the favouring auspices of the god of literature, rise to
assist the Son of Heaven with his counsels, or write a commentary upon
the Book of Rites. Alas for human hopes! The naughty baby, regardless
alike of his father's wishes and the filial code, passed over all
these glittering instruments of wealth and power, and devoted his
attention exclusively to some hair-pins, pearl-powder, rouge, and a
lot of women's head-ornaments.




JOURNALISM

Were any wealthy philanthropist to consult us as to the disposal of
his millions with a view to ensure the greatest possible advantages to
the greatest possible number, we should unhesitatingly recommend him
to undertake the publication of a Chinese newspaper, to be sold at a
merely nominal figure per copy. Under skilled foreign guidance, and
with the total exclusion of religious topics, more would be effected
in a few years for the real happiness of China and its ultimate
conversion to western civilisation, than the most hopeful enthusiast
could venture to predict. The _Shun-pao_, edited in Shanghai by Mr
Ernest Major, is doing an incredible amount of good in so far as its
influence extends; but the daily issue of this widely-circulated paper
amounts only to about four thousand copies, or one to every hundred
thousand natives! Missionary publications are absolutely useless, as
they have a very limited sale beyond the circle of converts to the
faith; but a _colporteur_ of religious books informed us the other day
that he was continually being asked for the _Shun-pao_. Now the
_Shun-pao_ owes its success so far to the fact that it is a pure money
speculation, and therefore an undertaking intelligible enough to all
Chinamen. Not only are its columns closed to anything like
proselytising articles, but they are open from time to time to such
tit-bits of the miraculous as are calculated to tickle the native
palate, and swell the number of its subscribers. Therefore, to avert
suspicion, it would be necessary to make a charge, however small,
while at the same time such bogy paragraphs as occasionally appear in
the columns of the _Shun-pao_ might be altogether omitted.

Our attention was called to this matter by a charming description in
the _Shun-pao_ of a late balloon ascent from Calais, which was so
nearly attended with fatal results. Written in a singularly easy
style, and going quite enough into detail on the subject of balloons
generally to give an instructive flavour to its remarks, this article
struck us as being the identical kind of "light science for leisure
hours" so much needed by the Chinese; and it compared most favourably
with a somewhat heavy disquisition on aeronautic topics which appeared
some time back in the _Peking Magazine_, albeit the latter was
accompanied by an elaborate woodcut of a balloon under way. There is
so much that is wonderful in the healthy regions of fact which might
with mutual advantage be imparted to a reading people like the
Chinese, that it is quite unnecessary to descend to the gross, and too
often indecent, absurdities of fiction. Much indeed that is not
actually marvellous might be put into language which would rivet the
attention of Chinese readers. The most elementary knowledge, according
to our standard, is almost always new, even to the profoundest scholar
in native literature: the ignorance of the educated classes is
something appalling. On the other hand, all who have read their
_Shun-pao_ with regularity, even for a few months, are comparatively
enlightened. We heard the other day of a Tao-t'ai who was always
meeting the phrase "International Law" in the above paper, and his
curiosity at length prompted him to make inquiries, and finally to
purchase a copy of Dr Martin's translation of "Wheaton." He
subsequently complained bitterly that much of it was utterly
unintelligible; and judging from our own limited experience of the
translation, we think His Excellency's objection not altogether
groundless.

Of the domestic life of foreigners, the Chinese, with the exception of
a few servants, know absolutely nothing; and equally little of foreign
manners, customs, or etiquette. We were acquainted with one healthy
Briton who was popularly supposed by the natives with whom he was
thrown in contact to eat a whole leg of mutton every day for dinner;
and a high native functionary, complaining one day of some tipsy
sailors who had been rioting on shore, observed that "he knew
foreigners always got drunk on Sundays, and had the offence been
committed on that day he would have taken no notice of it; but," &c.,
&c. They have vague notions that filial piety is not considered a
virtue in the West, and look upon our system of contracting marriages
as objectionable in the extreme. They think foreigners carry whips and
sticks only for purposes of assault, and we met a man the other day
who had been wearing a watch for years, but was in the habit of never
winding it up till it had run down. This we afterwards found out to be
quite a common custom among the Chinese, it being generally believed
that a watch cannot be wound up whilst going; consequently, many
Chinamen keep two always in use, and it is worth noticing that watches
in China are almost invariably sold in pairs. The term "foreign devil"
is less frequently heard than formerly, and sometimes only for the
want of a better phrase. Mr Alabaster, in one of his journeys in the
interior, was politely addressed by the villagers as _His Excellency
the Devil_. The Chinese settlers in Formosa call themselves "foreign
men," but they call us "foreign things;" for, they argue, if we called
you foreign men, what should we call ourselves? The _Shun-pao_
deserves much credit for its unvarying use of _western_ instead of
_outside_ nations when speaking of foreign powers, but the belief is
still very prevalent that we all come from a number of small islands
scattered round the coast of one great centre, the Middle Kingdom.

And so we might go on multiplying _ad nauseam_ instances of Chinese
ignorance in trivial matters which an ably-conducted journal has it in
its power to dispel. We are so dissimilar from the Chinese in our ways
of life, and so unlike them in dress and facial appearance, that it is
only many years of commercial intercourse on the present familiar
footing which will cause them to regard us as anything but the
barbarians they call us. Red hair and blue eyes may make up what Baron
Hubner would euphemistically describe as the "beau type d'un gentleman
anglais," but when worn with a funny-shaped hat, a short coat, tight
trousers, and a Penang lawyer, the picture produced on the retina of a
Chinese mind is unmistakably that of a "foreign devil."




FUNERALS

Of all their cherished ceremonies, there are none the Chinese observe
with more scrupulous exactness than those connected with death and
mourning. We have just heard of the Governor of Kiangsu going into
retirement because of the decease of his mother; and so he will
remain, ineligible to any office, for the space of three years. He
will not shave his head for one hundred days. For forty-nine nights he
will sleep in a hempen garment, with his head resting on a brick and
stretched on the hard ground, by the side of the coffin which holds
the remains of the parent who gave him birth. He will go down upon his
knees and humbly kotow to each friend and relative at their first
meeting after the sad event--a tacit acknowledgment that it was but
his own want of filial piety which brought his beloved mother
prematurely to the grave. To the coolies who bear the coffin to its
resting-place on the slope of some wooded hill, or beneath the shade
of a clump of dark-leaved cypress trees, he will make the same
obeisance. Their lives and properties are at his disposal day and
night; but he now has a favour to ask which no violence could secure,
and pleads that his mother's body may be carried gently, without jar
or concussion of any kind. He will have her laid by the side of his
father, in a coffin which cost perhaps 100 pounds, and repair thither
periodically to appease her departed spirit with votive offerings of
fruit, vegetables, and pork.

Immediately after the decease of a parent, the children and other near
relatives communicate the news to friends living farther off, by what
is called an "announcement of death," which merely states that the
father or mother, as the case may be, has died, and that they, the
survivors, are entirely to blame. With this is sent a "sad report," or
in other words a detailed account of deceased's last illness, how it
originated, what medicine was prescribed and taken, and sundry other
interesting particulars. Their friends reply by sending a present of
money to help defray funeral expenses, a present of food or
joss-stick, or even a detachment of priests to read the prescribed
liturgies over the dead. Sometimes a large scroll is written and
forwarded, inscribed with a few such appropriate words as--"A hero has
gone!" When all these have been received, the members of the bereaved
family issue a printed form of thanks, one copy being left at the
house of each contributor and worded thus:--"This is to express the
thanks of . . . the orphaned son who weeps tears of blood and bows his
head: of . . . the mourning brother who weeps and bows his head: of
. . . the mourning nephew who wipes away his tears and bows his head."

It is well known that all old and even middle-aged people in China
like to have their coffins prepared ready for use. A dutiful son will
see that his parents are thus provided, sometimes many years before
their death, and the old people will invite relatives or friends to
examine and admire both the materials and workmanship, as if it were
some beautiful picture or statue of which they had just cause to be
proud. Upon the coffin is carved an inscription with the name and
titles of its occupant; if a woman, the name of her husband. At the
foot of the coffin are buried two stone tablets face to face; one
bears the name and title of the deceased, and the other a short
account of his life, what year he was born in, what were his
achievements as a scholar, and how many children were born to him.
Periods of mourning are regulated by the degrees of relationship to
the dead. A son wears his white clothes for three years--actually for
twenty-eight months; and a wife mourns her husband for the same
period. The death of a wife, however, calls for only a single year of
grief; for, as the Sacred Edict points out, if your wife dies you can
marry another. The same suffices for brother, sister, or child.
Marriages contracted during these days of mourning are not only
invalid, but the offending parties are punished with a greater or
lesser number of blows according to the gravity of the offence.
Innumerable other petty restrictions are imposed by national or local
custom, which are observed with a certain amount of fidelity, though
instances are not wanting where the whole thing is shirked as
inconvenient and a bore.

Cremation, once the prevailing fashion in China, is now reserved for
the priest of Buddha alone,--that self-made outcast from society,
whose parting soul relies on no fond breast, who has no kith or kin to
shed "those pious drops the closing eye requires;" but who, seated in
an iron chair beneath the miniature pagoda erected in most large
temples for that purpose, passes away in fire and smoke from this vale
of tears and sin to be absorbed in the blissful nothingness of an
eternal Nirvana.




INQUESTS

Inquests in China serve, unfortunately, but to illustrate one more
phase of the folly and ignorance which hopelessly overshadow the vast
area of its Empire. For although the Chinese justly regard such
investigations as matters of paramount importance, and the office of
coroner devolves upon a high functionary--the district magistrate--yet
the backward state of science on the one hand, and the necessity the
ruling classes have been under of supplying this deficiency on the
other, have combined to produce at once the most deplorable and the
most laughable results. Two good-sized volumes of "Instructions to
Coroners," beautifully printed on white paper and altogether
handsomely got up, are published under the authority of the
Government, and copies of this book are to be found in the offices of
every magistrate throughout the Empire. It is carefully studied even
by the underlings who play only subordinate parts on such occasions,
and the coroner himself generally carries his private copy with him in
his sedan-chair to the very scene of the inquest. From this work the
following sketch has been compiled, for though it has been our fate to
be present at more than one of the lamentable exhibitions thus
dignified by the name of inquest, and to have had ocular demonstration
of the absurdities there perpetrated, it will be more satisfactory to
stick closely to the text of an officially-recognised book, the
translation of which helped to while away many a leisure hour.

The first chapter opens as follows:--

  "There is nothing more sacred than human life: there is no
  punishment greater than death. A murderer gives life for life: the
  law shows no mercy. But to obviate any regrets which might be
  occasioned by a wrong infliction of such punishment, the validity
  of any confession and the sentence passed are made to depend on a
  satisfactory examination of the wounds. If these are of a _bona
  fide_ nature [i.e., not counterfeit], and the confession of the
  accused tallies therewith, then life may be given for life, that
  those who know the laws may fear them, that crime may become less
  frequent among the people, and due weight be attached to the
  sanctity of human existence. If an inquest is not properly
  conducted, the wrong of the murdered man is not redressed, and new
  wrongs are raised up amongst the living; other lives may be
  sacrificed, and both sides roused to vengeance of which no man can
  foresee the end."

On this it is only necessary to remark that the "validity" of a
confession is an important point in China, since substitutes are
easily procurable at as low a rate as from 20 to 50 pounds a life.

The duties of a Chinese coroner are by no means limited to _post
mortem_ examinations; he visits and examines any one who has been
dangerously wounded, and fixes a date within which the accused is held
responsible for the life of his victim.

  "Murders are rarely the result of premeditation, but can be
  traced, in the majority of cases, to a brawl. The statute which
  treats of wounding in a brawl attaches great weight to the 'death-
  limit,' which means that the wounded man be handed over to the
  accused to be taken care of and provided with medical aid, and
  that a limit of time be fixed, on the expiration of which
  punishment be awarded according to circumstances. Now the
  relatives of a wounded man, unless their ties be of the closest,
  generally desire his death that they may extort money from his
  slayer; but the accused wishes him to live that he himself may
  escape death, and therefore he leaves no means untried to restore
  his victim to health. This institution of the 'death-limit' is a
  merciful endeavour to save the lives of both."

One whole chapter is devoted to a division of the body into vital and
non-vital parts. Of the former there are twenty-two altogether,
sixteen before and six behind; of the latter fifty-six, thirty-six
before and twenty behind. Every coroner provides himself with a form,
drawn up according to these divisions, and on this he enters the
various wounds he finds on the body at the inquest.

  "Do not," say the Instructions, "deterred by the smell of the
  corpse, sit at a distance, your view intercepted by the smoke of
  fumigation, letting the assistants call out the wounds and enter
  them on the form, perhaps to garble what is of importance and to
  give prominence to what is not."

The instructions for the examination of the body from the head
downwards are very explicit, and among them is one sentence by virtue
of which a Chinese judge would have disposed of the Tichborne case
without either hesitation or delay.

  "Examine the cheeks to see whether they have been tattooed or not,
  or whether the marks have been obliterated. In the latter case,
  cut a slip of bamboo and tap the parts; the tattooing will then
  re-appear."

In cases where the wounds are not distinctly visible, the following
directions are given:--

  "Spread a poultice of grain, and sprinkle some vinegar upon the
  corpse in the open air. Take a piece of new oiled silk, or a
  transparent oil-cloth umbrella, and hold it between the sun and
  the parts you want to examine. The wounds will then appear. If the
  day is dark or rainy, use live charcoal [instead of the sun].
  Suppose there is no result, then spread over the parts pounded
  white prunes with more grains and vinegar, and examine closely. If
  the result is still imperfect, then take the flesh only of the
  prune, adding cayenne pepper, onions, salt, and grains, and mix it
  up into a cake. Make this very hot, and having first interposed a
  sheet of paper, lay it on the parts. The wound will then appear."

Hot vinegar and grains are always used previous to an examination of
the body to soften it and cause the wounds to appear more distinctly.

  "But in winter, when the corpse is frozen hard, and no amount of
  grains and vinegar, however hot, or clothes piled up, however
  thick, will relax its rigidity, dig a hole in the ground of the
  length and breadth of the body and three feet in depth. Lay in it
  a quantity of fuel and make a roaring fire. Then dash over it
  vinegar, which will create dense volumes of steam, in the middle
  of which place the body with all its dressings right in the hole;
  cover it over with clothes and pour on more hot vinegar all over
  it. At a distance of two or three feet from the hole on either
  side of it light fires, and when you think the heat has thoroughly
  penetrated, take away the fire and remove the body for
  examination."

It is always a great point with the coroner to secure as soon as
possible the fatal weapon. If a long time has elapsed between the
murder and the inquest, and no traces of blood are visible on the
knife or sword which may have been used, "heat it red hot in a
charcoal fire, and pour over it a quantity of first-rate vinegar. The
stains of blood will at once appear."

The note following this last sentence is still more extraordinary:--

  "An inquest was held on the body of a man who had been murdered on
  the high road, and at first it was thought that the murder had
  been committed by robbers, but on examination the corpse was found
  to be fully clothed and bearing the marks of some ten or more
  wounds from a sickle. The coroner pointed out that robbers kill
  their victims for the sake of booty, which evidently was not the
  case in the present instance, and declared revenge to be at the
  bottom of it all. He then sent for the wife of the murdered man,
  and asked her if her husband had lately quarrelled with anybody.
  She replied No, but stated that there had been some high words
  between her husband and another man to whom he had refused to lend
  money. The coroner at once despatched his runners to the place
  where this man lived, to bid the people of that village produce
  all their sickles without delay, at the same time informing them
  that the concealment of a sickle would be tantamount to a
  confession of guilt. The sickles were accordingly produced, in
  number about eighty, and spread out upon the ground. The season
  being summer there were a great quantity of flies, all of which
  were attracted by one particular sickle. The coroner asked to whom
  this sickle belonged, and lo! it belonged to him with whom the
  murdered man had quarrelled about a loan. On being arrested, he
  denied his guilt; but the coroner pointed to the flies settling
  upon the sickle, attracted by the smell of blood, and the murderer
  bent his head in silent acknowledgment of his crime."

Inquests are often held in China many years after the death of the
victim. Give a Chinese coroner merely the dry and imperfect skeleton
of a man known to have been murdered, and he will generally succeed in
fixing the guilt on some one. To supplement thus by full and open
confession of the accused is a matter of secondary difficulty in a
country where torture may at any moment be brought to bear with
terrible efficacy in the cause of justice and truth. Its application,
however, is extremely rare.

  "Man has three hundred and sixty-five bones, corresponding to the
  number of days it takes the heavens to revolve. The skull of a
  man, from the nape of the neck to the top of the head, consists of
  eight pieces--that of a Ts'ai-chow man, of nine; women's skulls
  are of six pieces. Men have twelve ribs on either side; women have
  fourteen."

The above being sufficient to show where the Chinese are with regard
to the structure of the human frame, we will now proceed to the
directions for examining bones, it may be months or even years after
death.

  "For the examination of bones the day should be clear and bright.
  First take clean water and wash them, and then with string tie
  them together in proper order so that a perfect skeleton is
  formed, and lay this on a mat. Then make a hole in the ground,
  five feet long, three feet broad, and two feet deep. Throw into
  this plenty of firewood and charcoal, and keep it burning till the
  ground is thoroughly hot. Clear out the fire and pour in two pints
  of good spirit and five pounds of strong vinegar. Lay the bones
  quickly in the steaming pit and cover well up with rushes, &c. Let
  them remain there for two or three hours until the ground is cold,
  when the coverings may be removed, the bones taken to a convenient
  spot, and examined under a red oil-cloth umbrella.

  "If the day is dark or rainy the 'boiling' method must be adopted.
  Take a large jar and heat in it a quantity of vinegar; then having
  put in plenty of salt and white prunes, boil it altogether with
  the bones, superintending the process yourself. When it is boiling
  fast, take out the bones, wash them in water, and hold up to the
  light. The wounds will be perfectly visible, the blood having
  soaked into the wounded parts, marking them with red or dark blue
  or black.

  "The above method is, however, not the only one. Take a new yellow
  oil-cloth umbrella from Hangchow, hold it over the bones, and
  every particle of wound hidden in the bones will be clearly
  visible. In cases where the bones are old and the wounds have been
  obliterated by long exposure to wind and rain or dulled by
  frequent boilings, it only remains to examine them in the sun
  under a yellow umbrella, which will show the wounds as far as
  possible.

  "There must be no zinc boiled with the bones or they will become
  dull.

  "Bones which have passed several times through the process of
  examination become quite white and exactly like uninjured bones;
  in which case, take such as should show wounds and fill them with
  oil. Wait till the oil is oozing out all over, then wipe it off
  and hold the bone up to the light; where there are wounds the oil
  will collect and not pass; the clear parts have not been injured.

  "Another method is to rub some good ink thick and spread it on the
  bone. Let it dry, and then wash it off. Where there are wounds,
  and there only, it will sink into the bone. Or take some new
  cotton wool and pass it over the bone. Wherever there is a wound
  some will be pulled out [by the jagged parts of the bone]."

A whole chapter is devoted to counterfeit wounds, the means of
distinguishing them from real wounds, and the manner in which they are
produced. Section 2 of the thirteenth chapter is on a cognate subject,
namely, to ascertain whether wounds were inflicted before or after
death:--

  "If there are several dark-coloured marks on the body, take some
  water and let it fall drop by drop on to them. If they are wounds
  the water will remain without trickling away; if they are not
  wounds, the water will run off. In examining wounds, the finger
  must be used to press down any livid or red spot. If it is a wound
  it will be hard, and on raising the finger will be found of the
  same colour as before.

  "Wounds inflicted on the bone leave a red mark and a slight
  appearance of saturation, and where the bone is broken there will
  be at either end a halo-like trace of blood. Take a bone on which
  there are marks of a wound and hold it up to the light; if these
  are of a fresh-looking red, the wound was afflicted before death
  and penetrated to the bone; but if there is no trace of saturation
  from blood, although there is a wound, if was inflicted after
  death."

In a chapter on wounds from kicks, the following curious instructions
are given regarding a "bone-method" of examination:--

  "To depend on the evidence of the bone immediately below the wound
  would be to let many criminals slip through the meshes of the law.
  Where wounds have been thus inflicted, no matter on man or woman,
  the wounds will be visible on the upper half of the body, and not
  on the lower. For instance, they will appear in a male at the
  roots of either the top or bottom teeth, inside; on the right hand
  if the wound was on the left, and _vice versa_; in the middle of
  the wound was central. In women, the wounds will appear on the
  gums right or left as above."

The next extract needs no comment, except perhaps that it forms the
most cherished of all beliefs in the whole range of Chinese medical
jurisprudence:--

  "The bones of parents may be identified by their children in the
  following manner. Let the experimenter cut himself or herself with
  a knife and cause the blood to drip on to the bones; then, if the
  relationship is an actual fact the blood will sink into the bone,
  otherwise it will not. N.B. Should the bones have been washed with
  salt water, even though the relationship exists, yet the blood
  will not soak in. This is a trick to be guarded against
  beforehand.

  "It is also said that if parent and child, or husband and wife,
  each cut themselves and let the blood drip into a basin of water
  the two bloods will mix, whereas that of two people not thus
  related will not mix.

  "Where two brothers who may have been separated since childhood
  are desirous of establishing their identity as such, but are
  unable to do so by ordinary means, bid each one cut himself and
  let the blood drip into a basin. If they are really brothers, the
  two bloods will congeal into one; otherwise not. But because fresh
  blood will always congeal with the aid of a little salt or
  vinegar, people often smear the basin over with these to attain
  their own ends and deceive others; therefore, always wash out the
  basin you are going to use or buy a new one from a shop. Thus the
  trick will be defeated.

  "The above method of dropping blood on the bones may be used even
  by a grandchild, desirous of identifying the remains of his
  grandfather; but husband and wife, not being of the same flesh and
  blood, it is absurd to suppose that the blood of one would soak
  into the bones of the other. For such a principle would apply with
  still more force to the case of a child, who had been suckled by a
  foster-mother and had grown up, indebted to her for half its
  existence. With regard to the water method, if the basin used is
  large and full of water, the bloods will be unable to mix from
  being so much diluted; and in the latter case where there is no
  water, if the interval between dropping the two bloods into the
  basin is too long, the first will get cold and they will not mix."

Not content with holding an inquest on the bones of a man who may have
been murdered five years before, a Chinese coroner quite as often
proceeds gravely to examine the wounds of a corpse which has been
reduced to ashes by fire and scattered to the four winds of heaven. No
mere eyewitness would dare to relate the singular process by which
such a result is achieved; but directions exist in black and white, of
which the following is a close translation:--

  "There are some atrocious villains who, when they have murdered
  any one, burn the body and throw the ashes away, so that there are
  no bones to examine. In such cases you must carefully find out at
  what time the murder was committed and where the body was burnt.
  Then, when you know the place, all witnesses agreeing on this
  point, you may proceed without further delay to examine the
  wounds. The mode of procedure is this. Put up your shed near where
  the body was burnt, and make the accused and witnesses point out
  themselves the very spot. Then cut down the grass and weeds
  growing on this spot, and burn large quantities of fuel till the
  place is extremely hot, throwing on several pecks of hempseed. By
  and by brush the place clean, and then, if the body was actually
  burnt in this spot, the oil from the seed will be found to have
  sunk into the ground in the form of a human figure, and wherever
  there were wounds on the dead man, there on this figure the oil
  will be found to have collected together, large or small, square,
  round, long, short, oblique, or straight, exactly as they were
  inflicted. The parts where there were no wounds will be free from
  any such appearances. But supposing you obtain the outline only
  without the necessary detail of the wounds, then scrape away the
  masses of oil, light a brisk fire on the form of the body and
  throw on grains mixed with water. Make the fire burn as fiercely
  as possible, and sprinkle vinegar, instantly covering it over with
  a new well-varnished table. Leave the table on for a little while
  and then take it off for examination. The form of the body will be
  transferred to the table and the wounds will be distinct and clear
  in every particular.

  "If the place is wild and some time has elapsed since the deed was
  done, so that the very murderer does not remember the exact spot,
  inquire carefully in what direction it was with regard to such and
  such a village or temple, and about how far off. If all agree on
  this point, proceed in person to the place, and bid your
  assistants go round about searching for any spots where the grass
  is taller and stronger than usual, marking such with a mark. For
  where a body has been burnt the grass will be darker in hue, more
  luxuriant, and taller than that surrounding it, and will not lose
  these characteristics for a long time, the fat and grease of the
  body sinking down to the roots of the grass and causing the above
  results. If the spot is on a hill, or in a wild place where the
  vegetation is very luxuriant, then you must look for a growth
  about the height of a man. If the burning took place on stony
  ground, the crumbly appearance of the stones must be your guide;
  this simplifies matters immensely."

Such, then, are a few of the absurdities which pass muster among the
credulous people of China as the result of deep scientific research;
but whether the educated classes--more especially those individuals
who devote themselves in the course of their official duties to the
theory and practice of _post mortem_ examinations--can be equally
gulled with the gaping crowd around them, we may safely leave our
readers to decide for themselves.




INQUESTS, NO. II

Section IV. of the valuable work which formed the basis of our
preceding sketch, is devoted to the enumeration of methods for
restoring human life after such casualties as drowning, hanging,
poisoning, &c., some hours and even days after vitality has to all
appearances ceased. We shall quote as before from our own literal
translation.

  "Where a man has been hanging from morning to night, even though
  already cold, a recovery may still be effected. Stop up the
  patient's mouth tightly with your hand, and in a little over four
  hours respiration will be restored. _Or_, Take equal parts of
  finely-powdered soap-bean and anemone hepatica, and blow a
  quantity of this--about as much as a bean--into the patient's
  nostrils.

  "In all cases where men or women have been hanged, a recovery may
  be effected even if the body has become stiff. You must not cut
  the body down, but, supporting it, untie the rope and lay it down
  in some smooth place on its back with the head propped up. Bend
  the arms and legs gently, and let some one sitting behind pull the
  patient's hair tightly. Straighten the arms, let there be a free
  passage through the wind-pipe, and let two persons blow
  incessantly into the ears through a bamboo tube or reed, rubbing
  the chest all the time with the hand. Take the blood from a live
  fowl's comb, and drop it into the throat and nostrils--the left
  nostril of a woman, the right of a man; also using a cock's comb
  for a man, a hen's for a woman. Re-animation will be immediately
  effected. If respiration has been suspended for a long time, there
  must be plenty of blowing and rubbing; do not think that because
  the body is cold all is necessarily over.

  "Where a man has been in the water a whole night, a recovery may
  still be effected. Break up part of a mud wall and pound it to
  dust; lay the patient thereon on his back, and cover him up with
  the same, excepting only his mouth and eyes. Thus the water will
  be absorbed by the mud, and life will be restored. This method is
  a very sure one, even though the body has become stiff.

  "In cases of injury from scalding, get a large oyster and put it
  in a basin with its mouth upwards somewhere quite away from
  anybody. Wait till its shell opens, and then shake in from a spoon
  a little Borneo camphor, mixed and rubbed into a powder with an
  equal portion of genuine musk. The oyster will then close its
  shell and its flesh will be melted into a liquid. Add a little
  more of the above ingredients, and with a fowl's feather brush it
  over the parts and round the wound, getting nearer and nearer
  every time till at last you brush it into the wound; the pain will
  thus gradually cease. A small oyster will do if a large one is not
  to be had. This is a first-rate prescription.

  "Where a man has fallen into the water in winter, and has quite
  lost all consciousness from cold, if there is the least warmth
  about the chest, life may still be restored. Should the patient
  show the slightest inclination to laugh, stop up his nose and
  mouth at once, or he will soon be unable to leave off, and it will
  be impossible to save him. On no account bring a patient hastily
  to the fire, for the sight of fire will excite him to immoderate
  laughter, and his chance of life is gone.

  "In cases of nightmare, do not at once bring a light, or going
  near call out loudly to the sleeper, but bite his heel or his big
  toe, and gently utter his name. Also spit on his face and give him
  ginger tea to drink; he will then come round. _Or_, Blow into the
  patient's ears through small tubes, pull out fourteen hairs from
  his head, make them into a twist and thrust into his nose. Also,
  give salt and water to drink. Where death has resulted from seeing
  goblins, take the heart of a leek and push it up the patient's
  nostrils--the left for a man, the right for a woman. Look along
  the inner edge of the upper lips for blisters like grains of
  Indian corn, and prick them with a needle."

The work concludes with an antidote against a certain dangerous poison
known as _Ku_, originally discovered by a Buddhist priest and
successfully administered in a great number of cases. Its ingredients,
which comprise two red centipedes--one live and one roasted--must be
put into a mortar and pounded up together either on the 5th of the 5th
moon, the 9th of the 9th moon, or the 8th of the 12th moon, in some
place quite away from women, fowls, and dogs. Pills made from the
paste produced are to be swallowed one by one without mastication. The
preparation of this deadly _Ku_ poison is described in the last
chapter but one of Section III. in the following words:--

  "Take a quantity of insects of all kinds and throw them into a
  vessel of any kind; cover them up and let a year pass away before
  you look at them again. The insects will have killed and eaten
  each other until there is only one survivor, and this one is
  _Ku_."

In the next chapter we are informed that spinach eaten with tortoise
is poison, as also is shell-fish eaten with venison; that death
frequently results from drinking pond-water which has been poisoned by
snakes, from drinking water which has been used for flowers, or tea
which has stood uncovered through the night, from eating the flesh of
a fowl which has swallowed a centipede, and wearing clothes which have
been soaked with perspiration and dried in the sun. Finally,

  "A case is recorded of a man who tied his victim's hands and feet,
  and forced into his mouth the head of a snake, applying fire at
  the same time to its tail. The snake jumped down the man's throat
  and passed into his stomach, but at the inquest held over the body
  no traces of wounds were found to which death could be attributed.
  Such a crime, however, may be detected by examination of the bones
  which, from the head downwards, will be found entirely of a bright
  red colour, caused by the dispersion of the blood; and moreover,
  the more the bones are scraped away, the brighter in colour do
  they become."

It is difficult to speak of such a book as "Instructions to Coroners"
with anything like becoming gravity, and yet it is one of the most
widely-read and highly-esteemed works in China; so much so, that
native scholars frequently throw it in the teeth of foreigners as one
of their many repertories of real wonder-working science, equal to
anything that comes from the West, if only foreigners would take the
trouble to consult it. To satisfy our own curiosity on the subject we
bought a copy and translated it from beginning to end; but our readers
will perhaps be able to determine its scientific value from the few
quotations given above, and agree with us that it would hardly be
worth while to learn Chinese for the pleasure or profit to be derived
from reading "Instructions to Coroners" in the original character.




CHRISTIANITY

The extraordinary feeling of hatred and contempt evinced by the
Chinese nation for missionaries of every denomination who settle in
their country, naturally suggests the question whether Christianity is
likely to prove a boon to China, if, indeed, it ever succeeds in
taking root at all. That under the form of Roman Catholicism, it once
had a chance of becoming the religion of the Empire, and that that
chance was recklessly sacrificed to bigotry and intolerance, is too
well known to be repeated; but that such an opportunity will ever
occur again is quite beyond the bounds, if not of possibility, at any
rate of probability. Missionary prospects are anything but bright in
China just now, in spite of rosily worded "reports," and annual
statistics of persons baptized. A respectable Chinaman will tell you
that only thieves and bad characters who have nothing to lose avail
themselves of baptism, as a means of securing "long nights of
indolence and ease" in the household of some enthusiastic missionary
at from four to ten dollars a month. Educated men will not tolerate
missionaries in their houses, as many have found to their cost; and
the fact cannot be concealed that the foreign community in China
suffers no small inconvenience and incurs considerable danger for a
cause with which a large majority of its members has no sympathy
whatever. It would, however, be invidious to dwell upon the class of
natives who allow themselves to be baptized and pretend to accept
dogmas they most certainly do not understand, or on the mental and
social calibre of numbers of those gentlemen who are sent out to
convert them; we will confine ourselves merely to considering what
practical benefits Christianity would be likely to confer upon the
Chinese at large. And this we may fairly do, not being of those who
hold that all will be damned but the sect of that particular church to
which they themselves happen to belong; but believing that the Chinese
have as good a chance as anybody else of whatever happiness may be in
store for the virtuous, whether they become Christians or whether they
do not.

In the course of eight years' residence in China, we have never met a
drunken man in the streets. Opium-smokers we have seen in all stages
of intoxication; but no drunken brawls, no bruised and bleeding wives.
Would Christianity raise the Chinese to the standard of European
sobriety? Would it bring them to renounce opium, only to replace it
with gin? Would it cause them to become more frugal, to live more
economically than they do now on their bowl of rice and cabbage,
moistened with a drink of tea, and perhaps supplemented with a few
whiffs of the mildest possible tobacco? Would it cause them to be more
industrious than--e.g., the wood-carvers of Ningpo who work daily from
sunrise to dusk, with two short intervals for meals? Would it make
them more filial?--justly renowned as they are for unremitting care of
aged and infirm parents. More fraternal?--where every family is a
small society, each member toiling for the common good, and being sure
of food and shelter if thrown out of work or enfeebled by disease.
More law-abiding?--we appeal to any one who has lived in China, and
mixed with the people. Would it make them more honest?--when many
Europeans confess that for straightforward business they would sooner
deal with Chinamen than with merchants of certain Christian
nationalities we shall not take upon ourselves to name. Should we not
run the risk of sowing seed for future and bloody religious wars on
soil where none now rage? To teach them justice in the administration
of law would be a glorious task indeed, but even that would have its
dark side. Litigation would become the order of the day, and a
rapacious class would spring into existence where lawyers and
barristers are now totally unknown. The striking phenomenon of extreme
wealth side by side with extreme poverty, might be produced in a
country where absolute destitution is at present remarkably rare, and
no one need actually starve; and thus would be developed a fine field
for the practice of that Christian charity which by demoralisation of
the poorer classes so skilfully defeats its own end. We should rejoice
if anything could make Chinamen less cruel to dumb animals, desist
from carrying ducks, geese, and pigs, hanging by their legs to a pole,
feed their hungry dogs, and spare their worn-out beasts of burden. But
pigeon-shooting is unknown, and gag-bearing reins have yet to be
introduced into China; neither have we heard of a poor heathen
Chinaman "skinning a sheep alive." (_Vide Daily Papers of July_ 12,
1875.)

Last of all, it must not be forgotten that China has already four
great religions flourishing in her midst. There is _Confucianism_,
which, strictly speaking, is not a religion, but a system of
self-culture with a view to the proper government of (1) one's own
family and of (2) the State. It teaches man to be good, and to love
virtue for its own sake, with no fear of punishment for failure, no
hope of reward for success. Is it below Christianity in this?

_Buddhism_, _Taoism_, and _Mahomedanism_, share the patronage of the
illiterate, and serve to satisfy the natural craving in uneducated man
for something supernatural in which to believe and on which to rely.
The _literati_ are sheer materialists: they laugh at the absurdities
of Buddhism, though they sometimes condescend to practise its rites.
They strongly object to the introduction of a new religion, and
successfully oppose it by every means in their power. They urge, and
with justice, that Confucius has laid down an admirable rule of life
in harmony with their own customs, and that the conduct of those who
approximate to this standard would compare not unfavourably with the
practice, as distinguished from the profession, of any religion in the
world.




ANTI-CHRISTIAN LYRICS

The following inflammatory placard, which was posted up last year at a
place called Lung-p'ing, near the great tea mart of Hankow, will give
a faint idea of native prejudice against the propagation of
Christianity in China. The original was in verse, and evidently the
work of a highly-educated man:--

  Strange doctrines are speedily to be eradicated:
  The holy teaching of Confucius is now in the ascendant.
  There is but one most sacred religion:
  There can be but one Mean.
  By their great virtue Yao and Shun led the way,
  Alone able to expound the "fickle" and the "slight;"[*]
  Confucius' teachings have not passed away,
  Yet working wonders in secret[+] has long been in vogue.
  Be earnest in practising the ordinary virtues:
  To extend filial piety, brotherly love, loyalty, and
    considerateness, is to benefit one's-self.
  Be careful in your speech,
  And marvels, feats of strength, sedition, and spirits,[:] will
    disappear from conversation.
  I pray you do not listen to unsubstantiated words:
  Then who will dare to deceive the age with soft-sounding phrases.
  Our religion is for all who choose to seek it;
  But we build no chapels to beguile the foolish.
  Our true religion has existed from of old, up to the present day,
    undergoing no change.
  Its true principles include in their application those of the middle
    and outside nations alike.
  Great is the advantage to us!
  Great is the good influence on this generation!
  Of all religions the only true one,
  What false doctrine can compare with it?
  The _stillness_ and _cleanliness_ of Buddhism,
  The _abstruseness_ and _hollow mockery_ of Taoism--
  These are but side-doors compared with ours;
  Fit to be quitted, but not to be entered.
  These are but by-paths compared with ours;
  Fit to be blocked up, but not to be used.
  How then about this one, stranger than Buddhist or Taoist creed?
  With its secret confusion of sexes, unutterable!
  More hurtful than all the dogmas of the other two;
  Spreading far and wide the unfathomable poison of its mysteries.
  Herein you must carefully discriminate,
  And not receive it with belief and veneration.
    Those who now embrace Christ
  Call him Lord of heaven and earth,
  Worshipping him with prayer,
  Deceiving and exciting the foolish,
  Dishonouring the holy teaching of Confucius.
  I laugh at your hero of the cross,
  Who, though sacrificing his life, did not preserve his virtue
    complete.
  Missions build chapels,
  But the desire to do good works is not natural to them.
  The method of influencing the natures of women
  Is but a trick to further base ends.
  They injure boys by magical arts,
  And commit many atrocious crimes.
  They say their religion is the only true one,
  But their answers are full of prevarication.
  They say their book is the Holy Book,
  But the Old and New Testaments are like the songs of Wei and
    Cheng.[!]
  As to the people who are gradually being misled,
  I compassionate their ignorance;
  As to the educated who are thus deceived,
  I am wroth at their want of reflection.
  For these men are not of us;
  We are like the horse and the cow;[@]
  If you associate with them,
  Who will expel these crocodiles and snakes?
  This is a secret grievance of the State,
  A manifest injury to the people!
  Truly it is the eye-sore of the age.
  You quietly look on unconcerned!
  I, musing over the present state of men's hearts,
  Desire to rectify them.
  Alas! the ways of devils are full of guile!
  But man's disposition is naturally pure.
  How then can men willingly walk with devils?
  You, like trees and plants, without understanding,
  Allow the Barbarians to throw into confusion the Flowery Land.
  Is it that no holy and wise men have appeared?
  Under the Chow dynasty, when the barbarians were at the height of
    their arrogance,
  The hand of Confucius and Mencius was laid upon them!
  Under the T'ang when Buddhism was poisoning the age,
  Han and Hsi exterminated them.
  Now these devils are working evil,
  Troubling the villages and market-places where they live.
  Surely many heroes must come forward
  To crush them with the pen of Confucius.
  Turn then and consider
  That were it not for my class[#]
  None would uphold the true religion.
  I say unto you,
  And you should give heed unto me,
  Believe not the nonsense of Redemption,
  Believe not the trickery of the Resurrection.
  Set yourselves to find out the true path,
  And learn to distinguish between man and devil.
  Pass not with loitering step the unknown ford,
  Nor bow the knee before the vicious and the depraved.
  Wait not for Heaven to exterminate them
  To find out that earth has a day for their destruction.
  The shapeless, voiceless imp--
  Why worship him?
  His supernatural, unprincipled nonsense
  Should surely be discarded.
  Ye who think not so,
  When the devils are in your houses
  They will covet your homes,
  And they will take the fingers and arms of your strong ones
  To make claws and teeth for imps.
  They excite people at first by specious talk,
  Not one jot of which is intelligible;
  Then they destroy your reason,
  Making you wander far from the truth.
  You throw over ancestral worship to enjoy none yourselves;
  Your wives and children suffer pollution,
  And you are pointed at with the finger.
  Thus heedlessly you injure eternal principles,
  Embracing filth and treasuring corruption,
  To your endless shame
  And to your everlasting misfortune.
  Finally, if in life your heads escape the axe,
  There will await you the excessive injury of the shroud.[$]
  Judging by the crimes of your lives,
  Your corpses will be cast to scorpions and snakes.
  The devils introduce this doctrine,
  Which grows like plants from seeds;
  Some one must arise to punish them,
  And destroy their religion root and branch.
  Hasten, all of you, to repent,
  And walk in the way of righteousness;
  We truly pity you.
  A warning notice to discard false doctrines!

    [*] The fickle nature of men's minds, and slight regard for the true
    doctrine.

    [+] Forbidden by Confucius.

    [:] Avoided by Confucius as topics.

    [!] Licentious.

    [@] The Chinese say horses prefer going against, cows with, the wind.

    [#] The _literati_.

    [$] Missionaries are said to keep the corpses of converts concealed
    from public view between death and interment, that the absence of
    the dead man's eyes may not be detected.




CONCLUSION

"Surely it is manifest enough that by selecting the evidence, any
society may be relatively blackened, and any other society relatively
whitened."[*] We hope that no such principle of selection can be
traced in the preceding pages. Irritation against traducers of China
and her morality[+] may have occasionally tinged our views with a
somewhat rosy hue; but we have all along felt the danger of this bias,
and have endeavoured to guard against it. We have no wish to exalt
China at the expense of European civilisation, but we cannot blind
ourselves to the fact that her vices have been exaggerated, and her
virtues overlooked. Only the bigoted or ignorant could condemn with
sweeping assertions of immorality a nation of many millions absolutely
free, as the Chinese are, from one such vice as drunkenness; in whose
cities may be seen--what all our legislative and executive skill
cannot secure--streets quiet and deserted after nine or ten o'clock at
night. Add to this industry, frugality, patriotism,[:] and a boundless
respect for the majesty of office: it then only remains for us to
acknowledge that China is after all "a nation of much talent, and, in
some respects, even wisdom."[!]

    [*] Spencer's Sociology: The Bias of Patriotism.

    [+] "The miseries and horrors (?) which are now destroying (?) the
    Chinese Empire are the direct and organic result of the moral
    profligacy of its inhabitants."--_Froude's Short Studies on Great
    Subjects_.

    [:] "Every patriotic Chinese--and there are millions of such."--_Dr
    Legge to London and China Telegraph_, July 5, 1875.

    [!] Mill's Essay on Liberty.

========================================
========================================

THE CIVILIZATION OF CHINA

by Herbert A. Giles


Professor of Chinese in the University of Cambridge,

And sometime H.B.M. Consul at Ningpo




PREFACE

The aim of this work is to suggest a rough outline of Chinese
civilization from the earliest times down to the present period of rapid
and startling transition.

It has been written, primarily, for readers who know little or nothing
of China, in the hope that it may succeed in alluring them to a wider
and more methodical survey.

H.A.G.

Cambridge, May 12, 1911.




THE CIVILIZATION OF CHINA



CHAPTER I--THE FEUDAL AGE

It is a very common thing now-a-days to meet people who are going to
"China," which can be reached by the Siberian railway in fourteen or
fifteen days. This brings us at once to the question--What is meant by
the term China?

Taken in its widest sense, the term includes Mongolia, Manchuria,
Eastern Turkestan, Tibet, and the Eighteen Provinces, the whole being
equivalent to an area of some five million square miles, that is,
considerably more than twice the size of the United States of America.
But for a study of manners and customs and modes of thought of the
Chinese people, we must confine ourselves to that portion of the whole
which is known to the Chinese as the "Eighteen Provinces," and to us as
China Proper. This portion of the empire occupies not quite two-fifths
of the whole, covering an area of somewhat more than a million and a
half square miles. Its chief landmarks may be roughly stated as Peking,
the capital, in the north; Canton, the great commercial centre, in the
south; Shanghai, on the east; and the Tibetan frontier on the west.

Any one who will take the trouble to look up these four points on a
map, representing as they do central points on the four sides of a rough
square, will soon realize the absurdity of asking a returning traveller
the very much asked question, How do you like China? Fancy asking a
Chinaman, who had spent a year or two in England, how he liked Europe!
Peking, for instance, stands on the same parallel of latitude as Madrid;
whereas Canton coincides similarly with Calcutta. Within the square
indicated by the four points enumerated above will be found variations
of climate, flowers, fruit, vegetables and animals--not to mention human
beings--distributed in very much the same way as in Europe. The climate
of Peking is exceedingly dry and bracing; no rain, and hardly any snow,
falling between October and April. The really hot weather lasts only for
six or eight weeks, about July and August--and even then the nights are
always cool; while for six or eight weeks between December and February
there may be a couple of feet of ice on the river. Canton, on the other
hand, has a tropical climate, with a long damp enervating summer and a
short bleak winter. The old story runs that snow has only been seen
once in Canton, and then it was thought by the people to be falling
cotton-wool.

The northern provinces are remarkable for vast level plains, dotted
with villages, the houses of which are built of mud. In the southern
provinces will be found long stretches of mountain scenery, vying in
loveliness with anything to be seen elsewhere. Monasteries are built
high up on the hills, often on almost inaccessible crags; and there
the well-to-do Chinaman is wont to escape from the fierce heat of the
southern summer. On one particular mountain near Canton, there are
said to be no fewer than one hundred of such monasteries, all of which
reserve apartments for guests, and are glad to be able to add to their
funds by so doing.

In the north of China, Mongolian ponies, splendid mules, and donkeys are
seen in large quantities; also the two-humped camel, which carries heavy
loads across the plains of Mongolia. In the south, until the advent of
the railway, travellers had to choose between the sedan-chair carried
on the shoulders of stalwart coolies, or the slower but more comfortable
house-boat. Before steamers began to ply on the coast, a candidate for
the doctor's degree at the great triennial examination would take three
months to travel from Canton to Peking. Urgent dispatches, however, were
often forwarded by relays of riders at the rate of two hundred miles a
day.

The market in Peking is supplied, among other things, with excellent
mutton from a fat-tailed breed of sheep, chiefly for the largely
Mohammedan population; but the sheep will not live in southern China,
where the goat takes its place. The pig is found everywhere, and
represents beef in our market, the latter being extremely unpalatable to
the ordinary Chinaman, partly perhaps because Confucius forbade men to
slaughter the animal which draws the plough and contributes so much to
the welfare of mankind. The staple food, the "bread" of the people in
the Chinese Empire, is nominally rice; but this is too costly for the
peasant of northern China to import, and he falls back on millet as its
substitute. Apples, pears, grapes, melons, and walnuts grow abundantly
in the north; the southern fruits are the banana, the orange, the
pineapple, the mango, the pomelo, the lichee, and similar fruits of a
more tropical character.

Cold storage has been practised by the Chinese for centuries. Blocks of
ice are cut from the river for that purpose; and on a hot summer's day a
Peking coolie can obtain an iced drink at an almost infinitesimal cost.
Grapes are preserved from autumn until the following May and June by
the simple process of sticking the stalk of the bunch into a large hard
pear, and putting it away carefully in the ice-house. Even at Ningpo,
close to our central point on the eastern coast of China, thin layers
of ice are collected from pools and ditches, and successfully stored for
use in the following summer.

The inhabitants of the coast provinces are distinguished from the
dwellers in the north and in the far interior by a marked alertness of
mind and general temperament. The Chinese themselves declare that virtue
is associated with mountains, wisdom with water, cynically implying that
no one is both virtuous and wise. Between the inhabitants of the
various provinces there is little love lost. Northerners fear and
hate southerners, and the latter hold the former in infinite scorn and
contempt. Thus, when in 1860 the Franco-British force made for Peking,
it was easy enough to secure the services of any number of Cantonese,
who remained as faithful as though the attack had been directed against
some third nationality.

The population of China has never been exactly ascertained. It has been
variously estimated by foreign travellers, Sacharoff, in 1842, placing
the figure at over four hundred millions. The latest census, taken in
1902, is said to yield a total of four hundred and ten millions. Perhaps
three hundred millions would be a juster estimate; even that would
absorb no less than one-fifth of the human race. From this total it is
easy to calculate that if the Chinese people were to walk past a given
point in single file, the procession would never end; long before the
last of the three hundred millions had passed by, a new generation would
have sprung up to continue the neverending line. The census, however, is
a very old institution with the Chinese; and we learn that in A.D. 156
the total population of the China of those days was returned as a little
over fifty millions. In more modern times, the process of taking the
census consists in serving out house-tickets to the head of every
household, who is responsible for a proper return of all the inmates;
but as there is no fixed day for which these tickets are returnable, the
results are approximate rather than exact.

Again, it is not uncommon to hear people talking of the Chinese language
as if it were a single tongue spoken all over China after a more or less
uniform standard. But the fact is that the colloquial is broken up into
at least eight dialects, each so strongly marked as to constitute eight
languages as different to the ear, one from another, as English, Dutch
and German, or French, Spanish, Italian and Portuguese. A Shanghai man,
for instance, is unintelligible to a Cantonese, and so on. All officials
are obliged, and all of the better educated merchants and others
endeavour, if only for business purposes, to learn something of the
dialect spoken at the court of Peking; and this is what is popularly
known as "Mandarin." The written language remains the same for the whole
empire; which merely means that ideas set down on paper after a uniform
system are spoken with different sounds, just as the Arabic numerals are
written uniformly in England, France and Germany, but are pronounced in
a totally different manner.

The only difficulty of the spoken language, of no matter what dialect,
lies in the "tones," which simply means the different intonations which
may be given to one and the same sound, thus producing so many entirely
different meanings. But for these tones, the colloquial of China would
be absurdly easy, inasmuch as there is no such thing as grammar, in the
sense of gender, number, case, mood, tense, or any of the variations we
understand by that term. Many amusing examples are current of blunders
committed by faulty speakers, such as that of the student who told his
servant to bring him a goose, when what he really wanted was some salt,
both goose and salt having the same sound, _yen_, but quite different
intonations. The following specimen has the advantage of being true.
A British official reported to the Foreign Office that the people of
Tientsin were in the habit of shouting after foreigners, "Mao-tsu,
mao-tsu" (pronounced _mowdza_, _ow_ as in _how_), from which he gathered
that they were much struck by the head-gear of the barbarian. Now, it is
a fact that _mao-tsu_, uttered with a certain intonation, means a hat;
but with another intonation, it means "hairy one," and the latter,
referring to the big beards of foreigners, was the meaning intended to
be conveyed. This epithet is still to be heard, and is often preceded by
the adjective "red."

The written characters, known to have been in use for the past three
thousand years, were originally rude pictures, as of men, birds, horses,
dogs, houses, the numerals (one, two, three, four), etc., etc., and
it is still possible to trace in the modified modern forms of these
characters more or less striking resemblances to the objects intended.
The next step was to put two or more characters together, to express by
their combination an abstract idea, as, for instance, a _hand_ holding
a _rod_ = father; but of course this simple process did not carry the
Chinese very far, and they soon managed to hit on a joint picture and
phonetic system, which enabled them to multiply characters indefinitely,
new compounds being formed for use as required. It is thus that new
characters can still be produced, if necessary, to express novel objects
or ideas. The usual plan, however, is to combine existing terms in
such a way as to suggest what is wanted. For instance, in preference
to inventing a separate character for the piece of ordnance known as
a "mortar," the Chinese, with an eye to its peculiar pose, gave it the
appropriate name of a "frog gun."

Again, just as the natives and the dialects of the various parts of
China differ one from another, although fundamentally the same people
and the same language, so do the manners and customs differ to such an
extent that habits of life and ceremonial regulations which prevail in
one part of the empire do not necessarily prevail in another. Yet once
more it will be found that the differences which appear irreconcilable
at first, do not affect what is essential, but apply rather to matters
of detail. Many travellers and others have described as customs of the
Chinese customs which, as presented, refer to a part of China only, and
not to the whole. For instance, the ornamental ceremonies connected with
marriage vary in different provinces; but there is a certain ceremony,
equivalent in one sense to signing the register, which is almost
essential to every marriage contract. Bride and bridegroom must kneel
down and call God to witness; they also pledge each other in wine from
two cups joined together by a red string. Red is the colour for joy,
as white is the colour for mourning. Chinese note-paper is always ruled
with red lines or stamped with a red picture. One Chinese official who
gave a dinner-party in foreign style, even went so far as to paste a
piece of red paper on to each dinner-napkin, in order to counteract the
unpropitious influence of white.

Reference has been made above to journeys performed by boat. In addition
to the Yangtsze and the Yellow River or Hoang ho (pronounced _Hwong
haw_), two of the most important rivers in the world, China is covered
with a network of minor streams, which in southern China form the chief
lines of transport. The Yangtsze is nothing more than a huge navigable
river, crossing China Proper from west to east. The Yellow River, which,
with the exception of a great loop to the north, runs on nearly parallel
lines of latitude, has long been known as "China's Sorrow," and has been
responsible for enormous loss of life and property. Its current is so
swift that ordinary navigation is impossible, and to cross it in boats
is an undertaking of considerable difficulty and danger. It is so called
from the yellowness of its water, caused by the vast quantity of mud
which is swept down by its rapid current to the sea; hence, the common
saying, "When the Yellow River runs clear," as an equivalent of the
Greek Kalends. The huge embankments, built to confine it to a given
course, are continually being forced by any unusual press of extra
water, with enormous damage to property and great loss of life, and from
time to time this river has been known to change its route altogether,
suddenly diverging, almost at a right angle. Up to the year 1851 the
mouth of the river was to the south of the Shantung promontory, about
lat. 34 N.; then, with hardly any warning, it began to flow to the
north-east, finding an outlet to the north of the Shantung promontory,
about lat. 38 N.

A certain number of connecting links have been formed between the chief
lines of water communication, in the shape of artificial cuttings; but
there is nothing worthy the name of canal except the rightly named Grand
Canal, called by the Chinese the "river of locks," or alternatively the
"transport river," because once used to convey rice from the south to
Peking. This gigantic work, designed and executed in the thirteenth
century by the Emperor Kublai Khan, extended to about six hundred
and fifty miles in length, and completed an almost unbroken water
communication between Peking and Canton. As a wonderful engineering feat
it is indeed more than matched by the famous Great Wall, which dates
back to a couple of hundred years before Christ, and which has been
glorified as the last trace of man's handiwork on the globe to fade from
the view of an imaginary person receding into space. Recent exploration
shows that this wall is about eighteen hundred miles in length,
stretching from a point on the seashore somewhat east of Peking, to the
northern frontier of Tibet. Roughly speaking, it is twenty-two feet in
height by twenty feet in breadth; at intervals of a hundred yards are
towers forty feet high, the whole being built originally of brick, of
which in some parts but mere traces now remain. Nor is this the only
great wall; ruins of other walls on a considerable scale have lately
been brought to light, the object of all being one and the same--to keep
back the marauding Tartars.

Over the length and breadth of their boundless empire, with all its
varying climates and inhabitants, the Chinese people are free to travel,
for business or pleasure, at their own sweet will, and to take up their
abode at any spot without let or hindrance. No passports are required;
neither is any ordinary citizen obliged to possess other papers of
identification. Chinese inns are not exposed to the annoyance of
domicilary visits with reference to their clients for the time being;
and so long as the latter pay their way, and refrain from molesting
others, they will usually be free from molestation themselves. The
Chinese, however, are not fond of travelling; they love their homes too
well, and they further dread the inconveniences and dangers attached
to travel in many other parts of the world. Boatmen, carters, and
innkeepers have all of them bad reputations for extortionate charges;
and the traveller may sometimes happen upon a "black inn," which is
another name for a den of thieves. Still there have been many who
travelled for the sake of beautiful scenery, or in order to visit famous
spots of historical interest; not to mention the large body of officials
who are constantly on the move, passing from post to post.

Among those who believe that every nation must have reached its present
quarters from some other distant parts of the world, must be reckoned a
few students of the ancient history of China. Coincidences in language
and in manners and customs, mostly of a shadowy character, have led some
to suggest Babylonia as the region from which the Chinese migrated to
the land where they are now found. The Chinese possess authentic records
of an indisputably early past, but throughout these records there is
absolutely no mention, not even a hint, of any migration of the kind.

Tradition places the Golden Age of China so far back as three thousand
years before Christ; for a sober survey of China's early civilization,
it is not necessary to push further back than the tenth century B.C. We
shall find evidence of such an advanced state of civilization at that
later date as to leave no doubt of a very remote antiquity.

The China of those days, known even then as the Middle Kingdom, was
a mere patch on the empire of to-day. It lay, almost lozenge-shaped,
between the 34th and 40th parallels of latitude north, with the upper
point of the lozenge resting on the modern Peking, and the lower on
Si-an Fu in Shensi, whither the late Empress Dowager fled for safety
during the Boxer rising in 1900. The ancient autocratic Imperial system
had recently been disestablished, and a feudal system had taken its
place. The country was divided up into a number of vassal states of
varying size and importance, ruled each by its own baron, who swore
allegiance to the sovereign of the Royal State. The relations, however,
which came to subsist, as time went on, between these states, sovereign
and vassal alike, as described in contemporary annals, often remind the
reader of the relations which prevailed between the various political
divisions of ancient Greece. The rivalries of Athens and Sparta, whose
capitals were only one hundred and fifty miles apart--though a
perusal of Thucydides makes one feel that at least half the world was
involved--find their exact equivalent in the jealousies and animosities
which stirred the feudal states of ancient China, and in the disastrous
campaigns and bloody battles which the states fought with one another.
We read of chariots and horsemanship; of feats of arms and deeds of
individual heroism; of forced marches, and of night attacks in which the
Chinese soldier was gagged with a kind of wooden bit, to prevent talking
in the ranks; of territory annexed and reconquered, and of the violent
deaths of rival rulers by poison or the dagger of the assassin.

When the armies of these states went into battle they formed a line,
with the bowmen on the left and the spearmen on the right flank. The
centre was occupied by chariots, each drawn by either three or four
horses harnessed abreast. Swords, daggers, shields, iron-headed clubs
some five to six feet in length and weighing from twelve to fifteen
pounds, huge iron hooks, drums, cymbals, gongs, horns, banners
and streamers innumerable, were also among the equipment of war.
Beacon-fires of wolves' dung were lighted to announce the approach of
an enemy and summon the inhabitants to arms. Quarter was rarely if
ever given, and it was customary to cut the ears from the bodies of
the slain. Parleys were conducted and terms of peace arranged under the
shelter of a banner of truce, upon which two words were inscribed--"Stop
fighting."

The beacon-fires above mentioned, very useful for summoning the feudal
barons to the rescue in case of need, cost one sovereign his throne. He
had a beautiful concubine, for the sake of whose company he neglected
the affairs of government. The lady was of a melancholy turn, never
being seen to smile. She said she loved the sound of rent silk, and to
gratify her whim many fine pieces of silk were torn to shreds. The king
offered a thousand ounces of gold to any one who would make her laugh;
whereupon his chief minister suggested that the beacon-fires should be
lighted to summon the feudal nobles with their armies, as though the
royal house were in danger. The trick succeeded; for in the hurry-skurry
that ensued the impassive girl positively laughed outright. Later on,
when a real attack was made upon the capital by barbarian hordes, and
the beacon-fires were again lighted, this time in stern reality, there
was no response from the insulted nobles. The king was killed, and his
concubine strangled herself.

Meanwhile, a high state of civilization was enjoyed by these feudal
peoples, when not engaged in cutting each other's throats. They lived
in thatched houses constructed of rammed earth and plaster, with beaten
floors on which dry grass was strewn as carpet. Originally accustomed
to sit on mats, they introduced chairs and tables at an early date; they
drank an ardent spirit with their carefully cooked food, and wore robes
of silk. Ballads were sung, and dances were performed, on ceremonial and
festive occasions; hunting and fishing and agriculture were occupations
for the men, while the women employed themselves in spinning and
weaving. There were casters of bronze vessels, and workers in gold,
silver, and iron; jade and other stones were cut and polished for
ornaments. The written language was already highly developed, being much
the same as we now find it. Indeed, the chief difference lies in the
form of the characters, just as an old English text differs in form from
a text of the present day. What we may call the syntax of the language
has remained very much the same; and phrases from the old ballads of
three thousand years ago, which have passed into the colloquial, are
still readily understood, though of course pronounced according to the
requirements of modern speech. We can no more say how Confucius (551-479
B.C.) pronounced Chinese, than we can say how Miltiades pronounced Greek
when addressing his soldiers before the battle of Marathon (490 B.C.).
The "books" which were read in ancient China consisted of thin slips
of wood or bamboo, on which the characters were written by means of a
pencil of wood or bamboo, slightly frayed at the end, so as to pick up
a coloured liquid and transfer it to the tablets as required. Until
recently, it was thought that the Chinese scratched their words on
tablets of bamboo with a knife, but now we know that the knife was only
used for scratching out, when a character was wrongly written.

The art of healing was practised among the Chinese in their pre-historic
times, but the earliest efforts of a methodical character, of which
we have any written record, belong to the period with which we are now
dealing. There is indeed a work, entitled "Plain Questions," which is
attributed to a legendary emperor of the Golden Age, who interrogates
one of his ministers on the cause and cure of all kinds of diseases;
as might be expected, it is not of any real value, nor can its date be
carried back beyond a few centuries B.C.

Physicians of the feudal age classified diseases under the four seasons
of the year: headaches and neuralgic affections under _spring_, skin
diseases of all kinds under _summer_, fevers and agues under _autumn_,
and bronchial and pulmonary complaints under _winter_. They treated the
various complaints that fell under these headings by suitable doses of
one or more ingredients taken from the five classes of drugs, derived
from herbs, trees, living creatures, minerals, and grains, each of which
class contained medicines of five flavours, with special properties:
_sour_ for nourishing the bones, _acid_ for nourishing the muscles,
_salt_ for nourishing the blood-vessels, _bitter_ for nourishing general
vitality, and _sweet_ for nourishing the flesh. The pulse has always
been very much to the front in the treatment of disease; there are at
least twenty-four varieties of pulse with which every doctor is supposed
to be familiar, and some eminent doctors have claimed to distinguish
no fewer than seventy-two. In the "Plain Questions" there is a sentence
which points towards the circulation of the blood,--"All the blood is
under the jurisdiction of the heart," a point beyond which the Chinese
never seem to have pushed their investigations; but of this curious
feature in their civilization, later on.

It was under the feudal system, perhaps a thousand years before Christ,
that the people of China began to possess family names. Previous to that
time there appear to have been tribal or clan names; these however were
not in ordinary use among the individual members of each clan, who were
known by their personal names only, bestowed upon them in childhood by
their parents. Gradually, it became customary to prefix to the personal
name a surname, adopted generally from the name of the place where
the family lived, sometimes from an appellation or official title of
a distinguished ancestor; places in China never take their names from
individuals, as with us, and consequently there are no such names as
Faringdon or Gislingham, the homes of the Fearings or Gislings of old.
Thus, to use English terms, a boy who had been called "Welcome" by his
parents might prefix the name of the place, Cambridge, where he was
born, and call himself Cambridge Welcome, the surname always coming
first in Chinese, as, for instance, in Li Hung-Chang. The Manchus, it
must be remembered, have no surnames; that is to say, they do not use
their clan or family names, but call themselves by their personal names
only.

Chinese surnames, other than place names, are derived from a variety
of sources: from nature, as River, Stone, Cave; from animals, as Bear,
Sheep, Dragon; from birds, as Swallow, Pheasant; from the body, as
Long-ears, Squint-eye; from colours, as Black, White; from trees and
flowers, as Hawthorn, Leaf, Reed, Forest; and others, such as Rich,
East, Sharp, Hope, Duke, Stern, Tepid, Money, etc. By the fifth century
before Christ, the use of surnames had definitely become established for
all classes, whereas in Europe surnames were not known until about the
twelfth century after Christ, and even then were confined to persons
of wealth and position. There is a small Chinese book, studied by every
schoolboy and entitled _The Hundred Surnames_, the word "hundred" being
commonly used in a generally comprehensive sense. It actually contains
about four hundred of the names which occur most frequently.

About two hundred and twenty years before Christ, the feudal system came
to an end. One aggressive state gradually swallowed up all the others;
and under the rule of its sovereign, China became once more an empire,
and such it has ever since remained. But although always an empire, the
throne, during the past two thousand years, has passed many times from
one house to another.

The extraordinary man who led his state to victory over each rival in
turn, and ultimately mounted the throne to rule over a united China,
finds his best historical counterpart in Napoleon. He called himself
the First Emperor, and began by sending an army of 300,000 men to fight
against an old and dreaded enemy to the north, recently identified
beyond question with the Huns. He dispatched a fleet to search for some
mysterious islands off the coast, thought by some to be the islands
which form Japan. He built the Great Wall, to a great extent by means
of convict labour, malefactors being condemned to long terms of penal
servitude on the works. His copper coinage was so uniformly good that
the cowry disappeared altogether from commerce during his reign. Above
all things he desired to impart a fresh stimulus to literary effort, but
he adopted singularly unfortunate means to secure this desirable end;
for, listening to the insidious flattery of courtiers, he determined
that literature should begin anew with his reign. He therefore
determined to destroy all existing books, finally deciding to spare
those connected with three important departments of human knowledge:
namely, (1) works which taught the people to plough, sow, reap, and
provide food for the race; (2) works on the use of drugs and on the
healing art; and (3) works on the various methods of foretelling the
future which might lead men to act in accordance with, and not in
opposition to, the eternal fitness of things as seen in the operations
of Nature. Stringent orders were issued accordingly, and many scholars
were put to death for concealing books in the hope that the storm would
blow over. Numbers of valuable works perished in a vast conflagration
of books, and the only wonder is that any were preserved, with the
exception of the three classes specified above.

In 210 B.C. the First Emperor died, and his youngest son was placed
upon the throne with the title of Second Emperor. The latter began by
carrying out the funeral arrangements of his father, as described about
a century later by the first and greatest of China's historians:--

"On the 9th moon the First Emperor was buried in Mount Li, which in the
early days of his reign he had caused to be tunnelled and prepared with
that view. Then, when he had consolidated the empire, he employed his
soldiery, to the number of 700,000, to bore down to the Three Springs
(that is, until water was reached), and there a firm foundation was laid
and the sarcophagus placed thereon. Rare objects and costly jewels were
collected from the palaces and from the various officials, and were
carried thither and stored in huge quantities. Artificers were ordered
to construct mechanical crossbows, which, if any one were to enter,
would immediately discharge their arrows. With the aid of quicksilver,
rivers were made--the Yangtsze, the Yellow River, and the great
ocean--the metal being made to flow from one into the other by
machinery. On the roof were delineated the constellations of the sky,
on the floor the geographical divisions of the earth. Candles were made
from the fat of the man-fish (walrus), calculated to last for a
very long time. The Second Emperor said: 'It is not fitting that the
concubines of my late father who are without children should leave him
now;' and accordingly he ordered them to accompany the dead monarch into
the next world, those who thus perished being many in number. When the
internment was completed, some one suggested that the workmen who had
made the machinery and concealed the treasure knew the great value of
the latter, and that the secret would leak out. Therefore, so soon as
the ceremony was over, and the path giving access to the sarcophagus had
been blocked up at its innermost end, the outside gate at the entrance
to this path was let fall, and the mausoleum was effectually closed, so
that not one of the workmen escaped. Trees and grass were then planted
around, that the spot might look like the rest of the mountain."

The career of the Second Emperor finds an apt parallel in that of
Richard Cromwell, except that the former was put to death, after a
short and inglorious reign. Then followed a dynasty which has left an
indelible mark upon the civilization as well as on the recorded history
of China. A peasant, by mere force of character, succeeded after a
three-years' struggle in establishing himself upon the throne, 206 B.C.,
and his posterity, known as the House of Han, ruled over China for four
hundred years, accidentally divided into two nearly equal portions
by the Christian era, about which date there occurred a temporary
usurpation of the throne which for some time threatened the stability
of the dynasty in the direct line of succession. To this date, the more
northern Chinese have no prouder title than that of a "son of Han."

During the whole period of four hundred years the empire cannot be said
to have enjoyed complete tranquillity either at home or abroad. There
were constant wars with the Tartar tribes on the north, against whom the
Great Wall proved to be a somewhat ineffectual barrier. Also with the
Huns, the forbears of the Turks, who once succeeded in shutting up the
founder of the dynasty in one of his own cities, from which he only
escaped by a stratagem to be related in another connexion. There were
in addition wars with Korea, the ultimate conquest of which led to the
discovery of Japan, then at a low level of civilization and unable to
enter into official relations with China until A.D. 57, when an embassy
was sent for the first time. Those who are accustomed to think of the
Chinese as an eminently unwarlike nation will perhaps be surprised to
hear that before the end of the second century B.C. they had carried
their victorious arms far away into Central Asia, annexing even the
Pamirs and Kokand to the empire. The wild tribes of modern Yunnan were
reduced to subjection, and their territory may further be considered as
added from about this period.

At home, the eunuchs gave an immense deal of trouble by their restless
spirit of intrigue; besides which, for nearly twenty years the Imperial
power was in the hands of a famous usurper, named Wang Mang (pronounced
_Wahng Mahng_), who had secured it by the usual means of treachery and
poison, to lose it on the battle-field and himself to perish shortly
afterwards in a revolt of his own soldiery. But the most remarkable of
all events connected with the Han dynasty was the extended revival of
learning and authorship. Texts of the Confucian Canon were rescued from
hiding-places in which they had been concealed at the risk of death;
editing committees were appointed, and immense efforts were made to
repair the mischief sustained by literature at the hands of the First
Emperor. The scholars of the day expounded the teachings of Confucius as
set forth in these texts; and although their explanations were set aside
in the twelfth century, when an entirely new set of interpretations
became (and remain) the accepted standard for all students, it is mostly
due to those early efforts that the Confucian Canon has exercised such
a deep and lasting influence over the minds of the Chinese people.
Unfortunately, it soon became the fashion to discover old texts, and
many works are now in circulation which have no claim whatever to the
antiquity to which they pretend.

During the four hundred years of Han supremacy the march of civilization
went steadily forward. Paper and ink were invented, and also the
camel's-hair brush, both of which gave a great impetus to the arts of
writing and painting, the latter being still in a very elementary stage.
The custom of burying slaves with the dead was abolished early in the
dynasty. The twenty-seven months of mourning for parents--nominally
three years, as is now again the rule--was reduced to a more manageable
period of twenty-seven days. Literary degrees were first established,
and perpetual hereditary rank was conferred upon the senior descendant
of Confucius in the male line, which has continued in unbroken
succession down to the present day. The head of the Confucian clan is
now a duke, and resides in a palace, taking rank with, if not before,
the highest provincial authorities.

The extended military campaigns in Central Asia during this period
brought China into touch with Bactria, then an outlying province of
ancient Greece. From this last source, the Chinese learnt many things
which are now often regarded as of purely native growth. They imported
the grape, and made from it a wine which was in use for many centuries,
disappearing only about two or three hundred years ago. Formerly
dependent on the sun-dial alone, the Chinese now found themselves in
possession of the water-clock, specimens of which are still to be seen
in full working order, whereby the division of the day into twelve
two-hour periods was accurately determined. The calendar was regulated
anew, and the science of music was reconstructed; in fact, modern
Chinese music may be said to approximate closely to the music of ancient
Greece. Because of the difference of scale, Chinese music does not make
any appeal to Western ears; at any rate, not in the sense in which it
appealed to Confucius, who has left it on record that after listening to
a certain melody he was so affected as not to be able to taste meat for
three months.



CHAPTER II--LAW AND GOVERNMENT

In the earliest ages of which history professes to take cognizance,
persons who wished to dispose of their goods were obliged to have
recourse to barter. By and by shells were adopted as a medium of
exchange, and then pieces of stamped silk, linen, and deerskin. These
were followed by circular discs of copper, pierced with a round hole,
the forerunners of the ordinary copper coins of a century or two later,
which had square holes, and bore inscriptions, as they still do in
the present day. Money was also cast in the shape of "knives" and of
"trouser," by which names specimens of this early coinage (mostly fakes)
are known to connoisseurs. Some of these were beautifully finished, and
even inlaid with gold. Early in the ninth century, bills of exchange
came into use; and from the middle of the twelve century paper money
became quite common, and is still in general use all over China, notes
being issued in some places for amounts less even than a shilling.

Measures of length and capacity were fixed by the Chinese after an
exceedingly simple process. The grain of millet, which is fairly uniform
in size, was taken as the unit of both. Ten of these grains, laid
end-ways, formed the inch, ten of which made a foot, and ten feet a
_chang_. The decimal system has always prevailed in China, with one
curious exception: sixteen ounces make a pound. How this came to be so
does not appear to be known; but in this case it is the pound which is
the unit of weight, and not the lower denomination. The word which
for more than twenty centuries signified "pound" to the Chinese, was
originally the rude picture of an axe-head; and there is no doubt
that axe-heads, being all of the same size, were used in weighing
commodities, and were subsequently split, for convenience's sake, into
sixteen equal parts, each about one-third heavier than the English
ounce. For measures of capacity, we must revert to the millet-grain, a
fixed number of which set the standard for Chinese pints and quarts.
The result of this rule-of-thumb calculation has been that weights and
measures vary all over the empire, although there actually exist an
official foot, pound and pint, as recognized by the Chinese government.
In one and the same city a tailor's foot will differ from a carpenter's
foot, an oilman's pint from a spirit-merchant's pint, and so on. The
final appeal is to local custom.

With the definitive establishment of the monarchy, two hundred years
before the Christian era, a system of government was inaugurated which
has proceeded, so far as essentials are concerned, upon almost uniform
lines down to the present day.

It is an ancient and well-recognized principle in China, that every
inch of soil belongs to the sovereign; consequently, all land is held on
consideration of a land-tax payable to the emperor, and so long as this
tax is forthcoming, the land in question is practically freehold, and
can be passed by sale from hand to hand for a small conveyancing fee to
the local authorities who stamp the deeds. Thus, the foreign concessions
or settlements in China were not sold or parted with in any way by the
Chinese; they were "leased in perpetuity" so long as the ground-rent
is paid, and remain for all municipal and such purposes under the
uncontrolled administration of the nation which leased them. The
land-tax may be regarded as the backbone of Chinese finance; but
although nominally collected at a fixed rate, it is subject to
fluctuations due to bad harvests and like visitations, in which cases
the tax is accepted at a lower rate, in fact at any rate the people can
afford to pay.

The salt and other monopolies, together with the customs, also
contribute an important part of China's revenue. There is the old native
customs service, with its stations and barriers all over the empire, and
the foreign customs service, as established at the treaty ports only, in
order to deal with shipments on foreign vessels trading with China. The
traditional and well-marked lines of taxation are freely accepted by the
people; any attempt, however, to increase the amounts to be levied,
or to introduce new charges of any kind, unless duly authorized by the
people themselves, would be at once sternly resisted. As a matter of
fact, the authorities never run any such risks. It is customary, when
absolutely necessary, and possibly desirable, to increase old or to
introduce new levies, for the local authorities to invite the leading
merchants and others concerned to a private conference; and only when
there is a general consent of all parties do the officials venture
to put forth proclamations saying that such and such a tax will be
increased or imposed, as the case may be. Any other method may lead to
disastrous results. The people refuse to pay; and coercion is met at
once by a general closing of shops and stoppage of trade, or, in more
serious cases, by an attack on the official residence of the offending
mandarin, who soon sees his house looted and levelled with the ground.
In other words, the Chinese people tax themselves.

The nominal form of government, speaking without reference to the new
constitution which will be dealt with later on, is an irresponsible
autocracy; its institutions are likewise autocratic in form, but
democratic in operation. The philosopher, Mencius (372-289 B.C.), placed
the people first, the gods second, and the sovereign third, in the scale
of national importance; and this classification has sunk deep into the
minds of the Chinese during more than two thousand years past. What the
people in China will not stand is injustice; at the same time they will
live contentedly under harsh laws which they have at one time or another
imposed upon themselves.

Each of the great dynasties has always begun with a Penal Code of its
own, based upon that of the outgoing dynasty, but tending to be more and
more humane in character as time goes on. The punishments in old days
were atrocious in their severity; the Penal Code of the present dynasty,
which came into force some two hundred and fifty years ago, has been
pronounced by competent judges to take a very high rank indeed. It was
introduced to replace a much harsher code which had been in operation
under the Ming dynasty, and contains the nominally immutable laws of the
empire, with such modifications and restrictions as have been authorized
from time to time by Imperial edict. Still farther back in Chinese
history, we come upon punishments of ruthless cruelty, such as might
be expected to prevail in times of lesser culture and refinement. Two
thousand years ago, the Five Punishments were--branding on the forehead,
cutting off the nose, cutting off the feet, mutilation, and death; for
the past two hundred and fifty years, these have been--beating with
the light bamboo, beating with the heavy bamboo, transportation for a
certain period, banishment to a certain distance, and death, the last
being subdivided into strangling and decapitation, according to the
gravity of the offence.

Two actual instruments of torture are mentioned, one for compressing
the ankle-bones, and the other for squeezing the fingers, to be used
if necessary to extort a confession in charges of robbery and homicide,
confession being regarded as essential to the completion of the record.
The application, however, of these tortures is fenced round in such a
way as to impose great responsibility upon the presiding magistrate;
and in addition to the risk of official impeachment, there is the more
dreaded certainty of loss of influence and of popular esteem. Mention is
made in the code of the so-called "lingering death," according to which
first one arm is chopped off, then the other; the two legs follow in the
same way; two slits are made on the breast, and the heart is torn
out; decapitation finishes the proceedings. It is worthy of note that,
although many foreigners have been present from time to time at public
executions, occasionally when the "lingering death" has been announced,
not one has established it as a fact beyond a doubt that such a process
has ever been carried out. Not only that; it is also well known that
condemned criminals are allowed to purchase of themselves, or through
their friends, if they have any, spirits or opium with which to fortify
their courage at the last moment. There is indeed a tradition that
stupefying drinks are served out by the officials to the batches of
malefactors as they pass to the execution ground at Peking. It would
still remain to find executioners capable of performing in cold blood
such a disgusting operation as the "lingering death" is supposed to be.
The ordinary Chinaman is not a fiend; he does not gloat in his peaceful
moments, when not under the influence of extreme excitement, over
bloodshed and cruelty.

The generally lenient spirit in which the Penal Code of China was
conceived is either widely unknown, or very often ignored. For instance,
during the excessive summer heats certain punishments are mitigated, and
others remitted altogether. Prompt surrender and acknowledgment of an
offence, before it is otherwise discovered, entitles the offender, with
some exceptions, to a full and free pardon; as also does restitution
of stolen property to its owner by a repentant thief; while a criminal
guilty of two or more offences can be punished only to the extent of the
principal charge. Neither are the near relatives, nor even the servants,
of a guilty man, punishable for concealing his crime and assisting him
to escape. Immense allowances are made for the weakness of human nature,
in all of which may be detected the tempering doctrines of the great
Sage. A feudal baron was boasting to Confucius that in his part of
the country the people were so upright that a son would give evidence
against a father who had stolen a sheep. "With us," replied Confucius,
"the father screens the son, and the son screens the father; that is
real uprightness." To another questioner, a man in high authority, who
complained of the number of thieves, the Master explained that this was
due to the greed of the upper classes. "But for this greed," he added,
"even if you paid people to steal, they would not do so." To the same
man, who inquired his views on capital punishment, Confucius replied:
"What need is there for capital punishment at all? If your aims are
worthy, the people also will be worthy."

There are many other striking features of the Penal Code. No marriage,
for instance, may be contracted during the period of mourning for
parents, which in theory extends to three full years, but in practice
is reckoned at twenty-seven months; neither may musical instruments
be played by near relatives of the dead. During the same period, no
mandarin may hold office, but must retire into private life; though
the observance of this rule is often dispensed with in the case of
high officials whose presence at their posts may be of considerable
importance. In such cases, by special grace of the emperor, the period
of retirement is cut down to three months, or even to one.

The death of an emperor is followed by a long spell of national
tribulation. For one hundred days no man may have his head shaved, and
no woman may wear head ornaments. For twelve months there may be no
marrying or giving in marriage among the official classes, a term which
is reduced to one hundred days for the public at large. The theatres are
supposed to remain closed for a year, but in practice they shut only
for one hundred days. Even thus great hardships are entailed upon many
classes of the community, especially upon actors and barbers, who might
be in danger of actual starvation but for the common-sense of their
rulers coupled with the common rice-pot at home.

The law forbidding marriage between persons of the same surname is
widely, but not universally, in operation. No Smith may marry a Smith;
no Jones may marry a Jones; the reason of course being that all of the
same surname are regarded as members of the same family. However, there
are large districts in certain parts of China where the people are one
and all of the surname, and where it would be a great hardship--not to
mention the impossibility of enforcing the law--if intermarriages of the
kind were prohibited. Consequently, they are allowed, but only if the
contracting parties are so distantly related that, according to the
legal table of affinity, they would not wear mourning for one another in
case of death--in other words, not related at all. The line of descent
is now traced through the males, but there is reason to believe that in
early days, as is found to be often the case among uncivilized tribes,
the important, because more easily recognizable, parent was the mother.
Thus it is illegal for first cousins of the same surname to marry,
and legal if the surnames are different; in the latter case, however,
centuries of experience have taught the Chinese to frown upon such
unions as undesirable in the extreme.

The Penal Code forbids water burial, and also cremation; but it is
permitted to the children of a man dying at a great distance to consume
their father's corpse with fire if positively unable to bring it back
for ordinary burial in his native district. The idea is that with the
aid of fire immediate communication is set up with the spirit-world,
and that the spirit of the deceased is thus enabled to reach his native
place, which would be impossible were the corpse to remain intact. Hence
the horror of dying abroad, common to all Chinese, and only faced if
there is a reasonable probability that their remains will be carried
back to the ancestral home.

In spite of the above law, the cremation of Buddhist priests is
universal, and the practice is tolerated without protest. Priests who
are getting on in years, or who are stricken with a mortal disease, are
compelled by rule to move into a certain part of their monastery, known
as the Abode of a Long Old Age, in which they are required--not to die,
for death does not come to a good priest, but--to enter into Nirvana,
which is a sublime state of conscious freedom from all mental and
physical disturbance, not to be adequately described in words. At death,
the priest is placed in a chair, his chin supported by a crutch, and
then put into a wooden box, which on the appointed day is carried in
procession, with streaming banners, through the monastery, and out into
the cremation-ground attached, his brother priests chanting all the
while that portion of the Buddhist liturgies set apart as the service
for the dead, but which being in Pali, not a single one of them can
understand. There have, of course, been many highly educated priests at
one time and another during the long reign of Buddhism in China; but
it is safe to say that they are no longer to be met with in the present
day. The Buddhist liturgies have been written out in Chinese characters
which reproduce the sounds of the original Indian language, and these
the priests learn by heart without understanding a word of their
meaning. The box with the dead man in it is now hoisted to the top of a
funeral pyre, which has been well drenched with oil, and set alight;
and when the fire has burnt out, the ashes are reverently collected and
placed in an urn, which is finally deposited in a mausoleum kept for
that purpose.

Life is remarkably safe in China. No man can be executed until his
name has been submitted to the emperor, which of course means to his
ministers at the capital. The Chinese, however, being, as has been so
often stated, an eminently practical people, understand that certain
cases admit of no delay; and to prevent the inevitable lynching of such
criminals as kidnappers, rebels, and others, caught red-handed, high
officials are entrusted with the power of life and death, which they
can put into immediate operation, always taking upon themselves full
responsibility for their acts. The essential is to allay any excitement
of the populace, and to preserve the public peace.

In the general administration of the law great latitude is allowed, and
injustice is rarely inflicted by a too literal interpretation of the
Code. Stealing is of course a crime, yet no Chinese magistrate would
dream of punishing a hungry man for simple theft of food, even if such
a case were ever brought into court. Cake-sellers keep a sharp eye on
their wares; farmers and market-gardeners form associates for mutual
protection, and woe to the thief who gets caught--his punishment is
short and sharp. Litigation is not encouraged, even by such facilities
as ought to be given to persons suffering wrongs; there is no bar, or
legal profession, and persons who assist plaintiffs or defendants in
the conduct of cases, are treated with scant courtesy by the presiding
magistrate and are lucky if they get off with nothing worse. The
majority of commercial cases come before the guilds, and are settled
without reference to the authorities. The ordinary Chinese dread a court
of justice, as a place in which both parties manage to lose something.
"It is not the big devil," according to the current saying, "but the
little devils" who frighten the suitor away. This is because official
servants receive no salary, but depend for their livelihood on
perquisites and tips; and the Chinese suitor, who is a party to the
system, readily admits that it is necessary "to sprinkle a little
water."

Neither do any officials in China, high or low, receive salaries,
although absurdly inadequate sums are allocated by the Government for
that purpose, for which it is considered prudent not to apply. The
Chinese system is to some extent the reverse of our own. Our officials
collect money and pay it into the Treasury, from which source fixed sums
are returned to them as salaries. In China, the occupants of petty posts
collect revenue in various ways, as taxes or fees, pay themselves as
much as they dare, and hand up the balance to a superior officer, who in
turn pays himself in the same sense, and again hands up the balance to
his superior officer. When the viceroy of a province is reached, he too
keeps what he dares, sending up to the Imperial exchequer in Peking just
enough to satisfy the powers above him. There is thus a continual check
by the higher grade upon the lower, but no check on such extortion
as might be practised upon the tax-payer. The tax-payer sees to that
himself. Speaking generally, it may be said that this system, in spite
of its unsatisfactory character, works fairly well. Few officials
overstep the limits which custom has assigned to their posts, and those
who do generally come to grief. So that when the dishonesty of the
Chinese officials is held up to reprobation, it should always be
remembered that the financial side of their public service is not
surrounded with such formalities and safeguards as to make robbery of
public money difficult, if not almost impossible. It is, therefore, all
the more cheering when we find, as is frequently the case, retiring or
transferred mandarins followed by the good wishes and affection of the
people over whom they have been set to rule.

Until quite recently, there has been no such thing in China as municipal
administration and rating, and even now such methods are only being
tentatively introduced in large cities where there are a number of
foreign residents. Occupants of houses are popularly supposed to "sweep
the snow from their own doorsteps," but the repair of roads, bridges,
drains, etc., has always been left to the casual philanthropy of wealthy
individuals, who take these opportunities of satisfying public opinion
in regard to the obligations of the rich towards the poor. Consequently,
Chinese cities are left without efficient lighting, draining, or
scavengering; and it is astonishing how good the health of the people
living under these conditions can be. There is no organized police
force; but cities are divided into wards, and at certain points barriers
are drawn across the streets at night, with perhaps one watchman to
each. It is not considered respectable to be out late at night, and it
is not safe to move about without a lantern, which is carried, for those
who can afford the luxury, by a servant preceding them.

One difference between life in China and life in this country may
be illustrated to a certain extent in the following way. Supposing a
traveller, passing through an English village, to be hit on the head by
a stone. Unless he can point out his assailant, the matter is at an
end. In China, all the injured party has to do is to point out the
village--or, if a town, the ward--in which he was assaulted. Then the
headman of such town or ward is summoned before the authorities and
fined, proportionately to the offence, for allowing rowdy behaviour in
his district. The headman takes good care that he does not pay the fine
himself. In the same way, parents are held responsible for the acts of
their children, and householders for those of their servants.



CHAPTER III--RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION

The Chinese are emphatically not a religious people, though they are
very superstitious. Belief in a God has come down from the remotest
ages, but the old simple creed has been so overlaid by Buddhism as
not to be discernible at the present day. Buddhism is now the dominant
religion of China. It is closely bound up with the lives of the people,
and is a never-failing refuge in sickness or worldly trouble. It is no
longer the subtle doctrine which was originally presented to the people
of India, but something much more clearly defined and appreciable by
the plainest intellect. Buddha is the saviour of the people through
righteousness alone, and Buddhist saints are popularly supposed to
possess intercessory powers. Yet reverence is always wanting; and crowds
will laugh and talk, and buy and sell sweetmeats, in a Buddhist temple,
before the very eyes of the most sacred images. So long as divine
intervention is not required, an ordinary Chinaman is content to neglect
his divinities; but no sooner does sickness or financial trouble come
upon the family, than he will hurry off to propitiate the gods.

He accomplishes this through the aid of the priests, who receive his
offerings of money, and light candles or incense at the shrine of the
deity to be invoked. Buddhist priests are not popular with the Chinese,
who make fun of their shaven heads, and doubt the sincerity of their
convictions as well as the purity of their lives. "No meat nor wine may
enter here" is a legend inscribed at the gate of most Buddhist temples,
the ordinary diet as served in the refectory being strictly vegetarian.
A tipsy priest, however, is not an altogether unheard-of combination,
and has provided more than one eminent artist with a subject of an
interesting picture.

Yet the ordeal through which a novice must pass before being admitted to
holy orders is a severe tax upon nerve and endurance. In the process of
a long ritual, at least three, or even so many as nine, pastilles are
placed upon the bald scalp of the head. These are then lighted, and
allowed to burn down into the skin until permanent scars have been
formed, the unfortunate novice being supported on both sides by priests
who encourage him all the time to bear what must be excruciating pain.
The fully qualified priest receives a diploma, on the strength of which
he may demand a day and a night's board and lodging from the priests of
any temple all over the empire.

At a very early date Buddhism had already taken a firm hold on the
imagination of Chinese poets and painters, the latter of whom loved to
portray the World-honoured One in a dazzling hue of gold. A poet of the
eighth century A.D., who realized for the first time the inward meaning
of the Law, as it is called, ended a panegyric on Buddhism with the
following lines:--

     O thou pure Faith, had I but known thy scope,
     The Golden God had long since been my hope!

Taoism is a term often met with in books about China. We are told
that the three religions of the people are Confucianism, Buddhism, and
Taoism, this being the order of precedence assigned to them in A.D. 568.
Confucianism is of course not a religion at all, dealing as it does with
duty towards one's neighbour and the affairs of this life only; and it
will be seen that Taoism, in its true sense, has scarcely a stronger
claim. At a very remote day, some say a thousand, and others six
hundred, years before the Christian era, there flourished a wise man
named Lao Tzu, which may be approximately pronounced as _Loudza_ (_ou_
as in _loud_), and understood to mean the Old Philosopher. He was a very
original thinker, and a number of his sayings have been preserved to us
by ancient authors, whom they had reached by tradition; that is to say,
the Old Philosopher never put his doctrines into book form. There is
indeed in existence a work which passes under his name, but it is now
known to be a forgery, and is generally discarded by scholars.

The great flaw in the teaching of the Old Philosopher was its extremely
impractical character, its unsuitability to the needs of men and women
engaged in the ordinary avocations of life. In one sense he was an
Anarchist, for he held that the empire would fare better if there were
no government at all, the fact being that violence and disorder had
always been conspicuous even under the best rulers. Similarly, he argued
that we should get along more profitably with less learning, because
then there would be fewer thieves, successful thieving being the result
of mental training. It is not necessary to follow him to his most famous
doctrine, namely, that of doing nothing, by which means, he declared,
everything could be done, the solution of which puzzle of left everybody
to find out for himself. Among his quaint sayings will be found several
maxims of a very different class, as witness his injunction, "Requite
evil with kindness," and "Mighty is he who conquers himself." Of the
latter, the following illustration is given by a commentator. Two men
meeting in the street, one said to the other, "How fat you have grown!"
"Yes," replied his friend, "I have lately won a battle." "What do you
mean?" inquired the former. "Why, you see," said the latter, "so long
as I was at home, reading about ancient kings, I admired nothing but
virtue; then, when I went out of doors, I was attracted by the charms
of wealth and power. These two feelings fought inside me, and I began to
lose flesh; but now love of virtue has conquered, and I am fat."

The teachings of the Old Philosopher were summed up in the word _Tao_,
pronounced as _tou(t)_, which originally meant a road, a way; and
as applied to doctrines means simply the right way or path of moral
conduct, in which mankind should tread so as to lead correct and
virtuous lives. Later on, when Buddhism was introduced, this Taoism,
with all its paradoxes and subtleties, to which alchemy and the
concoction of an elixir of life had been added, gradually began to lose
its hold upon the people; and in order to stem the tide of opposition,
temples and monasteries were built, a priesthood was established in
imitation of the Buddhists, and all kinds of ceremonies and observances
were taken from Buddhism, until, at the present day, only those who know
can tell one from the other.

Although alchemy, which was introduced from Greece, via Bactria, in the
second century B.C., has long ceased to interest the Chinese public, who
have found out that gold is more easily made from the sweat of the
brow than from copper or lead; and although only a few silly people now
believe that any mixture of drugs will produce an elixir of life, able
to confer immortality upon those who drink it; nevertheless, Taoism
still professes to teach the art of extending life, if not indefinitely,
at any rate to a considerable length. This art would probably go some
way towards extending life under any circumstances, for it consists
chiefly in deep and regular breathing, preferably of morning air,
in swallowing the saliva three times in every two hours, in adopting
certain positions for the body and limbs, which are also strengthened
by gymnastic exercises, and finally, as borrowed from the Buddhists, in
remaining motionless for some hours a day, the eyes shut, and the mind
abstracted as much as possible from all surrounding influences. The
upshot of these and other practices is the development of "the pure
man," on which Chuang Tzu (_Chwongdza_), a Taoist philosopher of the
third and fourth centuries B.C., to be mentioned again, writes as
follows: "But what is a pure man? The pure men of old acted without
calculation, not seeking to secure results. They laid no plans.
Therefore, failing, they had no cause for regret; succeeding, no cause
for congratulation. And thus they could scale heights without fear;
enter water without becoming wet, and fire without feeling hot. The pure
men of old slept without dreams, and waked without anxiety. They ate
without discrimination, breathing deep breaths. For pure men draw breath
from their heels; the vulgar only from their throats."

Coupled with what may be called intellectual Taoism, as opposed to the
grosser form under which this faith appeals to the people at large, is
a curious theory that human life reaches the earth from some
extraordinarily dazzling centre away in the depths of space, "beyond
the range of conceptions." This centre appears to be the home of eternal
principles, the abode of a First Cause, where perfectly spotless and
pure beings "drink of the spiritual and feed on force," and where
likeness exists without form. To get back to that state should be the
object of all men, and this is only to be attained by a process of
mental and physical purification prolonged through all conditions of
existence. Then, when body and soul are fitted for the change, there
comes what ordinary mortals call death; and the pure being closes his
eyes, to awake forthwith in his original glory from the sleep which
mortals call life.

For many centuries Buddhism and Taoism were in bitter antagonism.
Sometimes the court was Buddhist, sometimes Taoist; first one faith was
suppressed altogether, then the other; in A.D. 574 both were abolished
in deference to Confucianism, which, however, no emperor has ever dared
to interfere with seriously. At present, all the "three religions"
flourish happily side by side.

The Chinese believe firmly in the existence of spirits, which they
classify simply as good and evil. They do not trouble their heads much
about the former, but they are terribly afraid of the latter. Hideous
devils infest dark corners, and lie in wait to injure unfortunate
passers-by, often for no cause whatever. The spirits of persons who have
been wronged are especially dreaded by those who have done the wrong.
A man who has been defrauded of money will commit suicide, usually by
poison, at the door of the wrongdoer, who will thereby first fall into
the hands of the authorities, and if he escapes in that quarter,
will still have to count with the injured ghost of his victim. A
daughter-in-law will drown or hang herself to get free from, and also to
avenge, the tyranny or cruelty of her husband's mother. These acts lead
at once to family feuds, which sometimes end in bloodshed; more often in
money compensation; and the known risk of such contingencies operates as
a wholesome check upon aggressive treatment of the weak by the strong.

Divination and fortune-telling have always played a conspicuous part in
ordinary Chinese life. Wise men, of the magician type, sit at stalls
in street and market-place, ready for a small fee to advise those
who consult them on any enterprise to be undertaken, even of the most
trivial kind. The omens can be taken in various ways, as by calculation
based upon books, of which there is quite a literature, or by
drawing lots inscribed with mystic signs, to be interpreted by the
fortune-teller. Even at Buddhist temples may be found two kidney-shaped
pieces of wood, flat on one side and round on the other, which are
thrown into the air before an altar, the results--two flats, two rounds,
or one of each--being interpreted as unfavourable, medium, and very
favourable, respectively.

Of all Chinese superstitions, the one that has been most persistent,
and has exerted the greatest influence upon national life, is the
famous Wind-and-Water system (_feng shui_) of geomancy. According to
the principles which govern this system, and of which quite a special
literature exists, the good or evil fortunes of individuals and
the communities are determined by the various physical aspects and
conditions which surround their everyday life. The shapes of hills,
the presence or absence of water, the position of trees, the height of
buildings, and so forth, are all matters of deep consideration to
the professors of the geomantic art, who thrive on the ignorance of
superstitious clients. They are called in to select propitious sites for
houses and graves; and it often happens that if the fortunes of a family
are failing, a geomancer will be invited to modify in some way the
arrangement of the ancestral graveyard. Houses in a Chinese street are
never built up so as to form a line of uniform height; every now and
again one house must be a little higher or a little lower than its
neighbour, or calamity will certainly ensue. It is impossible to walk
straight into an ordinary middle-class dwelling-house. Just inside the
front door there will be a fixed screen, which forces the visitor to
turn to the right or to the left; the avowed object being to exclude
evil spirits, which can only move in straight lines.

Mention of the ancestral graveyard brings to mind the universal worship
of ancestors, which has been from time immemorial such a marked feature
of Chinese religious life. At death, the spirit of a man or woman is
believed to remain watching over the material interests of the family to
which the deceased had belonged. Offerings of various kinds, including
meat and drink, are from time to time made to such a spirit, supposed to
be particularly resident in an ancestral hall--or cupboard, as the case
may be. These offerings are made for the special purpose of conciliating
the spirit, and of obtaining in return a liberal share of the blessings
and good things of this life. This is the essential feature of the rite,
and this it is which makes the rite an act of worship pure and simple;
so that only superficial observers could make the mistake of classifying
ancestral worship, as practised in China, with such acts as laying
wreaths upon the tombs of deceased friends and relatives.

With reference to the spirit or soul, the Chinese have held for
centuries past that the soul of every man is twofold; in a popular
acceptation it is sometimes regarded as threefold. One portion is that
which expresses the visible personality, and is permanently attached to
the body; the other has the power of leaving the body, carrying with it
an appearance of physical form, which accounts for a person being
seen in two different places at once. Cases of catalepsy or trance are
explained by the Chinese as the absence from the body of this portion
of the soul, which is also believed to be expelled from the body by any
violent shock or fright. There is a story of a man who was so terrified
at the prospect of immediate execution that his separable soul left his
body, and he found himself sitting on the eaves of a house, from which
point he could see a man bound, and waiting for the executioner's sword.
Just then, a reprieve arrived, and in a moment he was back again in his
body. Mr. Edmund Gosse, who can hardly have been acquainted with the
Chinese view, told a similar story in his _Father and Son_: "During
morning and evening prayers, which were extremely lengthy and fatiguing,
I fancied that one of my two selves could flit up, and sit clinging to
the cornice, and look down on my other self and the rest of us."

In some parts of China, planchette is frequently resorted to as a means
of reading the future, and adapting one's actions accordingly. It is a
purely professional performance, being carried through publicly before
some altar in a temple, and payment made for the response. The question
is written down on a piece of paper, which is burnt at the altar
apparently before any one could gather knowledge of its contents; and
the answer from the god is forthwith traced on a tray of sand, word by
word, each word being obliterated to make room for the next, by two men,
supposed to be ignorant of the question, who hold the ends of a V-shaped
instrument from the point of which a little wooden pencil projects at
right angles.

Another method of extracting information from the spirits of the unseen
world is nothing more or less than hypnotism, which has long been known
to the Chinese, and is mentioned in literature so far back as the
middle of the seventeenth century. With all the paraphernalia of altar,
candles, incense, etc., a medium is thrown into a hypnotic condition,
during which his body is supposed to be possessed by a spirit, and
every word he may utter to be divinely inspired. An amusing instance
is recorded of a medium who, while under hypnotic influence, not only
blurted out the pecuniary defalcations of certain men who had been
collecting in aid of temple restoration, but went so far as to admit
that he had had some of the money himself.

This same influence is also used in cases of serious illness, but
always secretly, for such practices, as well as dark _seances_ for
communicating with spirits, are strictly forbidden by the Chinese
authorities, who regard the employment of occult means as more likely to
be subversive of morality than to do any good whatever to a sick person,
or to any one else. All secret societies of any sort or kind are equally
under the ban of the law, the assumption--a very justifiable one--being
that the aim of these societies is to upset the existing order of
political and social life. The Heaven-and-Earth Society is among the
most famous, and the most dreaded, partly perhaps because it has never
been entirely suppressed. The lodges of this fraternity, the oath
of fidelity, and the ceremonial of admission, remind one forcibly of
Masonry in the West; but the points of conduct are merely coincidences,
and there does not appear to be any real connexion.

Among the most curious of all these institutions is the Golden Orchid
Society, the girl-members of which swear never to marry, and not only
threaten, but positively commit suicide upon any attempt at coercion. At
one time this society became such a serious menace that the authorities
were compelled to adopt severe measures of repression.

Another old-established society is that of the Vegetarians, who eat no
meat and neither smoke nor drink. From their seemingly harmless ranks it
is said that the Boxers of 1900 were largely recruited.

For nearly twenty-five centuries the Chinese have looked to Confucius
for their morals. Various religions have appealed to the spiritual side
of the Chinese mind, and Buddhism has obtained an ascendancy which will
not be easily displaced; but through all this long lapse of time the
morality of China has been under the guidance of their great teacher,
Confucius (551-479 B.C.), affectionately known to them as the "uncrowned
king," and recently raised to the rank of a god.

His doctrines, in the form sometimes of maxims, sometimes of answers to
eager inquirers, were brought together after his death--we do not
know exactly how soon--and have influenced first and last an enormous
proportion of the human race. Confucius taught man's duty to his
neighbour; he taught virtue for virtue's sake, and not for the hope of
reward or fear of punishment; he taught loyalty to the sovereign as the
foundation stone of national prosperity, and filial piety as the basis
of all happiness in the life of the people. As a simple human moralist
he saw clearly the limitations of humanity, and refused to teach his
disciples to return good for evil, as suggested by the Old Philosopher,
declaring without hesitation that evil should be met by justice. The
first systematic writer of Chinese history, who died about 80 B.C.,
expressed himself on the position and influence of Confucius in
terms which have been accepted as accurate for twenty centuries past:
"Countless are the princes and prophets that the world has seen in its
time--glorious in life, forgotten in death. But Confucius, though only
a humble member of the cotton-clothed masses, remains with us after
numerous generations. He is the model for such as would be wise. By all,
from the Son of Heaven down to the meanest student, the supremacy of his
principles is freely and fully admitted. He may indeed be pronounced the
divinest of men."

The Son of Heaven is of course the Emperor, who is supposed to be God's
chosen representative on earth, and responsible for the right conduct
and well-being of all committed to his care. Once every year he
proceeds in state to the Temple of Heaven at Peking; and after the due
performance of sacrificial worship he enters alone the central raised
building with circular blue-tiled roof, and there places himself
in communication with the Supreme Being, submitting for approval or
otherwise his stewardship during the preceding twelve months. Chinese
records go so far as to mention letters received from God. There is a
legend of the sixth century A.D., which claims that God revealed Himself
to a hermit in a retired valley, and bestowed on him a tablet of jade
with a mysterious inscription. But there is a much more circumstantial
account of a written communication which in A.D. 1008 descended from
heaven upon mount T'ai, the famous mountain in Shantung, where a temple
has been built to mark the very spot. The emperor and his courtiers
regarded this letter with profound reverence and awe, which roused
the ire of a learned statesman of the day. The latter pointed out
that Confucius, when asked to speak, so that his disciples might have
something to record, had bluntly replied: "Does God speak? The four
seasons pursue their courses and all things are produced; but does God
say anything?" Therefore, he argued, if God does not speak to us, still
less will He write a letter.

The fact that the receipt of such a letter is mentioned in the dynastic
history of the period must not be allowed to discredit in any way
the general truth and accuracy of Chinese annals, which, as research
progresses, are daily found to be far more trustworthy than was ever
expected to be the case. We ourselves do not wholly reject the old
contemporary chronicles of Hoveden and Roger of Wendover because they
mention a letter from Christ on the neglect of the Sabbath.

In Chinese life, social and political alike, filial piety may
be regarded as the keystone of the arch. Take that away, and the
superstructure of centuries crumbles to the ground. When Confucius was
asked by one of his disciples to explain what constituted filial piety,
he replied that it was a difficult obligation to define; while to
another disciple he was able to say without hesitation that the mere
support of parents would be insufficient, inasmuch as food is what
is supplied even to horses and dogs. According to the story-books for
children, the obligation has been interpreted by the people at large
in many different ways. The twenty-four standard examples of filial
children include a son who allowed mosquitoes to feed upon him, and did
not drive them away lest they should go and annoy his parents; another
son who wept so passionately because he could procure no bamboo shoots
for his mother that the gods were touched, and up out of the ground
came some shoots which he gathered and carried home; another who when
carrying buckets of water would slip and fall on purpose, in order to
make his parents laugh; and so on. No wonder that Confucius found filial
piety beyond his powers of definition.

Now for a genuine example. There is a very wonderful novel in which a
very affecting love-story is worked out to a terribly tragic conclusion.
The heroine, a beautiful and fascinating girl, finally dies of
consumption, and the hero, a wayward but none the less fascinating
youth, enters the Buddhist priesthood. A lady, the mother of a clever
young official, was so distressed by the pathos of the tale that she
became quite ill, and doctors prescribed medicines in vain. At length,
when things were becoming serious, the son set to work and composed a
sequel to this novel, in which he resuscitated the heroine and made
the lovers happy by marriage; and in a short time he had the intense
satisfaction of seeing his mother restored to health.

Other forms of filial piety, which bear no relation whatever to the
fanciful fables given above, are commonly practised by all classes. In
consequence of the serious or prolonged illness of parents, it is very
usual for sons and daughters to repair to the municipal temple and pray
that a certain number of years may be cut off their own span of life and
added to that of the sick parents in question.

Let us now pause to take stock of some of the results which have accrued
from the operation and influence of Confucianism during such a long
period, and over such swarming myriads of the human race. It is
a commonplace in the present day to assert that the Chinese are
hardworking, thrifty, and sober--the last-mentioned, by the way, in a
land where drunkenness is not regarded as a crime. Shallow observers
of the globe-trotter type, who have had their pockets picked by
professional thieves in Hong-Kong, and even resident observers who have
not much cultivated their powers of observation and comparison, will
assert that honesty is a virtue denied to the Chinese; but those who
have lived long in China and have more seriously devoted themselves to
discover the truth, may one and all be said to be arrayed upon the other
side. The amount of solid honesty to be met with in every class, except
the professionally criminal class, is simply astonishing. That the word
of the Chinese merchant is as good as his bond has long since become a
household word, and so it is in other walks of life. With servants from
respectable families, the householder need have no fear for his goods.
"Be loyal," says the native maxim, "to the master whose rice you eat;"
and this maxim is usually fulfilled to the letter. Hence, it is that
many foreigners who have been successful in their business careers, take
care to see, on their final departure from the East, that the old and
faithful servant, often of twenty to thirty years' standing, shall have
some provision for himself and his family. In large establishments,
especially banks, in which great interests are at stake, it is customary
for the Chinese staff to be guaranteed by some wealthy man (or firm),
who deposits securities for a considerable amount, thus placing the
employer in a very favourable position. The properly chosen Chinese
servant who enters the household of a foreigner, is a being to whom, as
suggested above, his master often becomes deeply attached, and whom
he parts with, often after many years of service, to his everlasting
regret. Such a servant has many virtues. He is noiseless over his work,
which he performs efficiently. He can stay up late, and yet rise early.
He lives on the establishment, but in an out-building. He provides his
own food. He rarely wants to absent himself, and even then will always
provide a reliable _locum tenens_. He studies his master's ways, and
learns to anticipate his slightest wishes. In return for these and other
services he expects to get his wages punctually paid, and to be allowed
to charge, without any notice being taken of the same, a commission on
all purchases. This is the Chinese system, and even a servant absolutely
honest in any other way cannot emancipate himself from its grip. But if
treated fairly, he will not abuse his chance. One curious feature of
the system is that if one master is in a relatively higher position than
another, the former will be charged by his servants slightly more than
the latter by his servants for precisely the same article. Many attempts
have been made by foreigners to break through this "old custom,"
especially by offering higher wages; but signal failure has always been
the result, and those masters have invariably succeeded best who have
fallen in with the existing institution, and have tried to make the best
of it.

There is one more, and in many ways the most important, side of a
Chinese servant's character. He will recognize frankly, and without a
pang, the superior position and the rights of his master; but at the
same time, if worth keeping, he will exact from his master the proper
respect due from man to man. It is wholly beside the mark to say that
he will not put up for a moment with the cuffs and kicks so freely
administered to his Indian colleague. A respectable Chinese servant
will often refuse to remain with a master who uses abusive or violent
language, or shows signs of uncontrollable temper. A lucrative place is
as nothing compared with the "loss of face" which he would suffer in the
eyes of his friends; in other words, with his loss of dignity as a man.
If a servant will put up with a blow, the best course is to dismiss
him at once, as worthless and unreliable, if not actually dangerous.
Confucius said: "If you mistrust a man, do not employ him; if you employ
a man, do not mistrust him;" and this will still be found to be an
excellent working rule in dealings with Chinese servants.



CHAPTER IV--A.D. 220-1200

The long-lived and glorious House of Han was brought to a close by the
usual causes. There were palace intrigues and a temporary usurpation of
the throne, eunuchs of course being in the thick of the mischief;
added to which a very serious rebellion broke out, almost as a natural
consequence. First and last there arose three aspirants to the Imperial
yellow, which takes the place of purple in ancient Rome; the result
being that, after some years of hard fighting, China was divided into
three parts, each ruled by one of the three rivals. The period is known
in history as that of the Three Kingdoms, and lasted from A.D. 220 to
A.D. 265. This short space of time was filled, especially the early
years, with stirring deeds of heroism and marvellous strategical
operations, fortune favouring first one of the three commanders and then
another. The whole story of these civil wars is most graphically told in
a famous historical romance composed about a thousand years afterwards.
As in the case of the Waverley novels, a considerable amount of fiction
has been interwoven with truth to make the narrative more palatable
to the general reader; but its basis is history, and the work is
universally regarded among the Chinese themselves as one of the most
valuable productions in the lighter branches of their literature.

The three to four centuries which follow on the above period were a
time of political and social disorganisation, unfavourable, according
to Chinese writers, to the development of both literature and art. The
House of Chin, which at first held sway over a once more united empire,
was severely harassed by the Tartars on the north, who were in turn
overwhelmed by the House of Toba. The latter ruled for some two hundred
years over northern China, while the southern portions were governed
by several short-lived native dynasties. A few points in connexion with
these times deserve perhaps brief mention.

The old rule of twenty-seven months of mourning for parents was
re-established, and has continued in force down to the present day. The
Japanese sent occasional missions, with tribute; and the Chinese, who
had already in A.D. 240 dispatched an envoy to Japan, repeated the
compliment in 608. An attempt was made to conquer Korea, and envoys
were sent to countries as far off as Siam. Buddhism, which had been
introduced many centuries previously--no one can exactly say when--began
to spread far and wide, and appeared to be firmly established. In A.D.
399 a Buddhist priest, named Fa Hsien, started from Central China and
travelled to India across the great desert and over the Hindu Kush,
subsequently visiting Patna, Benares, Buddha-Gaya, and other well-known
spots, which he accurately described in the record of his journey
published on his return and still in existence. His object was to obtain
copies of the sacred books, relics and images, illustrative of the
faith; and these he safely conveyed to China by sea from India, via
Ceylon (where he spent three years), and Sumatra, arriving after an
absence of fifteen years.

In the year A.D. 618 the House of T'ang entered upon its glorious course
of three centuries in duration. Under a strong but dissolute ruler
immediately preceding, China had once more become a united empire,
undivided against itself; and although wars and rebellions were not
wanting to disturb the even tenor of its way, the general picture
presented to us under the new dynasty of the T'angs is one of national
peace, prosperity, and progress. The name of this House has endured,
like that of Han, to the present day in the popular language of the
people; for just as the northerners still delight to style themselves
"good sons of Han," so are the southerners still proud to speak of
themselves as "men of T'ang."

One of the chief political events of this period was the usurpation
of power by the Empress Wu--at first, as nominal regent on behalf of a
step-child, the son and heir of her late husband by his first wife, and
afterwards, when she had set aside the step-child, on her own account.
There had been one previous instance of a woman wielding the Imperial
sceptre, namely, the Empress Lu of the Han dynasty, to whom the Chinese
have accorded the title of legitimate ruler, which has not been allowed
to the Empress Wu. The latter, however, was possessed of much actual
ability, mixed with a kind of midsummer madness; and so long as her
great intellectual faculties remained unimpaired, she ruled, like her
successor of some twelve centuries afterwards, with a rod of iron. In
her old age she was deposed and dismissed to private life, the rightful
heir being replaced upon his father's throne.

Among the more extravagant acts of her reign are some which are still
familiar to the people of to-day. Always, even while her husband was
alive, she was present, behind a curtain, at councils and audiences;
after his death she was accustomed to take her place openly among the
ministers of state, wearing a false beard. In 694 she gave herself the
title of Divine Empress, and in 696 she even went so far as to style
herself God Almighty. In her later years she became hopelessly arrogant
and overbearing. No one was allowed to say that the Empress was fair
as a lily or lovely as a rose, but that the lily was fair or the rose
lovely as Her Majesty. She tried to spread the belief that she was
really the Supreme Being by forcing flowers artificially and then in the
presence of her courtiers ordering them to bloom. On one occasion she
commanded some peonies to bloom; and because they did not instantly
obey, she caused every peony in the capital to be pulled up and burnt,
and prohibited the cultivation of peonies ever afterwards. She further
decided to place her sex once and for all on an equality with man. For
that purpose women were admitted to the public examinations, official
posts being conferred upon those who were successful; and among other
things they were excused from kneeling while giving evidence in courts
of justice. This innovation, however, did not fulfil its promise;
and with the disappearance of its vigorous foundress, the system also
disappeared. It was not actually the first time in Chinese history that
the experiment had been tried. An emperor of the third century A.D. had
already opened public life to women, and it is said that many of them
rose to high office; but here too the system was of short duration, and
the old order was soon restored.

Another striking picture of the T'ang dynasty is presented by the career
of an emperor who is usually spoken of as Ming Huang, and who, after
distinguishing himself at several critical junctures, mounted the throne
in 712, in succession to his father, who had abdicated in his favour. He
began with economy, closing the silk factories and forbidding the palace
ladies to wear jewels or embroideries, considerable quantities of which
were actually burnt. He was a warm patron of literature, and schools
were established in every village. Fond of music, he founded a college
for training youth of both sexes in this art. His love of war and
his growing extravagance led to increased taxation, with the usual
consequences in China--discontent and rebellion. He surrounded himself
by a brilliant court, welcoming men of genius in literature and art;
at first for their talents alone, but finally for their readiness
to participate in scenes of revelry and dissipation provided for the
amusement of a favourite concubine, the ever-famous Yang Kuei-fei
(pronounced _Kway-fay_). Eunuchs were appointed to official posts, and
the grossest forms of religious superstition were encouraged. Women
ceased to veil themselves, as of old. At length, in 755, a serious
rebellion broke out, and a year later the emperor, now an old man of
seventy-one, fled before the storm. He had not proceeded far before his
soldiery revolted and demanded vengeance upon the whole family of the
favourite, several unworthy members of which had been raised to high
positions and loaded with honours. The wretched emperor was forced to
order the head eunuch to strangle his idolized concubine, while the
rest of her family perished at the hands of the troops. He subsequently
abdicated in favour of his son, and spent the last six years of his life
in seclusion.

This tragic story has been exquisitely told in verse by one of China's
foremost poets, who was born only a few years later. He divides his
poem into eight parts, dealing with the _ennui_ of the monarch until he
discovers _beauty_, the _revelry_ of the pair together, followed by the
horrors of _flight_, to end in the misery of _exile_ without her, the
_return_ when the emperor passes again by the fatal spot, _home_ where
everything reminds him of her, and finally _spirit-land_. This last is a
figment of the poet's imagination. He pictures the disconsolate emperor
sending a magician to discover Yang Kuei-fei's whereabouts in the next
world, and to bear to her a message of uninterrupted love. The magician,
after a long search, finds her in one of the Isles of the Blest, and
fulfils his commission accordingly.

     Her features are fixed and calm, though myriad tears fall,
     Wetting a spray of pear-bloom, as it were with the raindrops of
     spring.
     Subduing her emotions, restraining her grief, she tenders thanks
     to His Majesty.
     Saying how since their parting she had missed his form and voice;
     And how, although their love on earth had so soon come to an end,
     The days and months among the Blest were still of long duration.
     And now she turns and gazes towards the above of mortals,
     But cannot discern the Imperial city, lost in the dust and haze.
     Then she takes out the old keepsake, tokens of undying love,
     A gold hairpin, an enamel brooch, and bids the magician carry
     these back.
     One half of the hairpin she keeps, and one half of the enamel
     brooch,
     Breaking with her hands the yellow gold, and dividing the enamel
     in two.
     "Tell him," she said, "to be firm of heart, as this gold and
     enamel,
     And then in heaven or on earth below we two may meet once more."

The magnificent House of T'ang was succeeded by five insignificant
dynasties, the duration of all of which was crowded into about half
a century. Then, in A.D. 960, began the rule of the Sungs (pronounced
_Soongs_), to last for three hundred years and rival in national peace
and prosperity any other period in the history of China. The nation
had already in a great measure settled down to that state of material
civilization and mental culture in which it has remained to the present
time. To the appliances of ordinary Chinese life it is probable that but
few additions have been made since a very early date. The dress of the
people has indeed undergone several variations, but the ploughs and
hoes, the water-wheels and well-sweeps, the tools of the artisans, mud
huts, carts, junks, chairs, tables, chopsticks, etc., which we still
see in China, are probably very much those of two thousand years ago.
Mencius, of the third century B.C., observed that written characters had
the same form, and axle-trees the same breadth, all over the empire; and
to this day an unaltering uniformity is one of the chief characteristics
of the Chinese people in every department of life.

In spite, however, of the peaceful aspirations of the House of Sung,
the Kitan Tartars were for ever encroaching upon Chinese territory, and
finally overran and occupied a large part of northern China, with
their capital where Peking now stands. This resulted in an amicable
arrangement to divide the empire, the Kitans retaining their conquests
in the north, from which, after about two hundred years, they were in
turn expelled by the Golden Tartars, who had previously been subject to
them.

Many volumes, rather than pages, would be required to do justice to the
statesmen, soldiers, philosophers, poets, historians, art critics, and
other famous men of this dynasty. It has already been stated that the
interpretation of the Confucian Canon, accepted at the present day,
dates from this period; and it may now be of interest to give a brief
account of another remarkable movement connected with the dynasty,
though in quite a different line.

Wang An-shih (as _shi_ in _shirk_), popularly known as the Reformer, was
born in 1021. In his youth a keen student, his pen seemed to fly over
the paper. He rose to high office; and by the time he was forty-eight he
found himself installed as confidential adviser to the emperor. He then
entered upon a series of startling political reforms, said to be based
upon new and more correct interpretations of portions of the Confucian
Canon, which still remained, so far as explanation was concerned, just
as it had been left by the scholars of the Han dynasty. This appeal to
authority was, of course, a mere blind, cleverly introduced to satisfy
the bulk of the population, who were always unwilling to move in any
direction where no precedent is forthcoming. One of his schemes, the
express object of which was to decrease taxation and at the same time
to increase the revenue, was to secure a sure and certain market for all
products, as follows. From the produce of a given district, enough was
to be set aside (1) for the payment of taxes, and (2) to supply the
wants of the district; (3) the balance was then to be taken over by the
state at a low rate, and held for a rise or forwarded to some centre
where there happened to be a demand. There would be thus a certainty
of market for the farmer, and an equal certainty for the state to
make profits as a middleman. Another part of this scheme consisted in
obligatory advances by the state to cultivators of land, whether these
farmers required the money or not, the security for the loans being in
each case the growing crops.

There was also a system of tithing for military purposes, under which
every family having more than two males was bound to supply one to serve
as a soldier; and in order to keep up a breed of cavalry horses, every
family was compelled to take charge of one, which was provided, together
with its food, by the government. There was a system under which money
payments were substituted for the old-fashioned and vexatious method
of carrying on public works by drafts of forced labourers; and again
another under which warehouses for bartering and hypothecating goods
were established all over the empire.

Of all his innovations the most interesting was that all land was to be
remeasured and an attempt made to secure a more equitable incidence of
taxation. The plan was to divide up the land into equal squares, and to
levy taxes in proportion to the fertility of each. This scheme proved
for various reasons to be unworkable; and the bitter opposition with
which, like all his other measures of reform, it was received by
his opponents, did not conduce to success. Finally, he abolished all
restrictions upon the export of copper, the result being that even the
current copper "cash" were melted down and made into articles for sale
and exportation. A panic ensued, which Wang met by the simple expedient
of doubling the value of each cash. He attempted to reform the
examination system, requiring from the candidate not so much graces of
style as a wide acquaintance with practical subjects. "Accordingly,"
says one Chinese author, "even the pupils at the village schools
threw away their text-books of rhetoric, and began to study primers of
history, geography, and political economy"--a striking anticipation of
the movement in vogue to-day. "I have myself been," he tells us, "an
omnivorous reader of books of all kinds, even, for example, of ancient
medical and botanical works. I have, moreover, dipped into treatises on
agriculture and on needlework, all of which I have found very profitable
in aiding me to seize the great scheme of the Canon itself." But
like many other great men, he was in advance of his age. He fell into
disfavour at court, and was dismissed to a provincial post; and although
he was soon recalled, he retired into private life, shortly afterwards
to die, but not before he had seen the whole of his policy reversed.

His career stands out in marked contrast with that of the great
statesman and philosopher, Chu Hsi (pronounced _Choo Shee_), who
flourished A.D. 1130-1200. His literary output was enormous and his
official career successful; but his chief title to fame rests upon his
merits as a commentator on the Confucian Canon. As has been already
stated, he introduced interpretations either wholly or partly at
variance with those which had been put forth by the scholars of the
Han dynasty, and hitherto received as infallible, thus modifying to a
certain extent the prevailing standard of political and social morality.
His guiding principle was merely one of consistency. He refused to
interpret words in a given passage in one sense, and the same words
occurring elsewhere in another sense. The effect of this apparently
obvious method was magical; and from that date the teachings of
Confucius have been universally understood in the way in which Chu Hsi
said they ought to be understood.

To his influence also must be traced the spirit of materialism which
is so widely spread among educated Chinese. The God in whom Confucius
believed, but whom, as will be seen later on, he can scarcely be said
to have "taught," was a passive rather than an active God, and may be
compared with the God of the Psalms. He was a personal God, as we know
from the ancient character by which He was designated in the written
language of early ages, that character being a rude picture of a
man. This view was entirely set aside by Chu Hsi, who declared in the
plainest terms that the Chinese word for God meant nothing more than
"abstract right;" in other words, God was a principle. It is impossible
to admit such a proposition, which was based on sentiment and not
on sound reasoning. Chu Hsi was emphatically not a man of religious
temperament, and belief in the supernatural was distasteful to him;
he was for a short time under the spell of Buddhism, but threw that
religion over for the orthodoxy of Confucianism. He was, therefore,
anxious to exclude the supernatural altogether from the revised scheme
of moral conduct which he was deducing from the Confucian Canon, and his
interpretation of the word "God" has been blindly accepted ever since.

When Chu Hsi died, his coffin is said to have taken up a position,
suspended in the air, about three feet from the ground. Whereupon his
son-in-law, falling on his knees beside the bier, reminded the departed
spirit of the great principles of which he had been such a brilliant
exponent in life--and the coffin descended gently to the ground.



CHAPTER V--WOMEN AND CHILDREN

The Chinese are very fond of animals, and especially of birds; and on
the whole they may be said to be kind to their animals, though cases of
ill-treatment occur. At the same time it must be carefully remembered
that such quantum of humanity as they may exhibit is entirely of their
own making; there is no law to act persuasively on brutal natures, and
there is no Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to see that
any such law is enforced. A very large number of beautiful birds, mostly
songless, are found in various parts of China, and a great variety of
fishes in the rivers and on the coast. Wild animals are represented by
the tiger (in both north and south), the panther and the bear, and even
the elephant and the rhinoceros may be found in the extreme south-west.
The wolf and the fox, the latter dreaded as an uncanny beast, are very
widely distributed.

Still less would there be any ground for establishing a Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children, the very name of which would make
an ordinary, unsophisticated Chinaman stare. Chinese parents are, if
anything, over-indulgent to their children. The father is, indeed,
popularly known as the "Severe One," and it is a Confucian tradition
that he should not spare the rod and so spoil the child, but he draws
the line at a poker; and although as a father he possesses the power of
life and death over his offspring, such punishments as are inflicted are
usually of the mildest description. The mother, the "Gentle One," is,
speaking broadly, a soft-hearted, sweet-natured specimen of humanity;
one of those women to whom hundreds of Europeans owe deep debts of
gratitude for the care and affection lavished upon their alien children.
In the absence of the Severe One, it falls to her to chastise when
necessary; and we even read of a son who wept, not because his mother
hurt him, but because, owing to her advanced age, she was no longer able
to hit him hard enough!

Among other atrocious libels which have fastened upon the fair fame
of the Chinese people, first and foremost stands the charge of
female infanticide, now happily, though still slowly, fading from
the calculations of those who seek the truth. Fifty years ago it was
generally believed that the Chinese hated their female children, and got
rid of them in early infancy by wholesale murder. It may be admitted
at once that boys are preferred to girls, inasmuch as they carry on
the family line, and see that the worship of ancestors is regularly
performed in due season. Also, because girls require dowries, which they
take away with them for the benefit of other families than their own;
hence the saying, "There is no thief like a family of five daughters,"
and the term "lose-money goods," as jestingly applied to girls, against
which may be set another term, "a thousand ounces of gold," which is
commonly used of a daughter. Of course it is the boy who is specially
wanted in a family; and little boys are often dressed as little girls,
in order to deceive the angels of disease and death, who, it is hoped,
may thus pass them over as of less account.

To return to the belief formerly held that female infanticide was
rampant all over China. The next step was for the honest observer to
admit that it was not known in his own particular district, but to
declare that it was largely practised elsewhere. This view, however,
lost its validity when residents "elsewhere" had to allow that no
traces of infanticide could be found in their neighbourhood; and so
on. Luckily, still greater comfort is to be found in the following
argument,--a rare example of proving a negative--from which it will
be readily seen that female infanticide on any abnormal scale is
quite beyond the bounds of the possible. Those who have even a bowing
acquaintance with Chinese social life will grant that every boy, at
about the age of eighteen, is provided by his parents with a wife. They
must also concede the notorious fact that many well-to-do Chinese take
one or more concubines. The Emperor, indeed, is allowed seventy; but
this number exists only on paper as a regulation maximum. Now, if every
Chinaman has one wife, and many have two, over and above the host of
girls said to be annually sacrificed as worthless babies, it must follow
that the proportion of girls born in China enormously outnumbers the
proportion of boys, whereas in the rest of the world boys are well known
to be always in the majority. After this, it is perhaps superfluous to
state that, apart from the natural love of the parent, a girl is really,
even at a very early age, a marketable commodity. Girls are sometimes
sold into other families to be brought up as wives for the sons;
more often, to be used as servants, under what is of course a form of
slavery, qualified by the important condition, which can be enforced by
law, that when of a marriageable age, the girl's master shall find her
a husband. Illegitimate children, the source of so much baby-farming and
infanticide elsewhere, are practically unknown in China; and the same
may be said of divorce. A woman cannot legally divorce her husband. In
rare cases she will leave him, and return to her family, in spite of the
fact that he can legally insist upon her return; for she knows well that
if her case is good, the husband will not dare to risk the scandal of an
exposure, not to mention the almost certain vengeance of her
affronted kinsmen. It is also the fear of such vengeance that prevents
mothers-in-law from ill-treating the girls who pass into their new homes
rather as servants than daughters to the husband's mother. Every
woman, as indeed every man, has one final appeal by which to punish an
oppressor. She may commit suicide, there being no canon, legal or moral,
against self-slaughter; and in China, where, contrary to widespread
notions on the subject, human life is held in the highest degree sacred,
this course is sure to entail trouble and expense, and possibly severe
punishment, if the aggrieved parties are not promptly conciliated by a
heavy money payment.

A man may divorce his wife for one of the seven following reasons:--Want
of children, adultery, neglect of his parents, nagging, thieving (i.e.
supplying her own family with his goods, popularly known as "leakage"),
jealous temper and leprosy. To the above, the humanity of the lawgiver
has affixed three qualifying conditions. He may not put her away on
any of the above grounds if she has duly passed through the period of
mourning for his parents; if he has grown rich since their marriage; if
she has no longer any home to which she can return.

Altogether, the Chinese woman has by no means such a bad time as is
generally supposed to be the case. Even in the eye of the law, she has
this advantage over a man, that she cannot be imprisoned except for high
treason and adultery, and is to all intents and purposes exempt from the
punishment of the bamboo. Included in this exemption are the aged and
the young, the sick, the hungry and naked, and those who have already
suffered violence, as in a brawl. Further, in a well-known handbook,
magistrates are advised to postpone, in certain circumstances, the
infliction of corporal punishment; as for instance, when either the
prisoner or they themselves may be under the influence of excitement,
anger or drink.

The bamboo is the only instrument with which physical punishment may
legally be inflicted; and its infliction on a prisoner or recalcitrant
witness, in order to extort evidence, constitutes what has long been
dignified as "torture;" but even that is now, under a changing system,
about to disappear. This must not be taken to mean that torture, in our
sense of the term, has never been applied in China. The real facts
of the case are these. Torture, except as already described, being
constitutionally illegal, no magistrate would venture to resort to it
if there were any chance of his successful impeachment before the higher
authorities, upon which he would be cashiered and his official career
brought abruptly to an end. Torture, therefore, would have no
terrors for the ordinary citizen of good repute and with a backing of
substantial friends; but for the outcast, the rebel, the highway robber
(against whom every man's hand would be), the disreputable native of a
distant province, and also for the outer barbarian (e.g. the captives at
the Summer Palace in 1860), another tale must be told. No consequences,
except perhaps promotion, would follow from too rigorous treatment in
such cases as these.

Resort to the bamboo as a means of extorting the confession of a
prisoner is regarded by the people rather as the magistrate's confession
of his own incapacity. The education of the official, too easily and
too freely turned into ridicule, gives him an insight into human
nature which, coupled with a little experience, renders him extremely
formidable to the shifty criminal or the crafty litigant. As a rule,
he finds no need for the application of pain. There is a quaint story
illustrative of such judicial methods as would be sure to meet with
full approbation in China. A magistrate, who after several hearings had
failed to discover, among a gang accused of murder, what was essential
to the completion of the case, namely, the actual hand which struck
the fatal blow, notified the prisoners that he was about to invoke the
assistance of the spirits, with a view to elicit the truth. Accordingly,
he caused the accused men, dressed in the black clothes of criminals,
to be led into a large barn, and arranged around it, face to the wall.
Having then told them that an accusing angel would shortly come among
them, and mark the back of the guilty man, he went outside and had the
door shut, and the place darkened. After a short interval, when the door
was thrown open, and the men were summoned to come forth, it was seen
directly that one of the number had a white mark on his back. This
man, in order to make all secure, had turned his back to the wall, not
knowing, what the magistrate well knew, that the wall had been newly
white-washed.

As to the punishment of crime by flogging, a sentence of one or two
hundred--even more--blows would seem to be cruel and disgusting;
happily, it may be taken for granted that such ferocious sentences
are executed only in such cases as have been mentioned above. An acute
observer, for many years a member of the municipal police force in
Shanghai, whose duty it was to see that floggings were administered to
Chinese criminals, stated plainly in a public report that the bamboo is
not necessarily a severe ordeal, and that one hundred blows are at times
inflicted so lightly as to leave scarcely a mark behind, though the
recipient howls loudly all the time. Those criminals who have money
can always manage to square the gaoler; and the gaoler has acquired a
certain knack in laying on, the upshot being great cry and little wool,
very satisfactory to the culprit. Even were we to accept the cruellest
estimate in regard to punishment by the bamboo, it would only go to show
that humanitarian feelings in China are lagging somewhat behind our
own. In _The Times_ of March 1, 1811, we read that, for allowing French
prisoners to escape from Dartmoor, three men of the Nottingham militia
were sentenced to receive 900 lashes each, and that one of them actually
received 450 lashes in the presence of pickets from every regiment in
the garrison. On New Year's Day, 1911, a eunuch attempted to assassinate
one of the Imperial Princes. For this he was sentenced to be beaten to
death, some such ferocious punishment being necessary, in Chinese eyes,
to vindicate the majesty of the law. That end having been attained, the
sentence was commuted to eighty blows with the bamboo and deportation to
northern Manchuria.

The Chinese woman often, in mature life, wields enormous influence over
the family, males included, and is a kind of private Empress Dowager.
A man knows, says the proverb, but a woman knows better. As a widow
in early life, her lot is not quite so pleasant. It is not thought
desirable for widows to remarry; but if she remains single, she becomes
"a rudderless boat;" round which gathers much calumny. Many young women
brave public opinion, and enter into second nuptials. If they are bent
upon remarrying, runs the saying, they can no more be prevented than the
sky can be prevented from raining.

The days of "golden lilies," as the artificially small feet of Chinese
women are called, are generally believed to date from the tenth century
A.D., though some writers have endeavoured to place the custom many
centuries earlier. It must always be carefully remembered that Manchu
women--the women of the dynasty which has ruled since 1644--do not
compress their feet. Consequently, the empresses of modern times have
feet of the natural size; neither is the practice in force among the
Hakkas, a race said to have migrated from the north of China to the
south in the thirteenth century; nor among the hill tribes; nor among
the boating population of Canton and elsewhere. Small feet are thus in
no way associated with aristocracy or gentleness of birth; neither is
there any foundation for the generally received opinion that the
Chinese lame their women in this way to keep them from gadding about.
Small-footed women may be seen carrying quite heavy burdens, and even
working in the fields; not to mention that many are employed as nurses
for small children. Another explanation is that women with bound feet
bear finer children and stronger; but the real reason lies in another
direction, quite beyond the scope of this book. The question of charm
may be taken into consideration, for any Chinaman will bear witness to
the seductive effect of a gaily-dressed girl picking her way on tiny
feet some three inches in length, her swaying movements and delightful
appearance of instability conveying a general sense of delicate grace
quite beyond expression in words.

The lady of the tenth century, to whom the origin of small feet is
ascribed, wished to make her own feet like two new moons; but whether
she actually bound them, as at the present day, is purely a matter of
conjecture. The modern style of binding inflicts great pain for a long
time upon the little girls who have to endure it. They become very shy
on the subject, and will on no account show their bare feet, though
Manchu women and others with full-sized feet frequently walk about
unshod, and the boat-girls at Canton and elsewhere never seem to wear
shoes or stockings at all.

The "pigtail," or long plait of hair worn by all Chinamen, for the
abolition of which many advanced reformers are now earnestly pleading,
is an institution of comparatively modern date. It was imposed by the
victorious Manchu-Tartars when they finally established their dynasty in
1644, not so much as a badge of conquest, still less of servitude,
but as a means of obliterating, so far as possible, the most patent
distinction between the two races, and of unifying the appearance,
if not the aspirations, of the subjects of the Son of Heaven. This
obligation was for some time strenuously resisted by the natives of
Amoy, Swatow, and elsewhere in that neighbourhood. At length, when
compelled to yield, it is said that they sullenly wound their queues
round their heads and covered them with turbans, which are still worn by
natives of those parts.

The peculiar custom of shaving the head in front, and allowing the hair
to grow long behind, is said to have been adopted by the Manchus out
of affectionate gratitude to the horse, an animal which has played an
all-important part in the history and achievements of the race. This
view is greatly reinforced by the cut of the modern official sleeves,
which hang down, concealing the hands, and are shaped exactly like a
pair of horse's hoofs.

In many respects the Manchu conquerors left the Chinese to follow their
own customs. No attempt was made to coerce Chinese women, who dress
their hair in styles totally different from that of the Manchu women;
there are, too, some tolerated differences between the dress of the
Manchu and Chinese men, but these are such as readily escape notice.
Neither was any attempt made in the opening years of the conquest to
interfere with foot-binding by Chinese women; but in 1664 an edict was
issued forbidding the practice. Readers may draw their own conclusions,
when it is added that four years after the edict was withdrawn. Hopes
are now widely and earnestly entertained that with the dawn of the new
era, this cruel custom will become a thing of the past; it is, however,
to be feared that those who have been urging on this desirable reform
may be, like all reformers, a little too sanguine of immediate success,
and that a comparatively long period will have to go by before the last
traces of foot-binding disappear altogether. Meanwhile, it seems that
the Government has taken the important step of refusing admission to the
public schools of all girls whose feet are bound.

The disappearance of the queue is another thing altogether. It is not a
native Chinese institution; there would be no violation of any cherished
tradition of antiquity if it were once and for ever discarded. On the
contrary, if the Chinese do not intend to follow the Japanese and take
to foreign clothes, there might be a return to the old style of doing
the hair. The former dress of the Japanese was one of the numerous items
borrowed by them from China; it was indeed the national dress of the
Chinese for some three hundred years, between A.D. 600-900. One little
difficulty will vanish with the queue. A Chinese coolie will tie his
tail round his head when engaged on work in which he requires to keep it
out of the way, and the habit has become of real importance with the use
of modern machinery; but on the arrival of his master, he should at once
drop it, out of respect, a piece of politeness not always exhibited in
the presence of a foreign employer. The agitation, now in progress,
for the final abolition of the queue may be due to one or all of the
following reasons. Intelligent Chinese may have come to realize that the
fashion is cumbrous and out of date. Sensitive Chinese may fear that it
makes them ridiculous in the eyes of foreigners. Political Chinese, who
would gladly see the re-establishment of a native dynasty, may look
to its disappearance as the first step towards throwing off the Manchu
yoke.

On the whole, the ruling Manchus have shown themselves very careful
not to wound the susceptibilities of their Chinese subjects. Besides
allowing the women to retain their own costume, and the dead, men and
women alike, to be buried in the costume of the previous dynasty, it was
agreed from the very first that no Chinese concubines should be taken
into the Palace. This last condition seems to be a concession pure and
simple to the conquered; there is little doubt, however, that the wily
Manchus were only too ready to exclude a very dangerous possibility of
political intrigue.



CHAPTER VI--LITERATURE AND EDUCATION

The Chinese people reverence above all things literature and learning;
they hate war, bearing in mind the saying of Mencius, "There is no such
thing as a _righteous_ war; we can only assert that some wars are better
than others;" and they love trade and the finesse of the market-place.
China can boast many great soldiers, in modern as well as in ancient
days; but anything like a proper appreciation of the military arm is of
quite recent growth. "Good iron is not used for nails, nor good men for
soldiers," says the proverb; and again, "One stroke of the civilian's
pen reduces the military official to abject submission." On the other
hand, it is admitted that "Civilians give the empire peace, and soldiers
give it security."

Chinese parents have never, until recent days, willingly trained their
sons for the army. They have always wished their boys to follow the
stereotyped literary curriculum, and then, after passing successfully
through the great competitive examinations, to rise to high civil office
in the state. A good deal of ridicule has been heaped of late on the
Chinese competitive examination, the subjects of which were drawn
exclusively from the Confucian Canon, and included a knowledge of
ancient history, of a comprehensive scheme of morality, initiated by
Confucius, and further elaborated by Mencius (372-289 B.C.), of the
ballads and ceremonial rites of three thousand years ago, and of an
aptitude for essay-writing and the composition of verse. The whole
curriculum may be fitly compared with such an education as was given
to William Pitt and others among our own great statesmen, in which an
ability to read the Greek and Roman classics, coupled with an intimate
knowledge of the Peloponnesian War, carried the student about as far as
it was considered necessary for him to go. The Chinese course, too, has
certainly brought to the front in its time a great many eminent men, who
have held their own in diplomacy, if not in warfare, with the subtlest
intellects of the West.

Their system of competitive examinations has indeed served the Chinese
well. It is the brightest spot in the whole administration, being
absolutely above suspicion, such as attaches to other departments of the
state. Attempts have been made from time to time to gain admission by
improper means to the list of successful candidates, and it would be
absurd to say that not one has ever succeeded; the risk, however, is too
great, for the penalty on detection may be death.

The ordeal itself is exceedingly severe, as well for the examiners as
for the candidates. At the provincial examinations, held once in every
third year, an Imperial Commissioner, popularly known as the Grand
Examiner, is sent down from Peking. On arrival, his residence is
formally sealed up, and extraordinary precautions are taken to prevent
friends of intending candidates from approaching him in any way. There
is no age limit, and men of quite mature years are to be found
competing against youths hardly out of their teens; indeed, there is
an authenticated case of a man who successfully graduated at the age of
seventy-two. Many compete year after year, until at length they decide
to give it up as a bad job.

At an early hour on the appointed day the candidates begin to assemble,
and by and by the great gates of the examination hall are thrown open,
and heralds shriek out the names of those who are to enter. Each one
answers in turn as his name is called, and receives from the attendants
a roll of paper marked with the number of the open cell he is to occupy
in one of the long alleys into which the examination hall is divided.
Other writing materials, as well as food, he carries with him in a
basket, which is always carefully searched at the door, and in which
"sleeve" editions of the classics have sometimes been found. When all
have taken their seats, the Grand Examiner burns incense, and closes the
entrance gates, through which no one will be allowed to pass, either in
or out, dead or alive, until the end of the third day, when the first of
the three sessions is at an end, and the candidates are released for
the night. In case of death, not unusual where ten or twelve thousand
persons are cooped up day and night in a confined space, the corpse is
hoisted over the wall; and this would be done even if it were that of
the Grand Examiner himself, whose place would then be taken by the
chief Assistant Examiner, who is also appointed by the Emperor, and
accompanies the Grand Examiner from Peking.

The long strain of three bouts of three days each has often been
found sufficient to unhinge the reason, with a variety of distressing
consequences, the least perhaps of which may be seen in a regular
percentage of blank papers handed in. On one occasion, a man handed in a
copy of his last will and testament; on another, not very long ago,
the mental balance of the Grand Examiner gave way, and a painful scene
ensued. He tore up a number of the papers already handed in, and bit
and kicked every one who came near him, until he was finally secured
and bound hand and foot in his chair. A candidate once presented himself
dressed in woman's clothes, with his face highly rouged and powdered,
as is the custom. He was arrested at the entrance gate, and quietly sent
home to his friends.

Overwork, in the feverish desire to get into the Government service, is
certainly responsible for the mental break-down of a large proportion
of the comparatively few lunatics found in China. There being no lunatic
asylums in the empire, it is difficult to form anything like an exact
estimate of their number; it can only be said, what is equally true of
cripples or deformed persons, that it is very rare to meet them in the
streets or even to hear of their existence.

As a further measure of precaution against corrupt practices at
examinations, the papers handed in by the candidates are all copied out
in red ink, and only these copies are submitted to the examiners. The
difficulty therefore of obtaining favourable treatment, on the score of
either bribery or friendship, is very much increased. The Chinese, who
make no attempt to conceal or excuse, in fact rather exaggerate any
corruption in their public service generally, do not hesitate to declare
with striking unanimity that the conduct of their examination system is
above suspicion, and there appears to be no valid reason why we should
not accept this conclusion.

The whole system is now undergoing certain modifications, which,
if wisely introduced, should serve only to strengthen the national
character. The Confucian teachings, which are of the very highest order
of morality, and which have moulded the Chinese people for so many
centuries, helping perhaps to give them a cohesion and stability
remarkable among the nations of the world, should not be lightly cast
aside. A scientific training, enabling us to annihilate time and space,
to extend indefinitely the uses and advantages of matter in all its
forms, and to mitigate the burden of suffering which is laid upon the
greater portion of the human race, still requires to be effectively
supplemented by a moral training, to teach man his duty towards his
neighbour. From the point of view of science, the Chinese are, of
course, wholly out of date, though it is only within the past hundred
and fifty years that the West has so decisively outstripped the East. If
we go back to the fifteenth century, we shall find that the standard of
civilization, as the term is usually understood, was still much higher
in China than in Europe; while Marco Polo, the famous Venetian traveller
of the thirteenth century, who actually lived twenty-four years in
China, and served as an official under Kublai Khan, has left it on
record that the magnificence of Chinese cities, and the splendour of the
Chinese court, outrivalled anything he had ever seen or heard of.

Pushing farther back into antiquity, we easily reach a time when the
inhabitants of the Middle Kingdom "held learning in high esteem, while
our own painted forefathers were running naked and houseless in the
woods, and living on berries and raw meat." In inventive, mechanical and
engineering aptitudes the Chinese have always excelled; as witness--only
to mention a few--the art of printing (_see below_); their water-wheels
and other clever appliances for irrigation; their wonderful bridges (not
to mention the Great Wall); the "taxicab," or carriage fitted with a
machine for recording the distance traversed, the earliest notice
of which takes us back to the fourth century A.D.; the system of
fingerprints for personal identification, recorded in the seventh
century A.D.; the carved ivory balls which contain even so many as nine
or ten other balls, of diminishing size, one within another; a chariot
carrying a figure which always pointed south, recorded as in existence
at a very early date, though unfortunately the specifications which have
came down to us from later dates will not work out, as in the case of
the "taxicab." The story goes that this chariot was invented about 1100
B.C., by a wonderful hero of the day, in order to enable an ambassador,
who had come to the court of China from a far distant country in the
south, to find his way expeditiously home. The compass proper the
Chinese cannot claim; it was probably introduced into China by the
Arabs at a comparatively late date, and has been confused with the
south-pointing chariot of earlier ages. As to gunpowder, something
of that nature appears to have been used for fireworks in the seventh
century; and something of the nature of a gun is first heard of during
the Mongol campaigns of the thirteenth century; but firearms were not
systematically employed until the fifteenth century. Add to the above
the art of casting bronze, brought to a high pitch of excellence
seven or eight centuries before the Christian era, if not earlier; the
production of silk, mentioned by Mencius (372-289 B.C.) as necessary
for the comfort of old age; the cultivation of the tea-plant from time
immemorial; also the discovery and manufacture of porcelain some sixteen
centuries ago, subsequently brought to a perfection which leaves all
European attempts hopelessly out-classed.

In many instances the Chinese seem to have been so near and yet so far.
There is a distinct tradition of flying cars at a very remote date; and
rough woodcuts have been handed down for many centuries, showing a car
containing two passengers, flying through the clouds and apparently
propelled by wheels of a screw pattern, set at right angles to the
direction in which the travellers are proceeding. But there is not a
scrap of evidence to show what was the motive power which turned the
wheels. Similarly, iron ships are mentioned in Chinese literature so
far back as the tenth century, only, however, to be ridiculed as an
impossibility; the circulation of the blood is hinted at; added to which
is the marvellous anticipation of anaesthetics as applied to surgery, to
be mentioned later on, an idea which also remained barren of results for
something like sixteen centuries, until Western science stepped in and
secured the prize. Here it may be fairly argued that, considering the
national repugnance to mutilation of the body in any form, it could
hardly be expected that the Chinese would seek to facilitate a process
to which they so strongly object.

In the domain of painting, we are only just beginning to awake to the
fact that in this direction the Chinese have reached heights denied to
all save artists of supreme power, and that their art was already on
a lofty level many centuries before our own great representatives had
begun to put brush to canvas. Without going so far back as the famous
picture in the British Museum, by an artist of the fourth and fifth
centuries A.D., the point may perhaps be emphasized by quotation from
the words of a leading art-critic, referring to painters of the tenth
and eleventh centuries:--"To the Sung artists and poets, mountains
were a passion, as to Wordsworth. The landscape art thus founded, and
continued by the Japanese in the fifteenth century, must rank as
the greatest school of landscape which the world has seen. It is the
imaginative picturing of what is most elemental and most august in
Nature--liberating visions of storm or peace among abrupt peaks,
plunging torrents, trembling reed-beds--and though having a fantastic
side for its weakness, can never have the reproach of pretty tameness
and mere fidelity which form too often the only ideal of Western
landscape."

Great Chinese artists unite in dismissing fidelity to outline as of
little importance compared with reproduction of the spirit of the object
painted. To paint a tree successfully, it is necessary to produce not
merely shape and colour but the vitality and "soul" of the original.
Until with the last two or three centuries, nature itself was always
appealed to as the one source of true inspiration; then came the artist
of the studio, since which time Chinese art has languished, while
Japanese art, learned at the feet of Chinese artists from the fourteenth
century onwards, has come into prominent notice, and is now, with
extraordinary versatility, attempting to assimilate the ideals of the
West.

The following words were written by a Chinese painter of the fifth
century:--

"To gaze upon the clouds of autumn, a soaring exaltation in the soul; to
feel the spring breeze stirring wild exultant thoughts;--what is there
in the possession of gold and gems to compare with delights like these?
And then, to unroll the portfolio and spread the silk, and to transfer
to it the glories of flood and fell, the green forest, the blowing
winds, the white water of the rushing cascade, as with a turn of the
hand a divine influence descends upon the scene. . . . These are the
joys of painting."

Just as in poetry, so in pictorial art, the artist avoids giving full
expression to his theme, and leaving nothing for the spectator to supply
by his own imaginative powers. "Suggestion" is the key-note to both the
above arts; and in both, "Impressionism" has been also at the command
of the gifted, centuries before the term had passed into the English
language.

Literature and art are indeed very closely associated in China. Every
literary man is supposed to be more or less a painter, or a musician of
sorts; failing personal skill, it would go without saying that he was a
critic, or at the lowest a lover, of one or the other art, or of both.
All Chinese men, women and children seem to love flowers; and the poetry
which has gathered around the blossoms of plum and almond alone would
form a not inconsiderable library of itself. Yet a European bouquet
would appear to a man of culture as little short of a monstrosity; for
to enjoy flowers, a Chinaman must see only a single spray at a time. The
poorly paid clerk will bring with him to his office in the morning some
trifling bud, which he will stick into a tiny vase of water, and place
beside him on his desk. The owner of what may be a whole gallery of
pictures will invite you to tea, followed by an inspection of his
treasures; but on the same afternoon he will only produce perhaps a
single specimen, and scout the idea that any one could call for more.
If a long landscape, it will be gradually unwound from its roller, and
a portion at a time will be submitted for the enjoyment and criticism
of his visitors; if a religious or historical picture, or a picture
of birds or flowers, of which the whole effort must be viewed in its
completeness, it will be studied in various senses, during the intervals
between a chat and a cup of tea. Such concentration is absolutely
essential, in the eyes of the Chinese critic, to a true interpretation
of the artist's meaning, and to a just appreciation of his success.

The marvellous old stories of grapes painted by Zeuxis of ancient
Greece, so naturally that birds came to peck at them; and of the curtain
painted by Parrhasius which Zeuxis himself tried to pull aside; and
of the horse by Apelles at which another horse neighed--all these find
their counterparts in the literature of Chinese art. One painter, in
quite early days, painted a perch and hung it over a river bank, when
there was immediately a rush of otters to secure it. Another painted the
creases on cotton clothes so exactly that the clothes looked as if they
had just come from the wash. Another produced pictures of cats which
would keep a place free from rats. All these efforts were capped by
those of another artist, whose picture of the North Wind made people
feel cold, while his picture of the South Wind made people feel hot.
Such exaggerations are not altogether without their value; they suggest
that Chinese art must have reached a high level, and this has recently
been shown to be nothing more than the truth, by the splendid exhibition
of Chinese pictures recently on view in the British Museum.

The literary activities of the Chinese, and their output of literature,
have always been on a colossal scale; and of course it is entirely due
to the early invention of printing that, although a very large number of
works have disappeared, still an enormous bulk has survived the ravages
of war, rebellion and fire.

This art was rather developed than invented. There is no date, within
a margin even of half a century either way, at which we can say that
printing was invented. The germ is perhaps to be found in the engraving
of seals, which have been used by the Chinese as far back as we can go
with anything like historical certainty, and also of stone tablets
from which rubbings were taken, the most important of these being the
forty-six tablets on which five of the sacred books of Confucianism were
engraved about A.D. 170, and of which portions still remain. However
this may be, it was during the sixth century A.D. that the idea of
taking impressions on paper from wooden blocks seems to have arisen,
chiefly in connexion with religious pictures and tracts. It was not
widely applied to the production of books in general until A.D. 932,
when the Confucian Canon was so printed for the first time; from which
point onwards the extension of the art moved with rapid strides.

It is very noticeable that the Chinese, who are extraordinarily averse
to novelties, and can hardly be induced to consider any innovations,
when once convinced of their real utility, waste no further time in
securing to themselves all the advantages which may accrue. This was
forcibly illustrated in regard to the introduction of the telegraph,
against which the Chinese had set their faces, partly because of the
disturbance of geomantic influences caused by the tall telegraph poles,
and partly because they sincerely doubted that the wires could achieve
the results claimed. But when it was discovered that some wily Cantonese
had learnt over the telegraph the names of the three highest graduates
at the Peking triennial examination, weeks before the names could be
known in Canton by the usual route, and had enriched himself by buying
up the tickets bearing those names in the great lotteries which are
always held in connexion with this event, Chinese opposition went down
like a house of cards; and the only question with many of the literati
was whether, at some remote date, the Chinese had not invented
telegraphy themselves.

Moveable types of baked clay were invented about A.D. 1043, and some
centuries later they were made of wood and of copper or lead; but they
have never gained the favour accorded to block-printing, by which most
of the great literary works have been produced. The newspapers of modern
days are all printed from moveable types, and also many translations
of foreign books, prepared to meet the increasing demand for Western
learning. The Chinese have always been a great reading people,
systematic education culminating in competitive examinations for
students going back to the second century A.D. This is perhaps a
suitable place for explaining that the famous _Peking Gazette_, often
said to be the oldest newspaper in the world, is not really a newspaper
at all, in that it contains no news in our sense of the term. It is a
record only of court movements, list of promoted officials, with a
few selected memorials and edicts. It is published daily, but was not
printed until the fifteenth century.

Every Chinese boy may be said to have his chance. The slightest sign
of a capacity for book-learning is watched for, even among the poorest.
Besides the opportunity of free schools, a clever boy will soon find a
patron; and in many cases, the funds for carrying on a curriculum, and
for entering the first of the great competitions, will be subscribed in
the district, on which the candidate will confer a lasting honour by his
success. A promising young graduate, who has won his first degree with
honours, is at once an object of importance to wealthy fathers who
desire to secure him as a son-in-law, and who will see that money is not
wanting to carry him triumphantly up the official ladder. Boys without
any gifts of the kind required, remain to fill the humbler positions;
those who advance to a certain point are drafted into trade; while hosts
of others who just fall short of the highest, become tutors in private
families, schoolmasters, doctors, fortune-tellers, geomancers, and
booksellers' hacks.

Of high-class Chinese literature, it is not possible to give even the
faintest idea in the space at disposal. It must suffice to say that all
branches are adequately represented, histories, biographies, philosophy,
poetry and essays on all manner of subjects, offering a wide field even
to the most insatiate reader.

And here a remark may be interjected, which is very necessary for the
information of those who wish to form a true estimate of the Chinese
people. Throughout the Confucian Canon, a collection of ancient works on
which the moral code of the Chinese is based, there is not a single word
which could give offence, even to the most sensitive, on questions of
delicacy and decency. That is surely saying a good deal, but it is not
all; precisely the same may be affirmed of what is mentioned above as
high-class Chinese literature, which is pure enough to satisfy the most
strait-laced. Chinese poetry, of which there is in existence a huge
mass, will be searched in vain for suggestions of impropriety, for sly
innuendo, and for the other tricks of the unclean. This extraordinary
purity of language is all the more remarkable from the fact that, until
recent years, the education of women has not been at all general, though
many particular instances are recorded of women who have themselves
achieved success in literary pursuits. It is only when we come to the
novel, to the short story, or to the anecdote, which are not usually
written in high-class style, and are therefore not recognized as
literature proper, that this exalted standard is no longer always
maintained.

There are, indeed, a great number of novels, chiefly historical and
religious, in which the aims of the writers are on a sufficiently high
level to keep them clear of what is popularly known as pornography or
pig-writing; still, when all is said and done, there remains a balance
of writing curiously in contrast with the great bulk of Chinese
literature proper. As to the novel, the long story with a worked-out
plot, this is not really a local product. It seems to have come along
with the Mongols from Central Asia, when they conquered China in the
thirteenth century, and established their short-lived dynasty. Some
novels, in spite of their low moral tone, are exceedingly well written
and clever, graphic in description, and dramatic in episode; but it is
curious that no writer of the first rank has ever attached his name to
a novel, and that the authorship of all the cleverest is a matter of
entire uncertainty.

The low-class novel is purposely pitched in a style that will be
easily understood; but even so, there is a great deal of word- and
phrase-skipping to be done by many illiterate readers, who are quite
satisfied if they can extract the general sense as they go along.
The book-language, as cultivated by the best writers, is to be freely
understood only by those who have stocked their minds well with the
extensive phraseology which has been gradually created by eminent
men during the past twenty-five centuries, and with historical and
biographical allusions and references of all sorts and things. A word or
two, suggesting some apposite allusion, will often greatly enhance the
beauty of a composition for the connoisseur, but will fall flat on
the ears of those to whom the quotation is unknown. Simple objects in
everyday life often receive quaint names, as handed down in literature,
with which it is necessary to be familiar. For instance, a "fairy
umbrella" means a mushroom; a "gentleman of the beam" is a burglar,
because a burglar was once caught sitting on one of the open beams
inside a Chinese roof; a "slender waist" is a wasp; the "throat olive"
is the "Adam's apple"--which, by the way, is an excellent illustration
from the opposite point of view; "eyebrow notes" means notes at the
top of a page; "cap words" is sometimes used for "preface;" the
"sweeper-away of care" is wine; "golden balls" are oranges; the "golden
tray" is the moon; a "two-haired man" is a grey-beard; the "hundred
holes" is a beehive; "instead of the moon" is a lantern; "instead of
steps" is a horse; "the man with the wooden skirt" is a shopman;
to "scatter sleep" means to give hush-money; and so on, almost _ad
infinitum_.

Chinese medical literature is on a very voluminous scale, medicine
having always occupied a high place in the estimation of the people, in
spite of the fact that its practice has always been left to any one who
might choose to take it up. Surgery, even of an elementary kind, has
never had a chance; for the Chinese are extremely loath to suffer any
interference with their bodies, believing, in accordance with Confucian
dogma, that as they received them from their parents, so they should
carry them into the presence of their ancestors in the next world.
Medicine, as still practised in China, may be compared with the European
art of a couple of centuries ago, and its exceedingly doubtful results
are fully appreciated by patients at large. "No medicine," says one
proverb, "is better than a middling doctor;" while another points out
that "Many sons of clever doctors die of disease."

Legend, however, tells us of an extraordinary physician of the fifth
century B.C. who was able to see into the viscera of his patients--an
apparent anticipation of the X-rays--and who, by his intimate knowledge
of the human pulse, effected many astounding cures. We also read of an
eminent physician of the second and third centuries A.D. who did add
surgery to this other qualifications. He was skilled in the use of
acupuncture and cautery; but if these failed he would render his patient
unconscious by a dose of hashish, and then operate surgically. He is
said to have diagnosed a case of diseased bowels by the pulse alone, and
then to have cured it by operation. He offered to cure the headaches
of a famous military commander of the day by opening his skull under
hashish; but the offer was rudely declined. This story serves to show,
in spite of its marvellous setting, that the idea of administering an
anaesthetic to carry out a surgical operation must be credited, so far
as priority goes, to the Chinese, since the book in which the above
account is given cannot have been composed later than the twelfth
century A.D.



CHAPTER VII--PHILOSOPHY AND SPORT

Chinese philosophy covers altogether too large a field to be dealt with,
even in outline, on a scale suitable to this volume; only a few of its
chief features can possibly be exhibited in the space at disposal.

Beginning with moral philosophy, we are confronted at once with what was
in early days an extremely vexed question; not perhaps entirely set
at rest even now, but allowed to remain in suspense amid the universal
acceptance of Confucian teachings. Confucius himself taught in no
indistinct terms that man is born good, and that he becomes evil only by
contact with evil surroundings. He does not enlarge upon this dogma,
but states it baldly as a natural law, little anticipating that within
a couple of centuries it was to be called seriously in question. It
remained for his great follower, Mencius, born a hundred years later, to
defend the proposition against all comers, and especially against one
of no mean standing, the philosopher Kao (_Cow_). Kao declared that
righteousness is only to be got out of man's nature in the same way that
good cups and bowls are to be got out of a block of willow wood, namely,
by care in fashioning them. Improper workmanship would produce bad
results; good workmanship, on the other hand, would produce good
results. In plain words, the nature of man at birth is neither good
nor bad; and what it becomes afterwards depends entirely upon what
influences have been brought to bear and in what surroundings it has
come to maturity. Mencius met this argument by showing that in the
process of extracting cups and bowls from a block of wood, the wood as
a block is destroyed, and he pointed out that, according to such
reasoning, man's nature would also be destroyed in the process of
getting righteousness out of it.

Again, Kao maintained that man's nature has as little concern with
good or evil as water has with east or west; for water will flow
indifferently either one way or the other, according to the conditions
in each case. If there is freedom on the east, it will flow east; if
there is freedom on the west, it will flow west; and so with human
nature, which will move similarly in the direction of either good or
evil. In reply, Mencius freely admitted that water would flow either
east or west; but he asked if it would flow indifferently up or down.
He then declared that the bent of human nature towards good is precisely
like the tendency of water to flow down and not up. You can force water
to jump up, he said, by striking it, and by mechanical appliances you
can make it flow to the top of a hill; but what you do in such cases is
entirely contrary to the nature of water, and is merely the result of
violence, such violence, in fact, as is brought into play when man's
nature is bent towards evil.

"That which men get at birth," said Kao, "is their nature," implying
that all natures were the same, just as the whiteness of a white feather
is the same as the whiteness of white snow; whereupon Mencius showed
that on this principle the nature of a dog would be the same as that
of a an ox, or the nature of an ox the same as that of a man. Finally,
Mencius declared that for whatever evil men may commit, their natures
can in nowise be blamed. In prosperous times, he argued, men are mostly
good, whereas in times of scarcity the opposite is the case; these two
conditions, however, are not to be charged against the natures with
which God sent them into the world, but against the circumstances in
which the individuals in question have been situated.

The question, however, of man's original nature was not set permanently
at rest by the arguments of Mencius. A philosopher, named Hsun Tzu
(_Sheundza_), who flourished not very much later than Mencius, came
forward with the theory that so far from being good according to
Confucius, or even neutral according to Kao, the nature of man at birth
is positively evil. He supports this view by the following arguments.
From his earliest years, man is actuated by a love of gain for his own
personal enjoyment. His conduct is distinguished by selfishness and
combativeness. He becomes a slave to envy, hatred, and other passions.
The restraint of law, and the influence and guidance of teachers, are
absolutely necessary to good government and the well-being of social
life. Just as wood must be subjected to pressure in order to make it
straight, and metal must be subjected to the grindstone in order to
make it sharp, so must the nature of man be subjected to training
and education in order to obtain from it the virtues of justice and
self-sacrifice which characterize the best of the human race. It is
impossible to maintain that man's nature is good in the same sense
that his eyes see and his ears hear; for in the latter there is no
alternative. An eye which does not see, is not an eye; an ear which does
not hear, is not an ear. This proves that whereas seeing and hearing are
natural to man, goodness is artificial and acquired. Just as a potter
produces a dish or a carpenter a bench, working on some material before
them, so do the sages and teachers of mankind produce righteousness by
working upon the nature of man, which they transform in the same way
that the potter transforms the clay or the carpenter the wood. We cannot
believe that God has favourites, and deals unkindly with others. How,
then, is it that some men are evil while others are good? The answer
is, that the former follow their natural disposition, while the latter
submit to restraints and follow the guidance of their teachers. It
is indeed true that any one may become a hero, but all men do not
necessarily become heroes, nor is there any method by which they can be
forced to do so. If a man is endowed with a capacity for improvement,
and is placed in the hands of good teachers, associating at the same
time with friends whose actions display such virtues as self-sacrifice,
truth, kindness, and so forth, he will naturally imbibe principles which
will raise him to the same standard; whereas, if he consorts with evil
livers, he will be a daily witness of deceit, corruption, and general
impurity of conduct, and will gradually lapse into the same course
of life. If you do not know your son, says the proverb, look at his
friends.

The next step was taken by the philosopher Yang Hsiung (_Sheeyoong_),
53 B.C. to A.D. 18. He started a theory which occupies a middle place
between the last two theories discussed above, teaching that the nature
of man at birth is neither wholly good nor wholly evil, but a mixture
of both, and that development in either direction depends altogether
on environment. A compromise in matters of faith is not nearly so
picturesque as an extreme, and Yang's attempted solution has attracted
but scant attention, though always mentioned with respect. The same may
also be said of another attempt to smooth obvious difficulties in
the way of accepting either of the two extremes or the middle course
proposed by Yang Hsiung. The famous Han Yu, to be mentioned again
shortly, was a pillar and prop of Confucianism. He flourished between
A.D. 768 and 824, and performed such lasting services in what was to
him the cause of truth, that his tablet has been placed in the Confucian
temple, an honour reserved only for those whose orthodoxy is beyond
suspicion. Yet he ventured upon an attempt to modify this important
dogma, taking care all the time to appear as if he were criticizing
Mencius rather than Confucius, on whom, of course, the real
responsibility rests. He declared, solely upon his own authority, that
the nature of man is not uniform but divided into three grades--namely,
highest, middle, and lowest. Thus, natures of the highest grade are
good, wholly good, and nothing but good; natures of the lowest grade
are evil, wholly evil, and nothing but evil; while natures of the middle
grade may, under right direction, rise to the highest grade, or, under
wrong direction, sink to the lowest.

Another question, much debated in the age of Mencius, arose out of the
rival statements of two almost contemporary philosophers, Mo Ti (_Maw
Tee_) and Yang Chu. The former taught a system of mutual and consequently
universal love as a cure for all the ills arising from misgovernment
and want of social harmony. He pointed out, with much truth, that if the
feudal states would leave one another alone, families cease to quarrel,
and thieves cease to steal, while sovereign and subject lived on terms
of benevolence and loyalty, and fathers and sons on terms of kindness
and filial piety--then indeed the empire would be well governed. But
beyond suggesting the influence of teachers in the prohibition of hatred
and the encouragement of mutual love, our philosopher does little or
nothing to aid us in reaching such a desirable consummation.

The doctrine of Yang Chu is summed up as "every man for himself," and is
therefore diametrically opposed to that of Mo Ti. A questioner one day
asked him if he would consent to part with a single hair in order to
benefit the whole world. Yang Chu replied that a single hair could be
of no possible benefit to the world; and on being further pressed to
say what he would do if a hair were really of such benefit, it is stated
that he gave no answer. On the strength of this story, Mencius said:
"Yang's principle was, every man for himself. Though by plucking out a
single hair he might have benefited the whole world, he would not have
done so. Mo's system was universal love. If by taking off every hair
from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he could have
benefited the empire, he would have done so. Neither of these two
doctrines is sound; a middle course is the right one."

The origin of the visible universe is a question on which Chinese
philosophers have very naturally been led to speculate. Legend provides
us with a weird being named P'an Ku, who came into existence, no one can
quite say how, endowed with perfect knowledge, his function being to
set the gradually developing universe in order. He is often represented
pictorially with a huge adze in his hand, and engaged in constructing
the world out of the matter which has just begun to take shape. With
his death the detailed part of creation appeared. His breath became the
wind; his voice, the thunder; his left eye, the sun; his right eye, the
moon; his blood yielded rivers; his hair grew into trees and plants; his
flesh became the soil; his sweat descended as rain; and the parasites
which infested his body were the forerunners of the human race. This
sort of stuff, however, could only appeal to the illiterate; for
intellectual and educated persons something more was required. And so
it came about that a system, based originally upon the quite
incomprehensible Book of Changes, generally regarded as the oldest
portion of the Confucian Canon, was gradually elaborated and brought
to a finite state during the eleventh and twelfth centuries of our era.
According to this system, there was a time, almost beyond the reach of
expression in figures, when nothing at all existed. In the period which
followed, there came into existence, spontaneously, a principle, which
after another lapse of time resolved itself into two principles with
entirely opposite characteristics. One of these principles represented
light, heat, masculinity, and similar phenomena classed as positive;
the other represented darkness, cold, femininity, and other phenomena
classed as negative. The interaction of these two principles in duly
adjusted proportions produced the five elements, earth, fire, water,
wood, and metal; and with their assistance all Nature as we see it
around us was easily and rapidly developed. Such is the Confucian
theory, at any rate so called, for it cannot be shown that Confucius
ever entertained these notions, and his alleged connexion with the Canon
of Changes is itself of doubtful authenticity.

Chuang Tzu (_Chwongdza_), a philosopher of the third and fourth
centuries B.C., who was not only a mystic but also a moralist and a
social reformer, has something to say on the subject: "If there is
existence, there must have been non-existence. And if there was a time
when nothing existed, then there must have been a time before that, when
even nothing did not exist. Then when nothing came into existence, could
one really say whether it belonged to existence or non-existence?"

"Nothing" was rather a favourite term with Chuang Tzu for the exercise
of his wit. Light asked Nothing, saying: "Do you, sir, exist, or do you
not exist?" But getting no answer to his question, Light set to work to
watch for the appearance of Nothing. Hidden, vacuous--all day long he
looked but could not see it, listened but could not hear it, grasped at
but could not seize it. "Bravo!" cried Light; "who can equal this? I
can get to be nothing [meaning darkness], but I can't get to be not
nothing."

Confucius would have nothing to say on the subject of death and a future
state; his theme was consistently this life and its obligations, and he
regarded speculation on the unknown as sheer waste of time. When one
of three friends died and Confucius sent a disciple to condole with the
other two, the disciple found them sitting by the side of the corpse,
merrily singing and playing on the lute. They professed the then
comparatively new faith which taught that life was a dream and death the
awakening. They believed that at death the pure man "mounts to heaven,
and roaming through the clouds, passes beyond the limits of space,
oblivious of existence, for ever and ever without end." When the shocked
disciple reported what he had seen, Confucius said, "These men travel
beyond the rule of life; I travel within it. Consequently, our paths do
not meet; and I was wrong in sending you to mourn. They look on life as
a huge tumour from which death sets them free. All the same they know
not where they were before birth, nor where they will be after death.
They ignore their passions. They take no account of their ears and
eyes. Backwards and forwards through all eternity, they do not admit a
beginning or an end. They stroll beyond the dust and dirt of mortality,
to wander in the realms of inaction. How should such men trouble
themselves with the conventionalities of this world, or care what people
may think of them?"

Life comes, says Chuang Tzu, and cannot be declined; it goes, and cannot
be stopped. But alas, the world thinks that to nourish the physical
frame is enough to preserve life. Although not enough, it must still be
done; this cannot be neglected. For if one is to neglect the physical
frame, better far to retire at once from the world, since by renouncing
the world one gets rid of the cares of the world. There is, however,
the vitality which informs the physical frame; that must be equally an
object of incessant care. Then he whose physical frame is perfect and
whose vitality remains in its original purity--he is one with God. Man
passes through this sublunary life as a sunbeam passes through a crack;
here one moment, and gone the next. Neither are there any not equally
subject to the ingress and egress of mortality. One modification brings
life; then comes another, and there is death. Living creatures cry out;
human beings feel sorrow. The bow-case is slipped off; the clothes'-bag
is dropped; and in the confusion the soul wings its flight, and the body
follows, on the great journey home.

Attention has already been drawn to this necessary cultivation of the
physical frame, and Chuan Tzu gives an instance of the extent to which
it was carried. There was a certain man whose nose was covered with a
very hard scab, which was at the same time no thicker than a fly's wing.
He sent for a stonemason to chip it off; and the latter plied his adze
with great dexterity while the patient sat absolutely rigid, without
moving a muscle, and let him chip. When the scab was all off, the nose
was found to be quite uninjured. Such skill was of course soon noised
abroad, and a feudal prince, who also had a scab on his nose, sent for
the mason to take it off. The mason, however, declined to try, alleging
that the success did not depend so much upon the skill of the operator
as upon the mental control of the patient by which the physical frame
became as it were a perfectly inanimate object.

Contemporary with Chuang Tzu, but of a very different school of thought,
was the philosopher Hui Tzu (_Hooeydza_). He was particularly fond of
the quibbles which so delighted the sophists or unsound reasoners of
ancient Greece. Chuang Tzu admits that he was a man of many ideas,
and that his works would fill five carts--this, it must be remembered,
because they were written on slips of wood tied together by a string run
through eyelets. But he adds that Hui Tzu's doctrines are paradoxical,
and his terms used ambiguously. Hui Tzu argued, for instance, that such
abstractions as hardness and whiteness were separate existences, of
which the mind could only be conscious separately, one at a time.
He declared that there are feathers in a new-laid egg, because they
ultimately appear on the chick. He maintained that fire is not hot; it
is the man who feels hot. That the eye does not see; it is the man who
sees. That compasses will not make a circle; it is the man. That a bay
horse and a dun cow are three; because taken separately they are
two, and taken together they are one: two and one make three. That a
motherless colt never had a mother; when it had a mother, it was not
motherless. That if you take a stick a foot long and every day cut it in
half, you will never come to the end of it.

Of what use, asked his great rival, is Hui Tzu to the world? His efforts
can only be compared with those of a gadfly or a mosquito. He makes a
noise to drown an echo. He is like a man running a race with his own
shadow.

When Chuang Tzu was about to die, his disciples expressed a wish to give
him a splendid funeral. But Chuang Tzu said: "With heaven and earth
for my coffin and my shell; with the sun, moon and stars as my burial
regalia; and with all creation to escort me to my grave,--are not my
funeral paraphernalia ready to hand?" "We fear," argued the disciples,
"lest the carrion kite should eat the body of our Master;" to which
Chuang Tzu replied: "Above ground I shall be food for kites; below
ground for mole-crickets and ants. Why rob one to feed the other?"

Life in China is not wholly made up of book-learning and commerce. The
earliest Chinese records exhibit the people as following the chase
in the wake of the great nobles, more as a sport than as the serious
business it must have been in still more remote ages; and the first
emperors of the present dynasty were also notable sportsmen, who
organized periodical hunting-tours on a scale of considerable
magnificence.

Hawking was practised at least so far back as a century before Christ;
for we have a note on a man of that period who "loved to gallop after
wily animals with horse and dog, or follow up with falcon the pheasant
and the hare." The sport may be seen in northern China at the present
day. A hare is put up, and a couple of native greyhounds are dispatched
after it; these animals, however, would soon be distanced by the hare,
which can run straight away from them without doubling, but for the
sudden descent of the falcon, and a blow from its claw, often stunning
the hare at the first attempt, and enabling the dogs to come up.

Sportsmen who have to make their living by the business frequently
descend to methods which are sometimes very ingenious, and more
remunerative than the gun, but can hardly be classified as sport. Thus,
a man in search of wild duck will mark down a flock settled on some
shallow sheet of water. He will then put a crate over his head and
shoulders, and gradually approach the flock as though the crate were
drifting on the surface. Once among them, he puts out a hand under
water, seizes hold of a duck's legs, and rapidly pulls the bird down.
The sudden disappearance of a colleague does not seem to trouble
its companions, and in a short time a very considerable bag has been
obtained. Tradition says that Confucius was fond of sport, but would
never let fly at birds sitting; which, considering that his weapon was a
bow-and-arrow, must be set down as a marvel of self-restraint.

Scores of Chinese poets have dwelt upon the joys of angling, and fishing
is widely carried on over the inland waters; but the rod, except as
a matter of pure sport, has given place to the businesslike net. The
account of the use of fishing cormorants was formerly regarded as a
traveller's tale. It is quite true, however, that small rafts carrying
several of these birds, with a fisherman gently sculling at the stern,
may be seen on the rivers of southern China. The cormorant seizes a
passing fish, and the fisherman takes the fish from its beak. The bird
is trained with a ring round its neck, which prevents it from swallowing
the prey; while for each capture it is rewarded with a small piece
of fish. Well-trained cormorants can be trusted to fish without the
restraint of the ring. Confucius, again, is said to have been fond
of fishing, but he would not use a net; and there was another sage of
antiquity who would not even use a hook, but fished with a straight
piece of iron, apparently thinking that the advantage would be an unfair
one as against the resources of the fish; and declaring openly that
he would only take such fish as wished to be caught. By such simple
narratives do the Chinese strive to convey great truths to childish
ears.

Many sports were once common in China which have long since passed out
of the national life, and exist only in the record of books. Among these
may be mentioned "butting," a very ancient pastime, mentioned in history
two centuries before the Christian era. The sport consisted in putting
an ox-skin, horns and all, over the head, and then trying to knock one's
adversary out of time by butting at him after the fashion of bulls,
the result being, as the history of a thousand years later tells us,
"smashed heads, broken arms, and blood running in the Palace yard."

The art of boxing, which included wrestling, had been practised by
the Chinese several centuries before butting was introduced. Its most
accomplished exponents were subsequently found among the priests of a
Buddhist monastery, built about A.D. 500; and it was undoubtedly from
their successors that the Japanese acquired a knowledge of the modern
_jiu-jitsu_, which is simply the equivalent of the old Chinese term
meaning "gentle art." A few words from a chapter on "boxing" in a
military work of the sixteenth century will give some idea of the scope
of the Chinese sport.

"The body must be quick to move, the hands quick to take advantage,
and the legs lightly planted but firm, so as to advance or retire with
effect. In the flying leap of the leg lies the skill of the art; in
turning the adversary upside down lies its ferocity; in planting a
straight blow with the fist lies its rapidity; and in deftly holding the
adversary face upwards lies its gentleness."

Football was played in China at a very early date; originally, with a
ball stuffed full of hair; from the fifth century A.D., with an inflated
bladder covered with leather. A picture of the goal, which is something
like a triumphal arch, has come down to us, and also the technical names
and positions of the players; even more than seventy kinds of kicks
are enumerated, but the actual rules of the game are not known. It is
recorded by one writer that "the winners were rewarded with flowers,
fruit and wine, and even with silver bowls and brocades, while the
captain of the losing team was flogged, and suffered other indignities."
The game, which had disappeared for some centuries, is now being revived
in Chinese schools and colleges under the control of foreigners, and
finds great favour with the rising generation.

Polo is first mentioned in Chinese literature under the year A.D. 710,
the reference being to a game played before the Emperor and his court.
The game was very much in vogue for a long period, and even women were
taught to play--on donkey-back. The Kitan Tartars were the most skilful
players; it is doubtful if the game originated with them, or if it was
introduced from Persia, with which country China had relations at a very
early date. A statesman of the tenth century, disgusted at the way in
which the Emperor played polo to excess, presented a long memorial,
urging his Majesty to discontinue the practice. The reasons given for
this advice were three in number. "(1) When sovereign and subject play
together, there must be contention. If the sovereign wins, the subject
is ashamed; if the former loses, the latter exults. (2) To jump on a
horse and swing a mallet, galloping here and there, with no distinctions
of rank, but only eager to be first and win, is destructive of all
ceremony between sovereign and subject. (3) To make light of the
responsibilities of empire, and run even the remotest risk of an
accident, is to disregard obligations to the state and to her Imperial
Majesty the Empress."

It has always been recognized that the chief duty of a statesman is
to advise his master without fear or favour, and to protest loudly and
openly against any course which is likely to be disadvantageous to
the commonwealth, or to bring discredit on the court. It has also been
always understood that such protests are made entirely at the risk of
the statesman in question, who must be prepared to pay with his head for
counsels which may be stigmatized as unpatriotic, though in reality they
may be nothing more than unpalatable at the moment.

In the year A.D. 814 the Emperor, who had become a devout Buddhist, made
arrangements for receiving with extravagant honours a bone of Buddha,
which had been forwarded from India to be preserved as a relic. This was
too much for Han Yu (already mentioned), the leading statesman of the
day, who was a man of the people, raised by his own genius, and who, to
make things worse, had already been banished eleven years previously for
presenting an offensive Memorial on the subject of tax-collection,
for which he had been forgiven and recalled. He promptly sent in a
respectful but bitter denunciation of Buddha and all his works, and
entreated his Majesty not to stain the Confucian purity of thought by
tolerating such a degrading exhibition as that proposed. But for the
intercession of friends, the answer to this bold memorial would have
been death; as it was he was banished to the neighbourhood of the modern
Swatow, then a wild and barbarous region, hardly incorporated into the
Empire. There he set himself to civilize the rude inhabitants, until
soon recalled and once more reinstated in office; and to this day
there is a shrine dedicated to his memory, containing the following
inscription: "Wherever he passed, he purified."

Another great statesman, who flourished over two hundred years later,
and also several times suffered banishment, in an inscription to the
honour and glory of his predecessor, put down the following words:
"Truth began to be obscured and literature to fade; supernatural
religions sprang up on all sides, and many eminent scholars failed
to oppose their advance, until Han Yu, the cotton-clothed, arose and
blasted them with his derisive sneer."

Since the fourteenth century there has existed a definite organization,
known as the Censorate, the members of which, who are called the "ears
and eyes" of the sovereign, make it their business to report adversely
upon any course adopted by the Government in the name of the Emperor,
or by any individual statesman, which seems to call for disapproval.
The reproving Censor is nominally entitled to complete immunity from
punishment; but in practice he knows that he cannot count too much
upon either justice or mercy. If he concludes that his words will be
unforgivable, he hands in his memorial, and draws public attention
forthwith by committing suicide on the spot.

To be allowed to commit suicide, and not to suffer the indignity of a
public execution, is a privilege sometimes extended to a high official
whose life has become forfeit under circumstances which do not call for
special degradation. A silken cord is forwarded from the Emperor to the
official in question, who at once puts an end to his life, though not
necessarily by strangulation. He may take poison, as is usually the
case, and this is called "swallowing gold." For a long time it was
believed that Chinese high officials really did swallow gold, which in
view of its non-poisonous character gave rise to an idea that gold-leaf
was employed, the leaf being inhaled and so causing suffocation. Some
simple folk, Chinese as well as foreigners, believe this now, although
native authorities have pointed out that workmen employed in the
extraction of gold often steal pieces and swallow them, without any
serious consequences whatever. Another explanation, which has also the
advantage of being the true one, is that "swallowing gold" is one of the
roundabout phrases in which the Chinese delight to express painful
or repulsive subjects. No emperor ever "dies," he becomes "a guest on
high." No son will say that his parents are "dead;" but merely that
"they are not." The death of an official is expressed by "he is drawing
no salary;" of an ordinary man it may be said that "he has become an
ancient," very much in the same way that we say "he has joined the
majority." A corpse in a coffin is in its "long home;" when buried,
it is in "the city of old age," or on "the terrace of night." To say
grossly, then, that a man took poison would be an offence to ears
polite.



CHAPTER VIII--RECREATION

To return, after a long digression. The age of manly sport, as above
described, has long passed away; and the only hope is for a revival
under the changing conditions of modern China. Some few athletic
exercises have survived; and until recently, archery, in which the
Tartars have always excelled, was regarded almost as a semi-divine
accomplishment. Kite-flying has reached a high level of skill. Clever
little "messengers" have been devised, which run up the string, carrying
fire-crackers which explode at a great height. There is a game of
shuttlecock, without the battledore, for which the feet are used as
a substitute; and "diavolo," recently introduced into Europe, is an
ancient Chinese pastime. A few Manchus, too, may be seen skating during
the long northern winter, but the modern inhabitant of the Flowery Land,
be he Manchu or Chinese, much prefers an indoor game to anything
else, especially when, as is universally the case, a stake of money is
involved.

Gambling is indeed a very marked feature of Chinese life. A child buying
a cake will often go double or quits with the stall-keeper, to see if he
is to have two cakes or nothing, the question being settled by a throw
of dice in a bowl. Of the interval allowed for meals, a gang of coolies
will devote a portion to a game of cards. The cards used are smaller
than the European pack, and of course differently marked; they were the
invention of a lady of the Palace in the tenth century, who substituted
imitation leaves of gilt paper for real leaves, which had previously
been adopted for playing some kind of game. There are also various games
played with chequers, some of great antiquity; and there is chess, that
is to say, a game so little differing from our chess as to leave no
doubt as to the common origin of both. In all of these the money element
comes in; and it is not too much to say that more homes are broken
up, and more misery caused by this truly national vice than can be
attributed to any other cause.

For pleasure pure and simple, independent of gains and losses, the
theatre occupies the warmest place in every Chinaman's heart. If
gambling is a national vice in China, the drama must be set off as the
national recreation. Life would be unthinkable to the vast majority
if its monotony were not broken by the periodical performance of
stage-plays. It is from this source that a certain familiarity with the
great historical episodes of the past may be pleasantly picked up over
a pipe and a cup of tea; while the farce, occasionally perhaps erring on
the side of breadth, affords plenty of merriment to the laughter-loving
crowd.

Ability to make Chinamen laugh is a great asset; and a foreigner who
carries this about with him will find it stand him in much better stead
than a revolver. When, many years ago, a vessel was wrecked on the coast
of Formosa, the crew and passengers were at once seized, and confined
for some time in a building, where traces of their inscriptions could be
seen up to quite a recent date. At length, they were all taken out for
execution; but before the ghastly order was carried out, one of the
number so amused everybody by cutting capers and turning head over
heels, that the presiding mandarin said he was a funny fellow, and
positively allowed him to escape.

With regard to the farce itself, it is not so much the actual wit of
the dialogue which carries away the audience as the refined skill of the
actor, who has to pass through many trials before he is considered to be
fit for the stage. Beginning as quite a boy, in addition to committing
to memory a large number of plays--not merely his own part, but the
whole play--he has to undergo a severe physical training, part of which
consists in standing for an hour every day with his mouth wide open, to
inhale the morning air. He is taught to sing, to walk, to strut, and to
perform a variety of gymnastic exercises, such as standing on his head,
or turning somersaults. His first classification is as male or female
actor, no women having been allowed to perform since the days of the
Emperor Ch'ien Lung (A.D. 1736-1796), whose mother was an actress, just
as in Shakespeare's time the parts for women were always taken by young
men or boys. When once this is settled, it only remains to enrol him as
tragedian, comedian, low-comedy actor, walking gentleman or lady, and
similar parts, according to his capabilities.

It is not too much to say that women are very little missed on the
Chinese stage. The make-up of the actor is so perfect, and his imitation
of the feminine voice and manner, down to the smallest detail, even to
the small feet, is so exact in every point, that he would be a clever
observer who could positively detect impersonation by a man.

Generally speaking, a Chinese actor has many more difficulties to face
than his colleague in the West. In addition to the expression of all
shades of feeling, from mirth to melancholy, the former has to keep up
a perpetual make-believe in another sense, which is further great
strain upon his nerves. There being no scenery, no furniture, and no
appointments of any except the slenderest kind upon the stage, he has
to create in the minds of his audience a belief that all these missing
accessories are nevertheless before their eyes. A general comes upon the
scene, with a whip in his hand, and a studied movement not only suggests
that he is dismounting from a horse, but outlines the animal itself. In
the same manner, he remounts and rides off again; while some other actor
speaks from the top of a small table, which is forthwith transfigured,
and becomes to all intents and purposes a castle.

Many of those who might be apt to smile at the simple Chinese mind which
can tolerate such absurdities in the way of make-believe, require to
be reminded that the stage in the days of Queen Elizabeth was worked on
very much the same lines. Sir Philip Sidney tells us that the scene of
an imagined garden with imagined flowers had to do duty at one time for
an imagined shipwreck, and at another for an imagined battlefield, the
spectator in the latter case being helped out by two opposing soldiers
armed with swords and bucklers. Even Shakespeare, in the Prologue to
his play of _Henry V_, speaks of imagining one man to be an army of a
thousand, and says:--

     Think, when we talk of horses that you see them
     Printing their proud hoofs i' the receiving earth;
     For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings.

Here, then, is good authority for the quaint system that still prevails
in China.

Hundreds of Chinese pilgrims annually went their weary way to the top of
Mount Omi in the province of Ssuch'uan, and gaze downward from a sheer
and lofty precipice to view a huge circular belt of light, which is
called the Glory of Buddha. Some see it, some do not; the Chinese say
that the whole thing is a question of faith. In a somewhat similar
sense, the dramatic enthusiast sees before him such beings of the mind
as the genuine actor is able to call up. The Philistine cannot reach
this pitch; but he is sharp enough to see other things which to the eye
of the sympathetic spectator are absolutely non-existent. Some of the
latter will be enumerated below.

The Chinese stage has no curtain; and the orchestra is on the stage
itself, behind the actors. There is no prompter and no call-boy. Stage
footmen wait at the sides to carry in screens, small tables, and an odd
chair or two, to represent houses, city walls, and so on, or hand cups
of tea to the actors when their throats become dry from vociferous
singing, which is always in falsetto. All this in the face of the
audience. Dead people get up and walk off the stage; or while lying
dead, contrive to alter their facial expression, and then get up and
carry themselves off. There is no interval between one play and the
next following, which probably gives rise to the erroneous belief
that Chinese plays are long, the fact being that they are very short.
According to the Penal Code, there may be no impersonation of emperors
and empresses of past ages, but this clause is now held to refer solely
to the present dynasty.

For the man in the street and his children, there are to be seen
everywhere in China where a sufficient number of people gather together,
Punch-and-Judy shows of quite a high class in point of skill and general
attractiveness. These shows are variously traced back to the eighth and
second centuries B.C., and to the seventh century A.D., even the
latest of which periods would considerably antedate the appearance of
performing marionettes in this country or on the Continent. Associated
with the second century B.C., the story runs that the Emperor of the day
was closely besieged by a terrible Hun chieftain, who was accompanied
by his wife. It occurred to one of his Majesty's staff to exhibit on
the walls of the town, in full view of the enemy, a number of manikins,
dressed up to a deceptive resemblance to beautiful girls. The wife of
the Hun chieftain then persuaded her husband to draw off his forces, and
the Emperor escaped.

By the Chinese marionettes, little plays on familiar subjects are
performed; many are of a more serious turn than the loves of Mr. Punch,
while others again are of the knock-about style so dear to the ordinary
boy and girl. Besides such entertainments as these, the streets of a
Chinese city offer other shows to those who desire to be amused. An
acrobat, a rope-dancer or a conjurer will take up a pitch right in the
middle of the roadway, and the traffic has to get on as best it can.
A theatrical stage will sometimes completely block a street, and even
foot-passengers will have to find their way round. There is also the
public story-reader, who for his own sake will choose a convenient spot
near to some busy thoroughfare; and there, to an assembled crowd, he
will read out, not in the difficult book-language, but in the colloquial
dialect of the place, stories of war and heroism, soldiers led to
night-attacks with wooden bits in their mouths to prevent them from
talking in the ranks, the victory of the loyal and the rout and
slaughter of the rebel. Or it may be a tale of giants, goblins and
wizards; the bewitching of promising young men by lovely maidens who
turn out to be really foxes in disguise, ending as usual in the triumph
of virtue and the discomfiture of vice. The fixed eyes and open mouths
of the crowd, listening with rapt attention, is a sight which, once
seen, is not easily forgotten.

For the ordinary man, China is simply peopled with bogies and devils,
the spirits of the wicked or of those unfortunate enough not to secure
decent burial with all its accompanying worship and rites. These
creatures, whose bodies cast no shadow, lurk in dark corners, ready to
pounce on some unwary passer-by and possibly tear out his heart. Many a
Confucianist, sturdy in his faith that "devils only exist for those who
believe in them," will hesitate to visit by night a lonely spot, or even
to enter a disused tumbledown building by day. Some of the stories
told are certainly well fitted to make a deep impression upon young
and highly-strung nerves. For instance, one man who was too fond of
the bottle placed some liquor alongside his bed, to be drunk during the
night. On stretching out his hand to reach the flask, he was seized by a
demon, and dragged gradually into the earth. In response to his shrieks,
his relatives and neighbours only arrived in time to see the ground
close over his head, just as though he had fallen into water.

From this story it will be rightly gathered that the Chinese mostly
sleep on the ground floor. In Peking, houses of more than one storey
are absolutely barred; the reason being that each house is built round a
courtyard, which usually has trees in it, and in which the ladies of
the establishment delight to sit and sew, and take the air and all the
exercise they can manage to get.

Another blood-curdling story is that of four travellers who arrived by
night at an inn, but could obtain no other accommodation than a room in
which was lying the corpse of the landlord's daughter-in-law. Three of
the four were soon snoring; the fourth, however, remained awake, and
very soon heard a creaking of the trestles on which was the dead body
dressed out in paper robes, ready for burial. To his horror he saw the
girl get up, and go and breathe on his companions; so by the time she
came to him he had his head tucked well under the bedclothes. After a
little while he kicked one of the others; but finding that his friend
did not move, he suddenly grabbed his own trousers and made a bolt for
the door. In a moment the corpse was up and after him, following him
down the street, and gaining gradually on him, no one coming to the
rescue in spite of his loud shrieks as he ran. So he slipped behind
a tree, and dodged right and left, the infuriated corpse also dodging
right and left, and making violent efforts to get him. At length, the
girl made a rush forward with one arm on each side, in the hope of thus
grabbing her victim. The traveller, however, fell backwards and escaped
her clutch, while she remained rigidly embracing the tree. By and by he
was found senseless on the ground; and the corpse was removed from the
tree, but with great difficulty, as the fingers were buried in the bark
so deep that the nails were not even visible. The other three travellers
were found dead in their beds.

Periodical feasting may be regarded as another form of amusement by
which the Chinese seek to relieve the monotony of life. They have
never reserved one day in seven for absolute rest, though of late years
Chinese merchants connected with foreign trade have to some extent
fallen in with the observance of Sunday. Quite a number of days during
the year are set apart as public holidays, but no one is obliged to
keep them as such, unless he likes, with one important exception. The
festival of the New Year cannot be ignored by any one. For about ten
days before this date, and twenty days after it, the public offices
are closed and no business is transacted, the seal of each official is
handed over for safe keeping to the official's wife, a fact which
helps to dispose of the libel that women in China are the down-trodden
creatures they are often represented to be. All debts have to be paid
and accounts squared by midnight on the last day of the old year. A few
nights previously, offerings of an excessively sticky sweetmeat are
made to the Spirit of the Hearth, one of whose functions is that of
an accusing angel. The Spirit is then on the point of starting for his
annual visit to heaven, and lest any of the disclosures he might make
should entail unpleasant consequences, it is adjudged best that he shall
be rendered incapable of making any disclosures at all. The unwary god
finds his lips tightly glued together, and is unable to utter a single
word. Meanwhile, fire-crackers are being everywhere let off on a
colossal scale, the object being to frighten away the evil spirits which
have collected during the past twelve months, and to begin the year
afresh. The day itself is devoted to calling, in one's best clothes,
on relatives, friends and official superiors, for all of whom it is
customary to leave a present. The relatives and friends receive "wet"
gifts, such as fruit or cakes; officials also receive wet gifts, but
underneath the top layer will be found something "dry," in the shape of
silver or bank-notes. Everybody salutes everybody with the conventional
saying, "New joy, new joy; get rich, get rich!" Yet here again, as in
all things Chinese, we find a striking exception to this good-natured
rule. No one says "Get rich, get rich!" to the undertaker.

A high authority (on other matters) has recently stated that the Chinese
calendar "begins just when the Emperor chooses to say it shall. He is
like the captain of a ship, who says of the hour, 'Make it so,' and
it is so." The truth is that New Year's Day is determined by the
Astronomical Board, according to fixed rules, just as Easter is
determined; and it may fall on any day between the 21st of January and
the 20th of February, but neither before the former date nor after
the latter date, in spite even of the most threatening orders from the
Palace. This book will indeed have been written in vain if the reader
lays it down without having realized that no such wanton interference on
the part of their rulers would be tolerated by the Chinese people. But
we are wandering away from merry-making and festivity.

In their daily life the Chinese are extremely moderate eaters and mostly
tea-drinkers, even the wealthy confining themselves to few and simple
dishes of pork, fowl, or fish, with the ever-present accompaniment of
rice. The puppy-dog, on which the people are popularly believed to live,
as the French on frogs, is a stall-fed animal, and has always been, and
still is, an article of food; but the consumption of dog-flesh is really
very restricted, and many thousands of Chinamen have never tasted dog in
their lives. According to the popular classification of foods, those
who live on vegetables get strong, those who live on meat become brave,
those who live on grain acquire wisdom, and those who live on air become
divine.

At banquets the scene changes, and course after course of curiously
compounded and highly spiced dishes, cooked as only Chinese cooks know
how, are placed before the guests. The wine, too, goes merrily round;
bumpers are drunk at short intervals, and the wine-cups are held upside
down, to show that there are no heel-taps. Forfeits are exacted over the
game of "guess-fingers," for failure to cap a verse, or for any other
equally sufficient (or insufficient) reason; and the penalty is an extra
bumper for the loser.

This lively picture requires, perhaps, a little further explanation.
Chinese "wine" is an ardent spirit distilled from rice, and is modified
in various ways so as to produce certain brands, some of which are of
quite moderate strength, and really may be classed as wine. It is always
drunk hot, the heat being supplied by vessels of boiling water, in which
the pewter wine-flasks are kept standing. The wine-cups are small, and
it is possible to drink a good many of them without feeling in the least
overcome. Even so, many diners now refuse to touch wine at all, the
excuse always being that it flushes the face uncomfortably. Perhaps
they fear an undeserved imputation of drunkenness, remembering their own
cynical saying: "A bottle-nosed man may be a tee-totaller, but no one
will believe it." To judge from their histories and their poetry, the
Chinese seem once upon a time to have been a fairly tipsy nation:
now-a-days, the truth lies the other way. An official who died A.D.
639, and was the originator of epitaphs in China, wrote his own, as
follows:--

     Fu I loved the green hills and white clouds . . .
     Alas! he died of drink!

There are exceptions, no doubt, as to every rule in every country;
but such sights as drunken men tumbling about the streets, or lying
senseless by the roadside, are not to be seen in China. "It is not
wine," says the proverb, "which makes a man drunk; it is the man
himself."

Even at banquets, which are often very rich and costly, unnecessary
expense is by no means encouraged. Dishes of fruit, of a kind which no
one would wish to eat, and which are placed on the table for show or
ornament, are simply clever imitations in painted wood, and pass from
banquet to banquet as part of the ordinary paraphernalia of a feast; no
one is deceived. The same form of open and above-board deception appears
in many other ways. There are societies organized for visiting in
a comfortable style of pilgrimage some famous mountain of historic
interest. Names are put down, and money is collected; and then the party
starts off by boat or in sedan-chairs, as the case may be. On arriving
at the mountain, there is a grand feast, and after the picnic, for such
it is, every one goes home again. That is the real thing; now for the
imitation. Names are put down, and money is collected, as before; but
the funds are spent over a feast at home, alongside of a paper mountain.

Another of these deceptions, which deceive nobody, is one which might be
usefully adapted to life in other countries. A Chinaman meeting in the
street a friend, and having no leisure to stop and talk, or perhaps
meeting some one with whom he may be unwilling to talk, will promptly
put up his open fan to screen his face, and pass on. The suggestion
is that, wishing to pass without notice, he fails to see the person in
question, and it would be a serious breach of decorum on the part of the
latter to ignore the hint thus conveyed.

Japan, who may be said to have borrowed the civilization of China,
lock, stock and barrel--her literature, her moral code, her arts, her
sciences, her manners and customs, her ceremonial, and even her
national dress--invented the folding fan, which in the early part of the
fifteenth century formed part of the tribute sent from Korea to Peking,
and even later was looked upon by the Chinese as quite a curiosity. In
the early ages, fans were made of feathers, as still at the present day;
but the more modern fan of native origin is a light frame of bamboo,
wood or ivory, round or otherwise, over which silk is stretched,
offering a convenient medium for the inscription of poems, or for
paintings, as exchanged between friend and friend.

The same innocent form of deception, which deceives nobody, is carried
out when two officials, seated in sedan-chairs, have to pass one
another. If they are of about equal rank, etiquette demands that they
should alight from their chairs, and perform mutual salutations. To
obviate the extreme inconvenience of this rule, large wooden fans are
carried in all processions of the kind, and these are hastily thrust
between the passing officials, so that neither becomes aware of the
other's existence on the scene. The case is different when one of the
two is of higher rank. The official of inferior grade is bound to stop
and get out of his chair while his superior passes by, though even now
he has a chance of escape; he hears the gong beaten to clear the way
for the great man, whose rank he can tell from the number of consecutive
blows given; and hurriedly turns off down a side street.

An historical instance of substituting the shadow for the reality is
that of the great general Ts'ao Ts'ao, third century A.D., who for some
breach of the law sentenced himself to death, but satisfied his sense
of justice by cutting off his hair. An emperor of the sixth century,
who was a devout Buddhist, and therefore unable to countenance any
destruction of life, had all the sacrificial animals made of dough.

The opium question, which will claim a few words later on, has been
exhaustively threshed out; and in view of the contradictory statements
for and against the habit of opium smoking, it is recognized that any
conclusion, satisfactory to both parties, is a very remote possibility.
The Chinese themselves, who are chiefly interested in the argument, have
lately come to a very definite conclusion, which is that opium has
to go; and it seems that in spite of almost invincible obstacles, the
sincerity and patriotism which are being infused into the movement will
certainly, sooner or later, achieve the desired end. It is perhaps worth
noting that in the Decree of 1906, which ordered the abolition of opium
smoking, the old Empress Dowager, who was herself over sixty and a
moderate smoker, inserted a clause excusing from the operation of the
new law all persons already more than sixty years of age.



CHAPTER IX--THE MONGOLS, 1260-1368

Lack of patriotism is often hurled by foreigners as a reproach to the
Chinese. The charge cannot be substantiated, any more than it could be
if directed against some nation in Europe. If willingness to sacrifice
everything, including life itself, may be taken as a fair test of
genuine patriotism, then it will be found, if historical records be not
ignored, that China has furnished numberless brilliant examples of true
patriots who chose to die rather than suffer dishonour to themselves or
to their country. A single instance must suffice.

The time is the close of the thirteenth century, when the Mongols under
Kublai Khan were steadily dispossessing the once glorious and powerful
House of Sung, and placing the empire of China under alien rule.
Disaster followed disaster, until almost the last army of the Sungs
was cut to pieces, and the famous statesman and general in command, Wen
(pronounced _One_) T'ien-hsian, fell into the hands of the Mongols. He
was ordered, but refused, to write and advise capitulation, and every
effort was subsequently made to induce him to own allegiance to the
conquerors. He was kept in prison for three years. "My dungeon," he
wrote, "is lighted by the will-o'-the-wisp alone; no breath of spring
cheers the murky solitude in which I dwell. Exposed to mist and dew,
I had many times thought to die; and yet, through the seasons of two
revolving years, disease hovered around me in vain. The dank, unhealthy
soil to me became Paradise itself. For there was that within me which
misfortune could not steal away; and so I remained firm, gazing at the
white clouds floating over my head, and bearing in my heart a sorrow
boundless as the sky."

At length he was summoned into the presence of Kublai Khan, who said
to him, "What is it you want?" "By the grace of the Sung Emperor," he
replied, "I became His Majesty's Minister. I cannot serve two masters.
I only ask to die." Accordingly, he was executed, meeting his death with
composure, and making an obeisance in the direction of the old capital.
His last words were, "My work is finished." Compare this with the quiet
death-bed of another statesman, who flourished in the previous century.
He had advised an enormous cession of territory to the Tartars, and had
brought about the execution of a patriot soldier, who wished to recover
it at all costs. He was loaded with honours, and on the very night he
died he was raised to the rank of Prince. He was even canonized, after
the usual custom, as Loyalty Manifested, on a mistaken estimate of his
career; but fifty years later his title was changed to False and Foul
and his honours were cancelled, while the people at large took his
degraded name for use as an alternative to spittoon.

Two names of quite recent patriots deserve to be recorded here as
a tribute to their earnest devotion to the real interests of their
country, and incidentally for the far-reaching consequences of their
heroic act, which probably saved the lives of many foreigners in various
parts of China. It was during the Boxer troubles in Peking, at the
beginning of the siege of the legations, that Yuan Ch'ang and Hsu
Ching-ch'eng, two high Chinese officials, ventured to memorialize the
Empress Dowager upon the fatal policy, and even criminality, of the
whole proceedings, imploring her Majesty at a meeting of the Grand
Council to reconsider her intention of issuing orders for the
extermination of all foreigners. In spite of their remonstrances, a
decree was issued to that effect and forwarded to the high authorities
of the various provinces; but it failed to accomplish what had been
intended, for these two heroes, taking their lives in their hands, had
altered the words "slay all foreigners" into "protect all foreigners."
Some five to six weeks later, when the siege was drawing to a close,
the alteration was discovered; and next day those two men were hurriedly
beheaded, meeting death with such firmness and fortitude as only true
patriotism could inspire.

The Mongols found it no easy task to dispossess the House of Sung, which
had many warm adherents to its cause. It was in 1206 that Genghis Khan
began to make arrangements for a projected invasion of China, and by
1214 he was master of all the enemy's territory north of the Yellow
River, except Peking. He then made peace with the Golden Tartar emperor
of northern China; but his suspicions were soon aroused, and hostilities
were renewed. In 1227 he died, while conducting a campaign in Central
Asia; and it remained for his vigorous grandson, Kublai Khan, to
complete the conquest of China more than half a century afterwards. So
early as 1260, Kublai was able to proclaim himself emperor at Xanadu,
which means Imperial Capital, and lay about one hundred and eighty miles
north of modern Peking, where, in those days known as Khan-baligh (Marco
Polo's Cambaluc), he established himself four years later; but twenty
years of severe fighting had still to pass away before the empire was
finally subdued. The Sung troops were gradually driven south, contesting
every inch of ground with a dogged resistance born of patriotic
endeavour. In 1278 Canton was taken, and the heroic Wen T'ien-hsiang
was captured through the treachery of a subordinate. In 1279 the last
stronghold of the Sungs was beleaguered by land and sea. Shut up in
their ships which they formed into a compact mass and fortified with
towers and breastworks, the patriots, deprived of fresh water, harassed
by attacks during the day and by fire-ships at night, maintained the
unequal struggle for a month. But when, after a hard day's fighting, the
Sung commander found himself left with only sixteen vessels, he fled up
a creek. His retreat was cut off; and then at length despairing of his
country, he bade his wife and children throw themselves overboard. He
himself, taking the young emperor on his back, followed their example,
and thus brought the great Sung dynasty to an end.

The grandeur of Kublai Khan's reign may be gathered from the pages
of Marco Polo, in which, too, allusion is made to Bayan, the skilful
general to whom so much of the military success of the Mongols was due.
Korea, Burma, and Annam became dependencies of China, and continued to
send tribute as such even up to quite modern times. Hardly so successful
was Kublai Khan's huge naval expedition against Japan, which, in
point of number of ships and men, the insular character of the enemy's
country, the chastisement intended, and the total loss of the fleet in
a storm, aided by the stubborn resistance offered by the Japanese
themselves--suggests a very obvious comparison with the object and fate
of the Spanish Armada.

Among the more peaceful developments of Mongol rule at this epoch may
be mentioned the introduction of a written character for the Mongol
language. It was the work of a Tibetan priest, named Baschpa, and was
based upon the written language of a nation known as the Ouigours (akin
to the Turks), which had in turn been based upon Syraic, and is written
in vertical lines connected by ligatures. Similarly, until 1599 there
was no written Manchu language; a script, based upon the Mongol, was
then devised, also in vertical lines or columns like Chinese, but read
from left to right.

Under Kublai Khan the calendar was revised, and the Imperial Academy was
opened; the Yellow River was explored to its source, and bank-notes were
made current. The Emperor himself was an ardent Buddhist, but he took
care that proper honours were paid to Confucius; on the other hand, he
issued orders that all Taoist literature of the baser kind was to be
destroyed. Behind all this there was extortionate taxation, a form of
oppression the Chinese have never learned to tolerate, and discontent
led to disorder. Kublai's grandson was for a time an honest ruler and
tried to stem the tide, but by 1368 the mandate of the Mongols was
exhausted. They were an alien race, and the Chinese were glad to get rid
of them.

Chinese soldiers are often stigmatized as arrant cowards, who run away
at the slightest provocation, their first thought being for the safety
of their own skins. No doubt Chinese soldiers do run away--sometimes; at
other times they fight to the death, as has been amply proved over and
over again. It is the old story of marking the hits and not the misses.
A great deal depends upon sufficiency and regularity of pay. Soldiers
with pay in arrear, half clad, hungry, and ill armed, as has frequently
been the case in Chinese campaigns, cannot be expected to do much for
the flag. Given the reverse of these conditions, things would be likely
to go badly with the enemy, whosoever he might be.

Underneath a mask of complete facial stolidity, the Chinese conceal one
of the most exciteable temperaments to be found in any race, as will
soon be discovered by watching an ordinary street row between a couple
of men, or still better, women. A Chinese crowd of men--women keep
away--is a good-tempered and orderly mob, partly because not inflamed
by drink, when out to enjoy the Feast of the Lanterns, or to watch the
twinkling lamps float down a river to light the wandering ghosts of the
drowned on the night of their All Souls' Day, sacred to the memory of
the dead; but a rumour, a mere whisper, the more baseless often the more
potent, will transform these law-abiding people into a crowd of fiends.
In times when popular feeling runs high, as when large numbers of men
were said to be deprived suddenly and mysteriously of their queues, or
when the word went round, as it has done on more occasions than one,
that foreigners were kidnapping children in order to use their eyes for
medicine,--in such times the masses, incited by those who ought to know
better, get completely out of hand.

A curious and tragic instance of this excitability occurred some years
ago. The viceroy of a province had succeeded in organizing a contingent
of foreign-drilled troops, under the guidance and leadership of two
qualified foreign instructors. After some time had elapsed, and it was
thought that the troops were sufficiently trained to make a good show,
it was arranged that a sham fight should be held in the presence of
the viceroy himself. The men were divided into two bodies under the
two foreign commanders, and in the course of operations one body had to
defend a village, while the other had to attack it. When the time came
to capture the village at the point of the bayonet, both sides lost
their heads; there was a fierce hand-to-hand fight in stern reality,
and before this could be effectively stopped four men had been killed
outright and sixteen badly wounded.

Considering how squalid many Chinese homes are, it is all the more
astonishing to find such deep attachment to them. There exists in the
language a definite word for _home_, in its fullest English sense. As a
written character, it is supposed to picture the idea of a family, the
component parts being a "roof" with "three persons" underneath. There
is, indeed, another and more fanciful explanation of this character,
namely, that it is composed of a "roof" with a "pig" underneath, the
forms for "three men" and "pig" being sufficiently alike at any rate
to justify the suggestion. This analysis would not be altogether out
of place in China any more than in Ireland; but as a matter of fact the
balance of evidence is in favour of the "three men," which number, it
may be remarked, is that which technically constitutes a crowd.

Whatever may be the literary view of the word "home," it is quite
certain that to the ordinary Chinaman there is no place like it. "One
mile away from home is not so good as being in it," says a proverb with
a punning turn which cannot be brought out in English. Another says,
"Every day is happy at home, every moment miserable abroad." It may
therefore be profitable to look inside a Chinese home, if only to
discover wherein its attractiveness lies.

All such homes are arranged more or less on the patriarchal system; that
is to say, at the head of the establishment are a father and mother, who
rank equally so far as their juniors are concerned; the mother receiving
precisely the same share of deference in life, and of ancestral worship
after death, as the father. The children grow up; wives are sought for
the boys, and husbands for the girls, at about the ages of eighteen and
sixteen, respectively. The former bring their wives into the paternal
home; the latter belong, from the day of their marriage, to the paternal
homes of their husbands. Bachelors and old maids have no place in the
Chinese scheme of life. Theoretically, bride and bridegroom are not
supposed to see each other until the wedding-day, when the girl's veil
is lifted on her arrival at her father-in-law's house; in practice, the
young people usually manage to get at least a glimpse of one another,
usually with the connivance of their elders. Thus the family expands,
and one of the greatest happinesses which can befall a Chinaman is to
have "five generations in the hall." Owing to early marriage, this
is not nearly so uncommon as it is in Western countries. There is an
authentic record of an old statesman who had so many descendants that
when they came to congratulate him on his birthdays, he was quite unable
to remember all their names, and could only bow as they passed in line
before him.

As to income and expenditure, the earnings of the various members go
into a common purse, out of which expenses are paid. Every one has a
right to food and shelter; and so it is that if some are out of work,
the strain is not individually felt; they take their rations as usual.
On the death of the father, it is not at all uncommon for the mother to
take up the reins, though it is more usual for the eldest son to take
his place. Sometimes, after the death of the mother--and then it is
accounted a bad day for the family fortunes--the brothers cannot agree;
the property is divided, and each son sets up for himself, a proceeding
which is forbidden by the Penal Code during the parents' lifetime.
Meanwhile, any member of the family who should disgrace himself in any
way, as by becoming an inveterate gambler and permanently neglecting his
work, or by developing the opium vice to great excess, would be formally
cast out, his name being struck off the ancestral register. Men of this
stamp generally sink lower and lower, until they swell the ranks of
professional beggars, to die perhaps in a ditch; but such cases are
happily of rare occurrence.

In the ordinary peaceful family, regulated according to Confucian
principles of filial piety, fraternal love, and loyalty to the
sovereign, we find love of home exalted to a passion; and bitter is the
day of leave-taking for a long absence, as when a successful son starts
to take up his official appointment at a distant post. The latter, not
being able to hold office in his native province, may have a long and
sometimes dangerous journey to make, possibly to the other end of
the empire. In any case, years must elapse before he can revisit "the
mulberry and the elm"--the garden he leaves behind. He may take his
"old woman" and family with him, or they may follow later on; as another
alternative, the "old woman" with the children may remain permanently
in the ancestral home, while the husband carries on his official career
alone. Under such circumstances as the last-mentioned, no one, including
his own wife, is shocked if he consoles himself with a "small old
woman," whom he picks up at his new place of abode. The "small old
woman" is indeed often introduced into families where the "principal old
woman" fails to contribute the first of "the three blessings of which
every one desires to have plenty," namely, sons, money, and life.
Instances are not uncommon of the wife herself urging this course upon
her husband; and but for this system the family line would often come to
an end, failing recourse to another system, namely, adoption, which
is also brought into play when all hope of a lineal descendant is
abandoned.

Whether she has children or not, the principal wife--the only wife, in
fact--never loses her supremacy as the head of the household. The late
Empress Dowager was originally a concubine; by virtue of motherhood she
was raised to the rank of Western Empress, but never legitimately took
precedence of the wife, whose superiority was indicated by her title
of Eastern Empress, the east being more honourable than the west. The
emperor always sits with his face towards the south.

The story of Sung Hung, a statesman who flourished about the time of the
Christian era, pleasantly illustrates a chivalrous side of the Chinese
character. This man raised himself from a humble station in life to be a
minister of state, and was subsequently ennobled as marquis. The emperor
then wished him to put away his wife, who was a woman of the people, and
marry a princess; to which he nobly replied: "Sire, the partner of my
porridge days shall never go down from my hall."

Of the miseries of exile from the ancestral home, lurid pictures have
been drawn by many poets and others. One man, ordered from some soft
southern climate to a post in the colder north, will complain that the
spring with its flowers is too late in arriving; another "cannot stand
the water and earth," by which is meant that the climate does not agree
with him; a third is satisfied with his surroundings, but is still a
constant sufferer from home-sickness. Such a one was the poet who wrote
the following lines:--

     Away to the east lie fair forests of trees,
     From the flowers on the west comes a scent-laden breeze,
     Yet my eyes daily turn to my far-away home,
     Beyond the broad river, its waves and its foam.

And such, too, is the note of innumerable songs in exile, written for
the most part by officials stationed in distant parts of the empire;
sometimes by exiles in a harsher sense, namely, those persons who have
been banished to the frontier for disaffection, maladministration
of government, and like offences. A bright particular gem in Chinese
literature, referring to love of home, was the work of a young poet who
received an appointment as magistrate, but threw it up after a tenure of
only eighty-three days, declaring that he could not "crook the hinges of
his back for five pecks of rice a day," that being the regulation pay
of his office. It was written to celebrate his own return, and runs as
follows:--

"Homewards I bend my steps. My fields, my gardens, are choked with
weeds: should I not go? My soul has led a bondsman's life: why should I
remain to pine? But I will waste no grief upon the past: I will devote
my energies to the future. I have not wandered far astray. I feel that I
am on the right track once again.

"Lightly, lightly, speeds my boat along, my garments fluttering to the
gentle breeze. I inquire my route as I go. I grudge the slowness of the
dawning day. From afar I descry by old home, and joyfully press onwards
in my haste. The servants rush forth to meet me: my children cluster at
the gate. The place is a wilderness; but there is the old pine-tree and
my chrysanthemums. I take the little ones by the hand, and pass in. Wine
is brought in full bottles, and I pour out in brimming cups. I gaze
out at my favourite branches. I loll against the window in my new-found
freedom. I look at the sweet children on my knee.

"And now I take my pleasure in my garden. There is a gate, but it is
rarely opened. I lean on my staff as I wander about or sit down to
rest. I raise my head and contemplate the lovely scene. Clouds rise,
unwilling, from the bottom of the hills: the weary bird seeks its nest
again. Shadows vanish, but still I linger round my lonely pine. Home
once more! I'll have no friendships to distract me hence. The times
are out of joint for me; and what have I to seek from men? In the pure
enjoyment of the family circle I will pass my days, cheering my idle
hours with lute and book. My husbandmen will tell me when spring-time
is nigh, and when there will be work in the furrowed fields. Thither I
shall repair by cart or by boat, through the deep gorge, over the dizzy
cliff, trees bursting merrily into leaf, the streamlet swelling from its
tiny source. Glad is this renewal of life in due season: but for me, I
rejoice that my journey is over. Ah, how short a time it is that we are
here! Why, then, not set our hearts at rest, ceasing to trouble whether
we remain or go? What boots it to wear out the soul with anxious
thoughts? I want not wealth: I want not power: heaven is beyond my
hopes. Then let me stroll through the bright hours, as they pass, in my
garden among my flowers; or I will mount the hill and sing my song, or
weave my verse beside the limpid brook. Thus will I work out my allotted
span, content with the appointments of Fate, my spirit free from care."

Besides contributing a large amount of beautiful poetry, this author
provided his own funeral oration, the earliest which has come down to
us, written just before his death in A.D. 427. Funeral orations are not
only pronounced by some friend at the grave, but are further solemnly
consumed by fire, in the belief that they will thus reach the world of
spirits, and be a joy and an honour to the deceased, in the same sense
that paper houses, horses, sedan-chairs, and similar articles, are burnt
for the use of the dead.



CHAPTER X--MINGS AND CH'INGS, 1368-1911

The first half of the fourteenth century, which witnessed the gradual
decline of Mongol influence and power, was further marked by the birth
of a humble individual destined to achieve a new departure in the
history of the empire. At the age of seventeen, Chu Yuan-chang lost both
his parents and an elder brother. It was a year of famine, and they died
from want of food. He had no money to buy coffins, and was forced to
bury them in straw. He then, as a last resource, decided to enter the
Buddhist priesthood, and accordingly enrolled himself as a novice; but
together with the other novices, he was soon dismissed, the priests
being unable to provide even for their own wants. After this he wandered
about, and finally joined a party of rebels commanded by one of his own
uncles. Rapidly rising to the highest military rank, he gradually found
himself at the head of a huge army, and by 1368 was master of so many
provinces that he proclaimed himself first emperor of the Great Ming
dynasty, under the title of Hung (_Hoong_) Wu, and fixed his capital
at Nanking. In addition to his military genius, he showed almost equal
skill in the administration of the empire, and also became a liberal
patron of literature and education. He organized the present system of
examinations, now in a transition state; restored the native Chinese
style of dress as worn under the T'ang dynasty, which is still the
costume seen on the stage; published a Penal Code of mitigated severity;
drew up a kind of Domesday Book under which taxation was regulated;
and fixed the coinage upon a proper basis, government notes and copper
_cash_ being equally current. Eunuchs were prohibited from holding
official posts, and Buddhism and Taoism were both made state religions.

This truly great monarch died in 1398, and was succeeded by a grandson,
whose very receding forehead had been a source of much annoyance to his
grandfather, though the boy grew up clever and could make good verses.
The first act of this new emperor was to dispossess his uncles of
various important posts held by them; but this was not tolerated by one
of them, who had already made himself conspicuous by his talents, and
he promptly threw off his allegiance. In the war which ensued, victory
attended his arms throughout, and at length he entered Nanking, the
capital, in triumph. And now begins one of those romantic episodes which
from time to time lend an unusual interest to the dry bones of Chinese
history. In the confusion which followed upon the entry of troops into
his palace, the young and defeated emperor vanished, and was never seen
again; although in after years pretenders started up on more than one
occasion, and obtained the support of many in their efforts to recover
the throne. It is supposed that the fugitive made his way to the distant
province of Yunnan in the garb of a Buddhist priest, left to him, so the
story runs, by his grandfather. After nearly forty years of wandering,
he is said to have gone to Peking and to have lived in seclusion in the
palace there until his death. He was recognized by a eunuch from a mole
on his left foot, but the eunuch was afraid to reveal his identity.

The victorious uncle mounted the throne in the year 1403, under the now
famous title of Yung Lo (_Yoong Law_), and soon showed that he could
govern as well as he could fight. He brought immigrants from populous
provinces to repeople the districts which had been laid waste by war.
Peking was built, and in 1421 the seat of government was transferred
thither, where it has remained ever since. A new Penal Code was drawn
up. Various military expeditions were despatched against the Tartars,
and missions under the charge of eunuchs were sent to Java, Sumatra,
Siam, and even reached Ceylon and the Red Sea. The day of doubt in
regard to the general accuracy of Chinese annals has gone by; were it
otherwise, a recent (1911) discovery in Ceylon would tend to dispel
suspicion on one point. A tablet has just been unearthed at Galle,
bearing an inscription in Arabic, Chinese and Tamil. The Arabic is
beyond decipherment, but enough is left of the Chinese to show that the
tablet was erected in 1409 to commemorate a visit by the eunuch Cheng
Ho, who passed several times backwards and forwards over that route. In
1411 the same eunuch was sent as envoy to Japan, and narrowly escaped
with his life.

The emperor was a warm patron of literature, and succeeded in bringing
about the achievement of the most gigantic literary task that the
world has ever seen. He employed a huge staff of scholars to compile an
encyclopaedia which should contain within the compass of a single
work all that had ever been written in the four departments of (1)
the Confucian Canon, (2) history, (3) philosophy, and (4) general
literature, including astronomy, geography, cosmogony, medicine,
divination, Buddhism, Taoism, handicrafts and arts. The completed work,
over which a small army of scholars--more than two thousand in all--had
spent five years, ran to no fewer than 22,877 sections, to which must
be added an index occupying 60 sections. The whole was bound up (Chinese
style) in 11,000 volumes, averaging over half-an-inch in thickness, and
measuring one foot eight inches in length by one foot in breadth. Thus,
if all these were laid flat one upon another, the column so formed would
rise considerably higher than the very top of St. Paul's. Further, each
section contains about twenty leaves, making a total of 917,480 pages
for the whole work, with a grand total of 366,000,000 words. Taking
100 Chinese words as the equivalent of 130 English, due to the greater
condensation of Chinese literary style, it will be found that even the
mighty river of the _Encyclopedia Britannica_ "shrinks to a rill" when
compared with this overwhelming specimen of Chinese industry.

It was never printed; even a Chinese emperor, and enthusiastic patron of
literature to boot, recoiled before the enormous cost of cutting such
a work on blocks. It was however transcribed for printing, and there
appear to have been at one time three copies in existence. Two of these
perished at Nanking with the downfall of the dynasty in 1644, and the
third was in great part destroyed in Peking during the siege of the
Legations in 1900. Odd volumes have been preserved, and bear ample
witness to the extraordinary character of the achievement.

This emperor was an ardent Buddhist, and the priests of that religion
were raised to high positions and exerted considerable influence at
court. In times of famine there were loud complaints that some ten
thousand priests were living comfortably at Peking, while the people of
several provinces were reduced to eating bark and grass.

The porcelain of the Ming dynasty is famous all over the world. Early in
the sixteenth century a great impetus was given to the art, owing to
the extravagant patronage of the court, which was not allowed to pass
without openly expressed remonstrance. The practice of the pictorial
art was very widely extended, and the list of Ming painters is endless,
containing as it does over twelve hundred names, some few of which stand
for a high level of success.

Towards the close of the sixteenth century the Portuguese appeared upon
the scene, and settled themselves at Macao, the ownership of which has
been a bone of contention between China and Portugal ever since. It is
a delightful spot, with an excellent climate, not very far from Canton,
and was for some time the residence of the renowned poet Camoens. Not
far from Macao lies the island of Sancian, where St. Francois Xavier
died. He was the first Roman Catholic missionary of more modern times
to China, but he never set foot on the mainland. Native maps mark the
existence of "Saint's Grave" upon the island, though he was actually
buried at Goa. There had previously been a Roman Catholic bishop in
Peking so far back as the thirteenth century, from which date it seems
likely that Catholic converts have had a continuous footing in the
empire.

In 1583, Matteo Ricci, the most famous of all missionaries who have
ever reached China, came upon the scene at Canton, and finally, in
1601, after years of strenuous effort succeeded in installing himself
at Peking, with the warm support of the emperor himself, dying there in
1610. Besides reforming the calendar and teaching geography and science
in general, he made a fierce attack upon Buddhism, at the same time
wisely leaving Confucianism alone. He was the first to become aware
of the presence in China of a Jewish colony, which had been founded
in 1163. It was from his writings that truer notions of Chinese
civilization than had hitherto prevailed, began to spread in the West.
"Mat. Riccius the Jesuite," says Burton in his _Anatomy of Melancholy_
(1651), "and some others, relate of the industry of the Chinaes most
populous countreys, not a beggar, or an idle person to be seen, and how
by that means they prosper and flourish."

In 1625 an important find was made. A large tablet, with a long
inscription in Chinese and a shorter one in Syraic, was discovered in
central China. The inscription, in an excellent state of preservation,
showed that the tablet had been set up in A.D. 781 by Nestorian
missionaries, and gave a general idea of the object and scope of the
Christian religion. The genuineness of this tablet was for many years in
dispute--Voltaire, Renan, and others of lesser fame, regarding it as
a pious fraud--but has now been established beyond any possibility
of doubt; its value indeed is so great that an attempt was made quite
recently to carry it off to America. Nestorian Christianity is mentioned
by Marco Polo, but disappears altogether after the thirteenth century,
without leaving any trace in Chinese literature of its once flourishing
condition.

The last emperor of the Ming dynasty meant well, but succumbed to the
stress of circumstances. Eunuchs and over-taxation brought about the
stereotyped consequence--rebellion; rebellion, too, headed by an able
commander, whose successive victories soon enabled him to assume the
Imperial title. In the capital all was confusion. The treasury was
empty; the garrison were too few to man the walls; and the ministers
were anxious to secure each his own safety. On April 9, 1644, Peking
fell. During the previous night the emperor, who had refused to flee,
slew the eldest princess, commanded the empress to commit suicide, and
sent his three sons into hiding. At dawn the bell was struck for the
court to assemble; but no one came. His Majesty then ascended the Coal
Hill in the palace grounds, and wrote a last decree on the lapel of his
robe: "WE, poor in virtue and of contemptible personality, have incurred
the wrath of God on high. My ministers have deceived me. I am ashamed to
meet my ancestors; and therefore I myself take off my crown, and with my
hair covering my face await dismemberment at the hands of the rebels. Do
not hurt a single one of my people." He then hanged himself, as also did
one faithful eunuch; and his body, together with that of the empress,
was reverently encoffined by the rebels.

So ended the Ming dynasty, of glorious memory, but not in favour of the
rebel commander, who was driven out of Peking by the Manchus and was
ultimately slain by local militia in a distant province.

The subjugation of the empire by the victors, who had the disadvantage
of being an alien race, was effected with comparative ease and rapidity.
It was carried out by a military occupation of the country, which has
survived the original necessity, and is part of the system of government
at the present day. Garrisons of Tartar troops were stationed at various
important centres of population, each under the command of an officer of
the highest military grade, whose duty it was to co-operate with, and
at the same time watch and act as a check upon, the high authorities
employed in the civil administration. Those Tartar garrisons still
occupy the same positions; and the descendants of the first battalions,
with occasional reinforcements from Peking, live side by side and in
perfect harmony with the strictly Chinese populations, though the two
races do not intermarry except in very rare cases. These Bannermen, as
they are called, in reference to eight banners or corps under which they
are marshalled, may be known by their square heavy faces, which contrast
strongly with the sharper and more astute-looking physiognomies of the
Chinese. They speak the dialect of Peking, now regarded as the official
or "mandarin" language, just as the dialect of Nanking was, so long as
that city remained the capital of the empire.

In many respects the conquering Tartars have been themselves conquered
by the people over whom they set themselves to rule. They have adopted
the language, written and colloquial, of China; and they are fully as
proud as the purest-blooded Chinese of the vast literature and glorious
traditions of those past dynasties of which they have made themselves
joint heirs. Manchu, the language of the conquerors, is still kept
alive at Peking. By a fiction, it is supposed to be the language of the
sovereign; but the emperors of China have now in their youth to make a
study of Manchu, and so do the official interpreters and others whose
duty it is to translate from Chinese into Manchu all documents submitted
to what is called the "sacred glance" of His Majesty. In a similar
sense, until quite a recent date, skill in archery was required of every
Bannerman; and it was undoubtedly a great wrench when the once fatally
effective weapon was consigned to an unmerited oblivion. But though
Bannermen can no longer shoot with the bow and arrow, they still
continue to draw monthly allowances from state funds, as an hereditary
right obtained by conquest.

Of the nine emperors of the Manchu, or Great Ch'ing dynasty, who have
already occupied the dragon throne and have become "guests on high," two
are deserving of special mention as fit to be ranked among the wisest
and best rulers the world has ever known. The Emperor K'ang Hsi (_Khahng
Shee_) began his reign in 1662 and continued it for sixty-one years,
a division of time which has been in vogue for many centuries past. He
treated the Jesuit Fathers with kindness and distinction, and
availed himself in many ways of their scientific knowledge. He was an
extraordinarily generous and successful patron of literature. His name
is inseparably connected with the standard dictionary of the Chinese
language, which was produced under his immediate supervision. It
contains over forty thousand words, not a great number as compared with
European languages which have coined innumerable scientific terms,
but even so, far more than are necessary either for daily life or
for literary purposes. These words are accompanied in each case by
appropriate quotations from the works of every age and of every
style, arranged chronologically, thus anticipating to some extent the
"historical principles" in the still more wonderful English dictionary
by Sir James Murray and others, now going through the press. But the
greatest of all the literary achievements planned by this emperor was a
general encyclopaedia, not indeed on quite such a colossal scale as that
one produced under the Ming dynasty and already described, though still
of respectable dimensions, running as it does in a small-sized
edition to 1,628 octavo volumes of about 200 pages to each. The term
encyclopaedia must not be understood in precisely the same sense as in
Western countries. A Chinese encyclopaedia deals with a given subject
not by providing an up-to-date article written by some living
authority, but by exhibiting extracts from authors of all ages, arranged
chronologically, in which the subject in question is discussed. The
range of topics, however, is such that the above does not always
apply--as, for instance, in the biographical section, which consists
merely of lives of eminent men taken from various sources. In the great
encyclopaedia under consideration, in addition to an enormous number of
lives of men, covering a period of three thousand years, there are also
lives of over twenty-four thousand eminent women, or nearly as many as
all the lives in our own _National Dictionary of Biography_. An
original copy of this marvellous production, which by the way is fully
illustrated, may be seen at the British Museum; a small-sized edition,
more suitable for practical purposes and printed from movable type, was
issued about twenty years ago.

Skipping an emperor under whose reign was initiated that violent
persecution of Roman Catholics which has continued more or less openly
down to the present day, we come to the second of the two monarchs
before mentioned, whose long and beneficent reigns are among the real
glories of the present dynasty.

The Emperor Ch'ien Lung (_Loong_) ascended the throne in 1735, when
twenty-five years of age; and though less than two hundred years ago,
legend has been busy with his person. According to some native accounts,
his hands are said to have reached below his knees; his ears touched his
shoulders; and his eyes could see round behind his head. This sort of
stuff, is should be understood, is not taken from reliable authorities.
It cannot be taken from the dynastic history for the simple reason that
the official history of a dynasty is not published until the dynasty
has come to an end. There is, indeed, a faithful record kept of all the
actions of each reigning emperor in turn; good and evil are set down
alike, without fear or favour, for no emperor is ever allowed to get a
glimpse of the document by which posterity will judge him. Ch'ien Lung
had no cause for anxiety on this score; whatever record might leap
to light, he never could be shamed. An able ruler, with an insatiable
thirst for knowledge, and an indefatigable administrator, he rivals
his grandfather's fame as a sovereign and a patron of letters. His one
amiable weakness was a fondness for poetry; unfortunately, for his own.
His output was enormous so far as number of pieces go; these were always
short, and proportionately trivial. No one ever better illustrated one
half of the cynical Chinese saying: "We love our own compositions,
but other men's wives." He disliked missionaries, and forbade the
propagation of the Christian religion.

After ten years of internal reorganization, his reign became a
succession of wars, almost all of which were brought to a successful
conclusion. His generals led a large army into Nepaul and conquered the
Goorkhas, reaching a point only some sixty miles distant from British
territory. Burma was forced to pay tribute; Chinese supremacy was
established in Tibet; Kuldja and Kashgaria were added to the empire; and
rebellions in Formosa and elsewhere were suppressed. In fifty years the
population was nearly doubled, and the empire on the whole enjoyed peace
and prosperity. In 1750 a Portuguese embassy reached Peking; and was
followed by Lord Macartney's famous mission and a Dutch mission in 1793.
Two years after the venerable emperor had completed a reign of sixty
years, the full Chinese cycle; whereupon he abdicated in favour of his
son, and died in 1799.



CHAPTER XI--CHINESE AND FOREIGNERS

A virtue which the Chinese possess in an eminent degree is the rather
rare one of gratitude. A Chinaman never forgets a kind act; and what
is still more important, he never loses the sense of obligation to his
benefactor. Witness to this striking fact has been borne times without
number by European writers, and especially by doctors, who have
naturally enjoyed the best opportunities for conferring favours likely
to make a deep impression. It is unusual for a native to benefit by a
cure at the hands of a foreign doctor, and then to go away and make no
effort to express his gratitude, either by a subscription to a hospital,
a present of silk or tea, or perhaps an elaborate banner with a golden
inscription, in which his benefactor's skill is likened to that of the
great Chinese doctors of antiquity. With all this, the patient
will still think of the doctor, and even speak of him, not always
irreverently, as a foreign devil. A Chinaman once appeared at a British
Consulate, with a present of some kind, which he had brought from his
home a hundred miles away, in obedience to the command of his dying
father, who had formerly been cured of ophthalmia by a foreign doctor,
and who had told him, on his deathbed, "never to forget the English."
Yet this present was addressed in Chinese: "To His Excellency the Great
English Devil, Consul X."

The Chinaman may love you, but you are a devil all the same. It is most
natural that he should think so. For generation upon generation China
was almost completely isolated from the rest of the world. The people of
her vast empire grew up under influences unchanged by contact with other
peoples. Their ideals became stereotyped from want of other ideals to
compare with, and possibly modify, their own. Dignity of deportment
and impassivity of demeanour were especially cultivated by the ruling
classes. Then the foreign devil burst upon the scene--a being as
antagonistic to themselves in every way as it is possible to conceive.
We can easily see, from pictures, not intended to be caricatures, what
were the chief features of the foreigner as viewed by the Chinaman. Red
hair and blue eyes, almost without exception; short and extremely tight
clothes; a quick walk and a mobility of body, involving ungraceful
positions either sitting or standing; and with an additional feature
which the artist could not portray--an unintelligible language
resembling the twittering of birds. Small wonder that little children
are terrified at these strange beings, and rush shrieking into their
cottages as the foreigner passes by. It is perhaps not quite so easy to
understand why the Mongolian pony has such a dread of the foreigner and
usually takes time to get accustomed to the presence of a barbarian;
some ponies, indeed, will never allow themselves to be mounted unless
blindfolded. Then there are the dogs, who rush out and bark, apparently
without rhyme or reason, at every passing foreigner. The Chinese have a
saying that one dog barks at nothing and the rest bark at him; but that
will hardly explain the unfailing attack so familiar to every one who
has rambled through country villages. The solution of this puzzle was
extracted with difficulty from an amiable Chinaman who explained that
what the animals, and indeed his fellow-countrymen as well, could
not help noticing, was the frowzy and very objectionable smell of
all foreigners, which, strangely enough, is the very accusation which
foreigners unanimously bring against the Chinese themselves.

Compare these characteristics with the universal black hair and black
eyes of men and women throughout China, exclusive of a rare occasional
albino; with the long, flowing, loose robes of officials and of the
well-to-do; with their slow and stately walk and their rigid formality
of position, either sitting or standing. To the Chinese, their own
language seems to be the language of the gods; they know they have
possessed it for several thousand years, and they know nothing at all
of the barbarian. Where does he come from? Where can he come from except
from the small islands which fringe the Middle Kingdom, the world, in
fact, bounded by the Four Seas? The books tell us that "Heaven is round,
Earth is square;" and it is impossible to believe that those books,
upon the wisdom of which the Middle Kingdom was founded, can possibly be
wrong. Such was a very natural view for the Chinaman to take when first
brought really face to face with the West; and such is the view that
in spite of modern educational progress is still very widely held. The
people of a country do not unlearn in a day the long lessons of the
past. He was quite a friendly mandarin, taking a practical view of
national dress, who said in conversation: "I can't think why you
foreigners wear your clothes so tight; it must be very difficult to
catch the fleas."

As an offset against the virtue of gratitude must be placed the
deep-seated spirit of revenge which animates all classes. Though not
enumerated among their own list of the Seven passions--joy, anger,
sorrow, fear, love, hatred and desire--it is perhaps the most
over-mastering passion to which the Chinese mind is subject. It is
revenge which prompts the unhappy daughter-in-law to throw herself down
a well, consoled by the thought of the trouble, if not ruin, she is
bringing on her persecutors. Revenge, too, leads a man to commit suicide
on the doorstep of some one who has done him an injury, for he well
knows what it means to be entangled in the net which the law throws over
any one on whose premises a dead body may thus be found. There was once
an absurd case of a Chinese woman, who deliberately walked into a pond
until the water reached up to her knees, and remained there, alternately
putting her lips below the surface, and threatening in a loud voice
to drown herself on the spot, as life had been made unbearable by the
presence of foreign barbarians. In this instance, had the suicide
been carried out, vengeance would have been wreaked in some way on the
foreigner by the injured ghost of the dead woman.

The germ of this spirit of revenge, this desire to get on level terms
with an enemy, as when a life is extracted for a life, can be traced,
strangely enough, to the practice of filial piety and fraternal love,
the very cornerstone of good government and national prosperity. In the
Book of Rites, which forms a part of the Confucian Canon, and contains
rules not only for the performance of ceremonies but also for the
guidance of individual conduct, the following passage occurs: "With the
slayer of his father, a man may not live under the same sky; against
the slayer of his brother, a man must never have to go home to fetch a
weapon; with the slayer of his friend, a man may not live in the same
state." Being now duly admitted among the works which constitute the
Confucian Canon, the above-mentioned Book of Rites enjoys an authority
to which it can hardly lay claim on the ground of antiquity. It is a
compilation made during the first century B.C., and is based, no doubt,
on older existing documents; but as it never passed under the editorship
of either Confucius or Mencius, it would be unfair to jump to the
conclusion that either of these two sages is in any way responsible
for, or would even acquiesce in, a system of revenge, the only result of
which would be an endless chain of bloodshed and murder. The Chinese are
certainly as constant in their hates as in their friendships. To use a
phrase from their own language, if they love a man, they love him to the
life; if they hate a man they hate him to the death. As we have already
noted, the Old Philosopher urged men to requite evil with good; but
Confucius, who was only a mortal himself, and knew the limitations
of mortality, substituted for an ideal doctrine the more practical
injunction to requite evil with justice. It is to be feared that the
Chinese people fall short in practice even of this lower standard. "Be
just to your enemy" is a common enough maxim; but one for which only a
moderate application can be claimed.

It has often been urged against the Chinese that they have very little
idea of time. A friendly Chinaman will call, and stay on so persistently
that he often outstays his welcome. This infliction is recognized and
felt by the Chinese themselves, who have certain set forms of words by
which they politely escape from a tiresome visitor; among their vast
stores of proverbs they have also provided one which is much to the
point: "Long visits bring short compliments." Also, in contradiction of
the view that time is no value to the Chinaman, there are many familiar
maxims which say, "Make every inch of time your own!" "Half-an-hour is
worth a thousand ounces of silver," etc. An "inch of time" refers to the
sundial, which was known to the Chinese in the earliest ages, and
was the only means they had for measuring time until the invention
or introduction--it is not certain which--of the more serviceable
_clepsydra_, or water-clock, already mentioned.

This consists of several large jars of water, with a tube at the bottom
of each, placed one above another on steps, so that the tube of an upper
jar overhangs the top of a lower jar. The water from the top jar is made
to drip through its tube into the second jar, and so into a vessel at
the bottom, which contains either the floating figure of a man, or some
other kind of index to mark the rise of the water on a scale divided
into periods of two hours each. The day and night were originally
divided by the Chinese into twelve such periods; but now-a-days
watches and clocks are in universal use, and the European division into
twenty-four hours prevails everywhere. Formerly, too, sticks of incense,
to burn for a certain number of hours, as well as graduated candles,
made with the assistance of the water-clock, were in great demand; these
have now quite disappeared as time-recorders.

The Chinese year is a lunar year. When the moon has travelled twelve
times round the earth, the year is completed. This makes it about ten
days short of our solar year; and to bring things right again, an extra
month, that is a thirteenth month, is inserted in every three years.
When foreigners first began to employ servants extensively, the latter
objected to being paid their wages according to the European system, for
they complained that they were thus cheated out of a month's wages in
every third year. An elaborate official almanack is published annually
in Peking, and circulated all over the empire; and in addition to such
information as would naturally be looked for in a work of the kind, the
public are informed what days are lucky, and what days are unlucky, the
right and the wrong days for doing or abstaining from doing this, that,
or the other. The anniversaries of the death-days of the sovereigns
of the ruling dynasty are carefully noted; for on such days all the
government offices are supposed to be shut. Any foreign official who
wishes to see a mandarin for urgent business will find it possible to do
so, but the visitor can only be admitted through a side-door; the
large entrance-gate cannot possibly be opened under any circumstances
whatever.

No notice of the Chinese people, however slight or general in character,
could very well attain its object unless accompanied by some more
detailed account of their etiquette than is to be gathered from the
few references scattered over the preceding pages. Correct behaviour,
whether at court, in the market-place, or in the seclusion of private
life, is regarded as of such extreme importance--and breaches of
propriety in this sense are always so severely frowned upon--that it
behoves the foreigner who would live comfortably and at peace with
his Chinese neighbours, to pick up at least a casual knowledge of an
etiquette which in outward form is so different from his own, and yet in
spirit is so identically the same. A little judicious attention to these
matters will prevent much unnecessary friction, leading often to a
row, and sometimes to a catastrophe. Chinese philosophers have fully
recognized in their writings that ceremonies and salutations and bowings
and scrapings and rules of precedence and rules of the road are not of
any real value when considered apart from the conditions with which they
are usually associated; at the same time they argue that without
such conventional restraints, nothing but confusion would result.
Consequently, a regular code of etiquette has been produced; but as this
deals largely with court and official ceremonial, and a great part of
the remainder has long since been quietly ignored, it is more to the
point to turn to the unwritten code which governs the masses in their
everyday life.

For the foreigner who would mix easily with the Chinese people, it is
above all necessary to understand not only that the street regulations
of Europe do not apply in China; but also that he will there find a set
of regulations which are tacitly agreed upon by the natives, and which,
if examined without prejudice, can only be regarded as based on common
sense. An ordinary foot-passenger, meeting perhaps a coolie with two
buckets of water suspended one at each end of a bamboo pole, or carrying
a bag of rice, weighing one, two, or even three hundredweight, is
bound to move out of the burden-carrier's path, leaving to him whatever
advantages the road may offer. This same coolie, meeting a sedan chair
borne by two or more coolies like himself, must at once make a similar
concession, which is in turn repeated by the chair-bearers in favour of
any one riding a horse. On similar grounds, an empty sedan-chair must
give way to one in which there is a passenger; and though not exactly
on such rational grounds, it is understood that horse, chair, coolie and
foot-passenger all clear the road for a wedding or other procession, as
well as for the retinue of a mandarin. A servant, too, should stand
at the side of the road to let his master pass. As an exception to the
general rule of common sense which is so very noticeable in all Chinese
institutions, if only one takes the trouble to look for it, it seems to
be an understood thing that a man may not only stand still wherever
he pleases in a Chinese thoroughfare, but may even place his burden or
barrow, as the fancy seizes him, sometimes right in the fairway, from
which point he will coolly look on at the streams of foot-passengers
coming and going, who have to make the best of their way round such
obstructions. It is partly perhaps on this account that friends who
go for a stroll together never walk abreast but always in single file,
shouting out their conversation for all the world to hear; this, too,
even in the country, where a more convenient formation would often, but
not always, be possible. Shopkeepers may occupy the path with tables
exposing their wares, and itinerant stall-keepers do not hesitate to
appropriate a "pitch" wherever trade seems likely to be brisk. The
famous saying that to have freedom we must have order has not entered
deeply into Chinese calculations. Freedom is indeed a marked feature of
Chinese social life; some small sacrifices in the cause of order would
probably enhance rather than diminish the great privileges now enjoyed.

A few points are of importance in the social etiquette of indoor life,
and should not be lightly ignored by the foreigner, who, on the other
hand, would be wise not to attempt to substitute altogether Chinese
forms and ceremonies for his own. Thus, no Chinaman, and, it may be
added, no European who knows how to behave, fails to rise from his chair
on the entrance of a visitor; and it is further the duty of a host to
see that his visitor is actually seated before he sits down himself.
It is extremely impolite to precede a visitor, as in passing through a
door; and on parting, it is usual to escort him to the front entrance.
He must be placed on the left of the host, this having been the post of
honour for several centuries, previous to which it was the seat to the
right of the host, as with us, to which the visitor was assigned. At
such interviews it would not be correct to allude to wives, who are no
more to be mentioned than were the queen of Spain's legs.

One singular custom in connection with visits, official and otherwise,
ignorance of which has led on many occasions to an awkward moment, is
the service of what is called "guest-tea." At his reception by the host
every visitor is at once supplied with a cup of tea. The servant brings
two cups, one in each hand, and so manages that the cup in his left hand
is set down before the guest, who faces him on his right hand, while
that for his master is carried across and set down in an exactly
opposite sense. The tea-cups are so handed, as it were with crossed
hands, even when the host, as an extra mark of politeness, receives that
intended for his visitor, and himself places it on the table, in this
case being careful to use _both_ hands, it being considered extremely
impolite to offer anything with one hand only employed. Now comes the
point of the "guest-tea," which, as will be seen, it is quite worth
while to remember. Shortly after the beginning of the interview, an
unwary foreigner, as indeed has often been the case, perhaps because
he is thirsty, or because he may think it polite to take a sip of the
fragrant drink which has been so kindly provided for him, will raise
the cup to his lips. Almost instantaneously he will hear a loud shout
outside, and become aware that the scene is changing rapidly for no very
evident reason--only too evident, however, to the surrounding Chinese
servants, who know it to be their own custom that so soon as a visitor
tastes his "guest-tea," it is a signal that he wishes to leave, and that
the interview is at an end. The noise is simply a bawling summons to get
ready his sedan-chair, and the scurrying of his coolies to be in their
places when wanted. There is another side to this quaint custom, which
is often of inestimable advantage to a busy man. A host, who feels that
everything necessary has been said, and wishes to free himself from
further attendance, may grasp his own cup and invite his guest to drink.
The same results follow, and the guest has no alternative but to rise
and take his leave. In ancient days visitors left their shoes outside
the front door, a custom which is still practised by the Japanese, the
whole of whose civilization--this cannot be too strongly emphasized--was
borrowed originally from China.

It is considered polite to remove spectacles during an interview, or
even when meeting in the street; though as this rather unreasonable
rule has been steadily ignored by foreigners, chiefly, no doubt, from
unacquaintance with it, the Chinese themselves make no attempt to
observe it so far as foreigners are concerned. In like manner, it is
most unbecoming for any "read-book man," no matter how miserably poor he
is, to receive a stranger, or be seen himself abroad, in short clothes;
but this rule, too, is often relaxed in the presence of foreigners, who
wear short clothes themselves. Honest poverty is no crime in China,
nor is it in any way regarded as cause for shame; it is even more amply
redeemed by scholarship than is the case in Western countries. A man
who has gained a degree moves on a different level from the crowd around
him, so profound is the respect shown to learning. If a foreigner can
speak Chinese intelligibly, his character as a barbarian begins to be
perceptibly modified; and if to the knack of speech he adds a tolerable
acquaintance with the sacred characters which form the written language,
he becomes transfigured, as one in whom the influence of the holy men of
old is beginning to prevail over savagery and ignorance.

It is not without reason that the term "sacred" is applied above to the
written words or characters. The Chinese, recognizing the extraordinary
results which have been brought about, silently and invisibly, by
the operation of written symbols, have gradually come to invest these
symbols with a spirituality arousing a feeling somewhat akin to worship.
A piece of paper on which a single word has once been written or
printed, becomes something other than paper with a black mark on it.
It may not be lightly tossed about, still less trampled underfoot; it
should be reverently destroyed by fire, here again used as a medium of
transmission to the great Beyond; and thus its spiritual essence will
return to those from whom it originally came. In the streets of a
Chinese city, and occasionally along a frequented highroad, may be seen
small ornamental structures into which odd bits of paper may be thrown
and burnt, thus preventing a desecration so painful to the Chinese mind;
and it has often been urged against foreigners that because they are
so careless as to what becomes of their written and printed paper, the
matter contained in foreign documents and books must obviously be of no
great value. It is even considered criminal to use printed matter for
stiffening the covers or strengthening the folded leaves of books; still
more so, to employ it in the manufacture of soles for boots and shoes,
though in such cases as these the weakness of human nature usually
carries the day. Still, from the point of view of the Taoist faith, the
risk is too serious to be overlooked. In the sixth of the ten Courts of
Purgatory, through one or more of which sinners must pass after death in
order to expiate their crimes on earth, provision is made for those who
"scrape the gilding from the outside of images, take holy names in vain,
show no respect for written paper, throw down dirt and rubbish near
pagodas and temples, have in their possession blasphemous or obscene
books and do not destroy them, obliterate or tear books which teach man
to be good," etc., etc.

In this, the sixth Court, presided over, like all the others, by a
judge, and furnished with all the necessary means and appliances for
carrying out the sentences, there are sixteen different wards where
different punishments are applied according to the gravity of the
offence. The wicked shade may be sentenced to kneel for long periods on
iron shot, or to be placed up to the neck in filth, or pounded till the
blood runs out, or to have the mouth forced open with iron pincers and
filled with needles, or to be bitten by rats, or nipped by locusts while
in a net of thorns, or have the heart scratched, or be chopped in two
at the waist, or have the skin of the body torn off and rolled up into
spills for lighting pipes, etc. Similar punishments are awarded for
other crimes; and these are to be seen depicted on the walls of the
municipal temple, to be found in every large city, and appropriately
named the Chamber of Horrors. It is doubtful if such ghastly
representations of what is to be expected in the next world have really
any deterrent effect upon even the most illiterate of the masses;
certainly not so long as health is present and things are generally
going well. "The devil a monk" will any Chinaman be when the conditions
of life are satisfactory to him.

As has already been stated, his temperament is not a religious one; and
even the seductions and threats of Buddhism leave him to a great extent
unmoved. He is perhaps chiefly influenced by the Buddhist menace of
rebirth, possibly as a woman, or worse still as an animal. Belief
in such a contingency may act as a mild deterrent under a variety of
circumstances; it certainly tends to soften his treatment of domestic
animals. Not only because he may some day become one himself, but also
because among the mules or donkeys which he has to coerce through long
spells of exhausting toil, he may be unwittingly belabouring some friend
or acquaintance, or even a member of his own particular family. This
belief in rebirth is greatly strengthened by a large number of recorded
instances of persons who could recall events which had happened in their
own previous state of existence, and whose statements were capable of
verification. Occasionally, people would accurately describe places and
buildings which they could not have visited, while many would entertain
a dim consciousness of scenes, sights and sounds, which seemed to belong
to some other than the present life. There is a record of one man who
could remember having been a horse, and who vividly recalled the pain he
had suffered when riders dug their knees hard into his sides. This, too,
in spite of the administration in Purgatory of a cup of forgetfulness,
specially designed to prevent in those about to reborn any remembrance
of life during a previous birth.

After all, the most awful punishment inflicted in Purgatory upon sinners
is one which, being purely mental, may not appeal so powerfully to the
masses as the coarse tortures mentioned above. In the fifth Court, the
souls of the wicked are taken to a terrace from which they can hear and
see what goes on in their old homes after their own deaths. "They see
their last wishes disregarded, and their instructions disobeyed. The
property they scraped together with so much trouble is dissipated and
gone. The husband thinks of taking another wife; the widow meditates
second nuptials. Strangers are in possession of the old estate; there
is nothing to divide amongst the children. Debts long since paid are
brought again for settlement, and the survivors are called upon to
acknowledge false claims upon the departed. Debts owed are lost for want
of evidence, with endless recriminations, abuse, and general confusion,
all of which falls upon the three families--father's, mother's, and
wife's--connected with the deceased. These in their anger speak ill of
him that is gone. He sees his children become corrupt, and friends
fall away. Some, perhaps, may stroke the coffin and let fall a tear,
departing quickly with a cold smile. Worse than that, the wife sees her
husband tortured in gaol; the husband sees his wife a victim to some
horrible disease, lands gone, houses destroyed by flood or fire, and
everything in an unutterable plight--the reward of former sins."

Confucius declined absolutely to discuss the supernatural in any form
or shape, his one object being to improve human conduct in this life,
without attempting to probe that state from which man is divided by
death. At the same time, he was no scoffer; for although he declared
that "the study of the supernatural is injurious indeed," and somewhat
cynically bade his followers "show respect to spiritual beings, but keep
them at a distance," yet in another passage we read: "He who offends
against God has no one to whom he can pray." Again, when he was
seriously ill, a disciple asked if he might offer up prayer. Confucius
demurred to this, pointing out that he himself had been praying for a
considerable period; meaning thereby that his life had been one long
prayer.



CHAPTER XII--THE OUTLOOK

There is a very common statement made by persons who have lived in
China--among the people, but not of them--and the more superficial the
acquaintance, the more emphatically is the statement made, that the
ordinary Chinaman, be he prince or peasant, offers to the Western
observer an insoluble puzzle in every department of his life. He is, in
fact, a standing enigma; a human being, it may be granted, but one who
can no more be classed than his unique monosyllabic language, which
still stands isolated and alone.

This estimate is largely based upon some exceedingly false inferences.
It seems to be argued that because, in a great many matters, the
Chinaman takes a diametrically opposite view to our own, he must
necessarily be a very eccentric fellow; but as these are mostly matters
of convention, the argument is just as valid against us as against him.
"Strange people, those foreigners," he may say, and actually does say;
"they make their compass point north instead of south. They take off
their hats in company instead of keeping them on. They mount a horse
on its left instead of on its right side. They begin dinner with soup
instead of dessert, and end it with dessert instead of soup. They drink
their wine cold instead of hot. Their books all open at the wrong end,
and the lines in a page are horizontal instead of vertical. They put
their guests on the right instead of on the left, though it is true that
we did that until several hundred years ago. Their music, too, is so
funny, it is more like noise; and as for their singing, it is only
very loud talking. Then their women are so immodest; striding about in
ball-rooms with very little on, and embracing strange men in a whirligig
which they call dancing, but very unlike the dignified movements which
our male dancers exhibit in the Confucian temple. Their men and women
shake hands, though know from our sacred Book of Rites that men and
women should not even pass things from one to another, for fear their
hands should touch. Then, again, all foreigners, sometimes the women
also, carry sticks, which can only be for beating innocent people; and
their so-called mandarins and others ride races and row boats, instead
of having coolies to do these things for them. They are strange people
indeed; very clever at cunning, mechanical devices, such as fire-ships,
fire-carriages, and air-cars; but extremely ferocious and almost
entirely uncivilized."

Such would be a not exaggerated picture of the mental attitude of
the Chinaman towards his enigma, the foreigner. From the Chinaman's
imperturbable countenance the foreigner seeks in vain for some
indications of a common humanity within; and simply because he has not
the wit to see it, argues that it is not there. But there it is all the
time. The principles of general morality, and especially of duty towards
one's neighbour, the restrictions of law, and even the conventionalities
of social life, upon all of which the Chinaman is more or less nourished
from his youth upwards, remain, when accidental differences have been
brushed away, upon a bed-rock of ground common to both East and West;
and it is difficult to see how such teachings could possibly turn out a
race of men so utterly in contrast with the foreigner as the Chinese
are usually supposed to be. It is certain that anything like a full
and sincere observance of the Chinese rules of life would result in a
community of human beings far ahead of the "pure men" dreamt of in the
philosophy of the Taoists.

As has already been either stated or suggested, the Chinese seem to be
actuated by precisely the same motives which actuate other peoples. They
delight in the possession of wealth and fame, while fully alive to the
transitory nature of both. They long even more for posterity, that
the ancestral line may be carried on unbroken. They find their chief
pleasures in family life, and in the society of friends, of books, of
mountains, of flowers, of pictures, and of objects dear to the collector
and the connoisseur. Though a nation of what the Scotch would call
"sober eaters," they love the banquet hour, and to a certain extent
verify their own saying that "Man's heart is next door to his stomach."
In centuries past a drunken nation, some two to three hundred years
ago they began to come under the influence of opium, and the abuse of
alcohol dropped to a minimum. Opium smoking, less harmful a great deal
than opium eating, took the place of drink, and became the national
vice; but the extent of its injury to the people has been much
exaggerated, and is not to be compared with that of alcohol in the West.
It is now, in consequence of recent legislation, likely to disappear, on
which result there could be nothing but the warmest congratulations to
offer, but for the fact that something else, more insidious and deadly
still, is rapidly taking its place. For a time, it was thought that
alcohol might recover its sway, and it is still quite probable that
human cravings for stimulant of some kind will find a partial relief in
that direction. The present enemy, however, and one that demands serious
and immediate attention, is morphia, which is being largely imported
into China in the shape of a variety of preparations suitable to the
public demand. A passage from opium to morphia would be worse, if
possible, than from the frying-pan into the fire.

The question has often been asked, but has never found a satisfactory
answer, why and how it is that Chinese civilization has persisted
through so many centuries, while other civilizations, with equal if not
superior claims to permanency, have been broken up and have disappeared
from the sites on which they formerly flourished. Egypt may be able to
boast of a high level of culture at a remoter date than we can reach
through the medium of Chinese records, for all we can honestly claim
is that the Chinese were a remarkably civilized nation a thousand years
before Christ. That was some time before Greek civilization can be said
to have begun; yet the Chinese nation is with us still, and but for
contact with the Western barbarian, would be leading very much the same
life that it led so many centuries ago.

Some would have us believe that the bond which has held the people
together is the written language, which is common to the whole Empire,
and which all can read in the same sense, though the pronunciation of
words varies in different provinces as much as that of words in English,
French, or German. Others have suggested that to the teachings of
Confucius, which have outlived the competition of Taoism, Buddhism and
other faiths, China is indebted for the tie which has knitted men's
hearts together, and enabled them to defy any process of disintegration.
There is possibly some truth in all such theories; but these are
incomplete unless a considerable share of the credit is allowed to the
spirit of personal freedom which seems to breathe through all Chinese
institutions, and to unite the people in resistance to every form of
oppression. The Chinese have always believed in the divine right of
kings; on the other hand, their kings must bear themselves as kings, and
live up to their responsibilities as well as to the rights they claim.
Otherwise, the obligation is at an end, and their subjects will have
none of them. Good government exists in Chinese eyes only when
the country is prosperous, free from war, pestilence and famine.
Misgovernment is a sure sign that God has withdrawn His mandate from the
emperor, who is no longer fit to rule. It then remains to replace the
emperor by one who is more worthy of Divine favour, and this usually
means the final overthrow of the dynasty.

The Chinese assert their right to put an evil ruler to death, and it is
not high treason, or criminal in any way, to proclaim this principle in
public. It is plainly stated by the philosopher Mencius, whose writings
form a portion of the Confucian Canon, and are taught in the ordinary
course to every Chinese youth. One of the feudal rulers was speaking to
Mencius about a wicked emperor of eight hundred years back, who had been
attacked by a patriot hero, and who had perished in the flames of his
palace. "May then a subject," he asked, "put his sovereign to death?"
To which Mencius replied that any one who did violence to man's
natural charity of heart, or failed altogether in his duty towards
his neighbour, was nothing more than an unprincipled ruffian; and he
insinuated that it had been such a ruffian, in fact, not an emperor
in the true sense of the term, who had perished in the case they were
discussing. Another and most important point to be remembered in any
attempt to discover the real secret of China's prolonged existence as
a nation, also points in the direction of democracy and freedom. The
highest positions in the state have always been open, through the medium
of competitive examinations, to the humblest peasant in the empire. It
is solely a question of natural ability coupled with an intellectual
training; and of the latter, it has already been shown that there is no
lack at the disposal of even the poorest. China, then, according to a
high authority, has always been at the highest rung of the democratic
ladder; for it was no less a person than Napoleon who said: "Reasonable
democracy will never aspire to anything more than obtaining an equal
power of elevation for all."

In order to enforce their rights by the simplest and most bloodless
means, the Chinese have steadily cultivated the art of combining
together, and have thus armed themselves with an immaterial, invisible
weapon which simply paralyses the aggressor, and ultimately leaves them
masters of the field. The extraordinary part of a Chinese boycott or
strike is the absolute fidelity by which it is observed. If the boatmen
or chair-coolies at any place strike, they all strike; there are no
blacklegs. If the butchers refuse to sell, they all refuse, entirely
confident in each other's loyalty. Foreign merchants who have offended
the Chinese guilds by some course of action not approved by those
powerful bodies, have often found to their cost that such conduct
will not be tolerated for a moment, and that their only course is to
withdraw, sometimes at considerable loss, from the untenable position
they had taken up. The other side of the medal is equally instructive.
Some years ago, the foreign tea-merchants at a large port, in order to
curb excessive charges, decided to hoist the Chinese tea-men, or sellers
of tea, with their own petard. They organized a strict combination
against the tea-men, whose tea no colleague was to buy until, by what
seemed to be a natural order of events, the tea-men had been brought
to their knees. The tea-men, however, remained firm, their countenances
impassive as ever. Before long, the tea-merchants discovered that some
of their number had broken faith, and were doing a roaring business for
their own account, on the terms originally insisted on by the tea-men.

There is no longer any doubt that China is now in the early stages
of serious and important changes. Her old systems of education and
examination are to be greatly modified, if not entirely remodelled.
The distinctive Chinese dress is to be shorn of two of its most
distinguishing features--the _queue_ of the man and the small feet of
the woman. The coinage is to be brought more into line with commercial
requirements. The administration of the law is to be so improved that
an honest demand may be made--as Japan made it some years back--for the
abolition of extra-territoriality, a treaty obligation under which China
gives up all jurisdiction over resident foreigners, and agrees that
they shall be subject, civilly and criminally alike, only to their own
authorities. The old patriarchal form of government, autocratic in name
but democratic in reality, which has stood the Chinese people in such
good stead for an unbroken period of nearly twenty-two centuries, is
also to change with the changes of the hour, in the hope that a new era
will be inaugurated, worthy to rank with the best days of a glorious
past.

And here perhaps it may be convenient if a slight outline is given of
the course marked out for the future. China is to have a "constitution"
after the fashion of most foreign nations; and her people, whose sole
weapon of defence and resistance, albeit one of deadly efficiency, has
hitherto been combination of the masses against the officials set over
them, are soon to enjoy the rights of representative government. By an
Imperial decree, issued late in 1907, this principle was established;
and by a further decree, issued in 1908, it was ordered that at the
end of a year provincial assemblies, to deliberate on matters of local
government, were to be convened in all the provinces and certain
other portions of the empire, as a first step towards the end in view.
Membership of these assemblies was to be gained by election, coupled
with a small property qualification; and the number of members in each
assembly was to be in proportion to the number of electors in each
area, which works out roughly at about one thousand electors to
each representative. In the following year a census was to be taken,
provincial budgets were to be drawn up, and a new criminal code was to
be promulgated, on the strength of which new courts of justice were
to be opened by the end of the third year. By 1917, there was to be a
National Assembly or Parliament, consisting of an Upper and Lower House,
and a prime minister was to be appointed.

On the 14th of October 1909 these provincial assemblies met for the
first time. The National Assembly was actually opened on the 3rd of
October 1910; and in response to public feeling, an edict was issued a
month later ordering the full constitution to be granted within three
years from date. It is really a single chamber, which contains the
elements of two. It is composed of about one hundred members, appointed
by the Throne and drawn from certain privileged classes, including
thirty-two high officials and ten distinguished scholars, together with
the same number of delegates from the provinces. Those who obtain seats
are to serve for three years, and to have their expenses defrayed by the
state. It is a consultative and not an executive body; its function is
to discuss such subjects as taxation, the issue of an annual budget, the
amendment of the law, etc., all of which subjects are to be approved by
the emperor before being submitted to this assembly, and also to deal
with questions sent up for decision from the provincial assemblies.
Similarly, any resolution to be proposed must be backed by at least
thirty members, and on being duly passed by a majority, must then
be embodied in a memorial to the Throne. For passing and submitting
resolutions which may be classed under various headings as
objectionable, the assembly can at once be dissolved by Imperial edict.

There are, so far, no distinct parties in the National Assembly, that
is, as regards the places occupied in the House. Men of various shades
of opinion, Radicals, Liberals and Conservatives, are all mixed up
together. The first two benches are set aside for representatives of the
nobility, with precedence from the left of the president round to his
right. Then come officials, scholars and leading merchants on the
next two benches. Behind them, again, on four rows of benches, are the
delegates from the provincial assemblies. There is thus a kind of House
of Lords in front, with a House of Commons, the representatives of
the nation, at the back. The leanings of the former class, as might be
supposed, are mostly of a conservative tendency, while the sympathies
of the latter are rather with progressive ideas; at the same time, there
will be found among the Lords a certain sprinkling of Radicals, and
among the Commons not a few whose views are of an antiquated, not to say
reactionary, type.

With the above scheme the Chinese people are given to understand quite
clearly that while their advice in matters concerning the administration
of government will be warmly welcomed, all legislative power will
remain, as heretofore, confined to the emperor alone. At the first
blush, this seems like giving with one hand and taking away with the
other; and so perhaps it would work out in more than one nation of the
West. But those who know the Chinese at home know that when they offer
political advice they mean it to be taken. The great democracy of China,
living in the greatest republic the world has ever seen, would never
tolerate any paltering with national liberties in the present or in the
future, any more than has been the case in the past. Those who sit in
the seats of authority at the capital are far too well acquainted with
the temper of their countrymen to believe for a moment that, where such
vital interests are concerned, there can be anything contemplated save
steady and satisfactory progress towards the goal proposed. If the
ruling Manchus seize the opportunity now offered them, then, in spite of
simmering sedition here and there over the empire, they may succeed
in continuing a line which in its early days had a glorious record of
achievement, to the great advantage of the Chinese nation. If, on the
other hand, they neglect this chance, there may result one of those
frightful upheavals from which the empire has so often suffered. China
will pass again through the melting-pot, to emerge once more, as on all
previous occasions, purified and strengthened by the process.




BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. _The Chinese Classics_, by James Legge, D.D., late Professor of
Chinese at Oxford.

A translation of the whole of the Confucian Canon, comprising the Four
Books in which are given the discourses of Confucius and Mencius, the
Book of History, the Odes, the Annals of Confucius' native State, the
Book of Rites, and the Book of Changes.

2. _The Ancient History of China_, by F. Hirth, Ph.D., Professor of
Chinese at Columbia University, New York.

A sketch of Chinese history from fabulous ages down to 221 B.C.,
containing a good deal of information of an antiquarian character, and
altogether placing in its most attractive light what must necessarily be
rather a dull period for the general reader.

3. _China_, by E. H. Parker, Professor of Chinese at Victoria
University, Manchester.

A general account of China, chiefly valuable for commercial and
statistical information, sketch-maps of ancient trade-routes, etc.

4. _A Chinese Biographical Dictionary_, by H. A. Giles, LL.D., Professor
of Chinese at the University of Cambridge.

This work contains 2579 short lives of Chinese Emperors, statesmen,
generals, scholars, priests, and other classes, including some
women, from the earliest times down to the present day, arranged
alphabetically.

5. _A Comprehensive Geography of the Chinese Empire_, by L. Richard.

This work is rightly named "comprehensive," for it contains a great deal
of information which cannot be strictly classed as geographical, all of
which, however, is of considerable value to the student.

6. _Descriptive Sociology (Chinese)_, by E. T. C. Werner, H.B.M. Consul
at Foochow.

A volume of the series initiated by Herbert Spenger. It consists of a
large number of sociological facts grouped and arranged in chronological
order, and is of course purely a work of reference.

7. _A History of Chinese Literature_, by H. A. Giles.

Notes on two or three hundred writers of history, philosophy, biography,
travel, poetry, plays, fiction, etc., with a large number of translated
extracts grouped under the above headings and arranged in chronological
order.

8. _Chinese Poetry in English Verse_, by H. A. Giles.

Rhymed translations of nearly two hundred short poems from the earliest
ages down to the present times.

9. _An Introduction to the History of Chinese Pictorial Art_, by H. A.
Giles.

Notes on the lives and works of over three hundred painters of all
ages, chiefly translated from the writings of Chinese art-critics, with
sixteen reproductions of famous Chinese pictures.

10. _Scraps from a Collector's Note-book_, by F. Hirth.

Chiefly devoted to notes on painters of the present dynasty, 1644-
1905, with twenty-one reproductions of famous pictures, forming a
complementary supplement to No. 9.

11. _Religions of Ancient China_, by H. A. Giles.

A short account of the early worship of one God, followed by brief
notices of Taoism, Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Mahommedanism, and
other less well-known faiths which have been introduced at various dates
into China.

12. _Chinese Characteristics_, by the Rev. Arthur Smith, D.D.

A humorous but at the same time serious examination into the modes of
thought and springs of action which peculiarly distinguish the Chinese
people.

13. _Village Life in China_, by the Rev. Arthur Smith.

The scope of this work is sufficiently indicated by its title.

14. _China under the Empress Dowager_, by J. O. Bland, and E. Backhouse.

An interesting account of Chinese Court Life between 1860 and 1908,
with important sidelights on the Boxer troubles and the Siege of the
Legations in 1900.

15. _The Imperial History of China_, by Rev. J. Macgowan.

A short and compact work on a subject which has not been successfully
handled.

16. _Indiscreet Letters from Peking_, by B. Putnam Weale.

Though too outspoken to meet with general approbation, this work is
considered by many to give the most faithful account of the Siege of the
Legations, as seen by an independent witness.

17. _Buddhism as a Religion_, by H. Hackmann, Lic. Theol.

A very useful volume, translated from the German, showing the various
developments of Buddhism in different parts of the world.

18. _Chuang Tzu_, by H. A. Giles.

A complete translation of the writings of the leading Taoist
philosopher, who flourished in the fourth and third centuries B.C.

========================================
