========================================

HERMANN AND DOROTHEA

By Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

Translated by Ellen Frothingham




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

There are few modern poems of any country so perfect in their
kind as the "Hermann and Dorothea" of Goethe. In clearness
of characterization, in unity of tone, in the adjustment of
background and foreground, in the conduct of the narrative,
it conforms admirably to the strict canons of art; yet it
preserves a freshness and spontaneity in its emotional appeal
that are rare in works of so classical a perfection in form.

The basis of the poem is a historical incident. In the year 1731
the Archbishop of Salzburg drove out of his diocese a thousand
Protestants, who took refuge in South Germany, and among whom
was a girl who became the bride of the son of a rich burgher.
The occasion of the girl's exile was changed by Goethe to more
recent times, and in the poem she is represented as a German from
the west bank of the Rhine fleeing from the turmoil caused by the
French Revolution. The political element is not a mere background,
but is woven into the plot with consummate skill, being used,
at one point, for example, in the characterization of Dorothea,
who before the time of her appearance in the poem has been
deprived of her first betrothed by the guillotine; and, at another,
in furnishing a telling contrast between the revolutionary uproar
in France and the settled peace of the German village.

The characters of the father and the minister Goethe took over
from the original incident, the mother he invented, and the
apothecary he made to stand for a group of friends. But all of
these persons, as well as the two lovers, are recreated, and this
so skillfully that while they are made notably familiar to us as
individuals, they are no less significant as permanent types of
human nature. The hexameter measure which he employed, and which
is retained in the present translation, he handled with such
charm that it has since seemed the natural verse for the domestic
idyl--witness the obvious imitation of this, as of other
features of the poem, in Longfellow's "Evangeline."

Taken as a whole, with its beauty of form, its sentiment, tender
yet restrained, and the compelling pathos of its story, "Hermann
and Dorothea" appeals to a wider public than perhaps any other
product of its author.




HERMANN AND DOROTHEA


CALLIOPE

FATE AND SYMPATHY


 "Truly, I never have seen the market and street so deserted!
 How as if it were swept looks the town, or had perished! Not fifty
 Are there, methinks, of all our inhabitants in it remaining,
 What will not curiosity do! here is every one running,
 Hurrying to gaze on the sad procession of pitiful exiles.
 Fully a league it must be to the causeway they have to pass over,
 Yet all are hurrying down in the dusty heat of the noonday.
 I, in good sooth, would not stir from my place to witness the sorrows
 Borne by good, fugitive people, who now, with their rescued possessions,
 Driven, alas! from beyond the Rhine, their beautiful country,
 Over to us are coming, and through the prosperous corner
 Roam of this our luxuriant valley, and traverse its windings.
 Well hast thou done, good wife, our son in thus kindly dispatching,
 Laden with something to eat and to drink, and with store of old linen,
 'Mongst the poor folk to distribute; for giving belongs to the wealthy.
 How the youth drives, to be sure! What control he has over the horses!
 Makes not our carriage a handsome appearance,--the new one? With comfort,
 Four could be seated within, with a place on the box for the coachman.
 This time, he drove by himself. How lightly it rolled round the corner!"
 Thus, as he sat at his ease in the porch of his house on the market,
 Unto his wife was speaking mine host of the Golden Lion.

 Thereupon answered and said the prudent, intelligent housewife:
 "Father, I am not inclined to be giving away my old linen:
 Since it serves many a purpose; and cannot be purchased for money,
 When we may want it. To-day, however, I gave, and with pleasure,
 Many a piece that was better, indeed, in shirts and in bed-clothes;
 For I was told of the aged and children who had to go naked.
 But wilt thou pardon me, father? thy wardrobe has also been plundered.
 And, in especial, the wrapper that has the East-Indian flowers,
 Made of the finest of chintz, and lined with delicate flannel,
 Gave I away: it was thin and old, and quite out of the fashion."

 Thereupon answered and said, with a smile, the excellent landlord:
 "Faith! I am sorry to lose it, my good old calico wrapper,
 Real East-Indian stuff: I never shall get such another.
 Well, I had given up wearing it: nowadays, custom compels us
 Always to go in surtout, and never appear but in jacket;
 Always to have on our boots; forbidden are night-cap and slippers."

 "See!" interrupted the wife; "even now some are yonder returning,
 Who have beheld the procession: it must, then, already be over.
 Look at the dust on their shoes! and see how their faces are glowing!
 Every one carries his kerchief, and with it is wiping the sweat off.
 Not for a sight like that would I run so far and so suffer,
 Through such a heat; in sooth, enough shall I have in the telling."

 Thereupon answered and said, with emphasis, thus, the good father:
 "Rarely does weather like this attend such a harvest as this is.
 We shall be bringing our grain in dry, as the hay was before it.
 Not the least cloud to be seen, so perfectly clear is the heaven;
 And, with delicious coolness, the wind blows in from the eastward.
 That is the weather to last! over-ripe are the cornfields already;
 We shall begin on the morrow to gather our copious harvest."

 Constantly, while he thus spoke, the crowds of men and of women
 Grew, who their homeward way were over the market-place wending;
 And, with the rest, there also returned, his daughters beside him,
 Back to his modernized house on the opposite side of the market,
 Foremost merchant of all the town, their opulent neighbor,
 Rapidly driving his open barouche,--it was builded in Landau.
 Lively now grew the streets, for the city was handsomely peopled.
 Many a trade was therein carried on, and large manufactures.

 Under their doorway thus the affectionate couple were sitting,
 Pleasing themselves with many remarks on the wandering people.
 Finally broke in, however, the worthy housewife, exclaiming:
 "Yonder our pastor, see! is hitherward coming, and with him
 Comes our neighbor the doctor, so they shall every thing tell us;
 All they have witnessed abroad, and which 'tis a sorrow to look on."

 Cordially then the two men drew nigh, and saluted the couple;
 Sat themselves down on the benches of wood that were placed in the doorway,
 Shaking the dust from their feet, and fanning themselves with their kerchiefs.
 Then was the doctor, as soon as exchanged were the mutual greetings,
 First to begin, and said, almost in a tone of vexation:
 "Such is mankind, forsooth! and one man is just like another,
 Liking to gape and to stare when ill-luck has befallen his neighbor.
 Every one hurries to look at the flames, as they soar in destruction;
 Runs to behold the poor culprit, to execution conducted:
 Now all are sallying forth to gaze on the need of these exiles,
 Nor is there one who considers that he, by a similar fortune,
 May, in the future, if not indeed next, be likewise o'ertaken.
 Levity not to be pardoned, I deem; yet it lies in man's nature."

 Thereupon answered and said the noble, intelligent pastor;
 Ornament he of the town, still young, in the prime of his manhood.
 He was acquainted with life,--with the needs of his hearers acquainted;
 Deeply imbued he was with the Holy Scriptures' importance,
 As they reveal man's destiny to us, and man's disposition;
 Thoroughly versed, besides, in best of secular writings.
 "I should be loath," he replied, "to censure an innocent instinct,
 Which to mankind by good mother Nature has always been given.
 What understanding and reason may sometimes fail to accomplish,
 Oft will such fortunate impulse, that bears us resistlessly with it.
 Did curiosity draw not man with its potent attraction,
 Say, would he ever have learned how harmoniously fitted together
 Worldly experiences are? For first what is novel he covets;
 Then with unwearying industry follows he after the useful;
 Finally longs for the good by which he is raised and ennobled.
 While he is young, such lightness of mind is a joyous companion,
 Traces of pain-giving evil effacing as soon as 'tis over.
 He is indeed to be praised, who, out of this gladness of temper,
 Has in his ripening years a sound understanding developed;
 Who, in good fortune or ill, with zeal and activity labors:
 Such an one bringeth to pass what is good, and repaireth the evil."

 Then broke familiarly in the housewife impatient, exclaiming:
 "Tell us of what ye have seen; for that I am longing to hear of!"

 "Hardly," with emphasis then the village doctor made answer,
 "Can I find spirits so soon after all the scenes I have witnessed.
 Oh, the manifold miseries! who shall be able to tell them?
 E'en before crossing the meadows, and while we were yet at a distance,
 Saw we the dust; but still from hill to hill the procession
 Passed away out of our sight, and we could distinguish but little,
 But when at last we were come to the street that crosses the valley,
 Great was the crowd and confusion of persons on foot and of wagons.
 There, alas! saw we enough of these poor unfortunates passing,
 And could from some of them learn how bitter the sorrowful flight was,
 Yet how joyful the feeling of life thus hastily rescued.
 Mournful it was to behold the most miscellaneous chattels,--
 All those things which are housed in every well-furnished dwelling,
 All by the house-keeper's care set up in their suitable places,
 Always ready for use; for useful is each and important.--
 Now these things to behold, piled up on all manner of wagons,
 One on the top of another, as hurriedly they had been rescued.
 Over the chest of drawers were the sieve and wool coverlet lying;
 Thrown in the kneading-trough lay the bed, and the sheets on the mirror.
 Danger, alas! as we learned ourselves in our great conflagration
 Twenty years since, will take from a man all power of reflection,
 So that he grasps things worthless and leaves what is precious behind him.
 Here, too, with unconsidering care they were carrying with them
 Pitiful trash, that only encumbered the horses and oxen;
 Such as old barrels and boards, the pen for the goose, and the bird-cage.
 Women and children, too, went toiling along with their bundles,

 "Panting 'neath baskets and tubs, full of things of no manner of value:
 So unwilling is man to relinquish his meanest possession.
 Thus on the dusty road the crowded procession moved forward,
 All confused and disordered. The one whose beasts were the weaker,
 Wanted more slowly to drive, while faster would hurry another.
 Presently went up a scream from the closely squeezed women and children,
 And with the yelping of dogs was mingled the lowing of cattle,
 Cries of distress from the aged and sick, who aloft on the wagon,
 Heavy and thus overpacked, upon beds were sitting and swaying.
 Pressed at last from the rut and out to the edge of the highway,
 Slipped the creaking wheel; the cart lost its balance, and over
 Fell in the ditch. In the swing the people were flung to a distance,
 Far off into the field, with horrible screams; by good fortune
 Later the boxes were thrown and fell more near to the wagon.
 Verily all who had witnessed the fall, expected to see them
 Crushed into pieces beneath the weight of trunks and of presses.
 So lay the cart all broken to fragments, and helpless the people.
 Keeping their onward way, the others drove hastily by them,
 Each thinking only of self, and carried away by the current.
 Then we ran to the spot, and found the sick and the aged,--
 Those who at home and in bed could before their lingering ailments
 Scarcely endure,--lying bruised on the ground, complaining and groaning,
 Choked by the billowing dust, and scorched by the heat of the noonday."

 Thereupon answered and said the kind-hearted landlord, with feeling:
 "Would that our Hermann might meet them and give them refreshment and clothing!
 Loath should I be to behold them: the looking on suffering pains me.
 Touched by the earliest tidings of their so cruel afflictions,
 Hastily sent we a mite from out of our super-abundance,
 Only that some might be strengthened, and we might ourselves be made easy.
 But let us now no longer renew these sorrowful pictures
 Knowing how readily fear steals into the heart of us mortals,
 And anxiety, worse to me than the actual evil.
 Come with me into the room behind, our cool little parlor,
 Where no sunbeam e'er shines, and no sultry breath ever enters
 Through its thickness of wall. There mother will bring us a flagon
 Of our old eighty-three, with which we may banish our fancies.
 Here 'tis not cosey to drink: the flies so buzz round the glasses."
 Thither adjourned they then, and all rejoiced in the coolness.

 Carefully brought forth the mother the clear and glorious vintage,
 Cased in a well-polished flask, on a waiter of glittering pewter,
 Set round with large green glasses, the drinking cups meet for the Rhine Wine.
 So sat the three together about the highly waxed table,
 Gleaming and round and brown, that on mighty feet was supported,
 Joyously rang at once the glasses of landlord and pastor,
 But his motionless held the third, and sat lost in reflection,
 Until with words of good-humor the landlord challenged him, saying,--
 "Come, sir neighbor, empty your glass, for God in his mercy
 Thus far has kept us from evil, and so in the future will keep us.
 For who acknowledges not, that since our dread conflagration,
 When he so hardly chastised us, he now is continually blessing,
 Constantly shielding, as man the apple of his eye watches over,
 Holding it precious and dear above all the rest of his members?
 Shall he in time to come not defend us and furnish us succor?
 Only when danger is nigh do we see how great is his power.
 Shall he this blooming town which he once by industrious burghers
 Built up afresh from its ashes, and afterwards blessed with abundance,
 Now demolish again, and bring all the labor to nothing?"

 Cheerfully said in reply the excellent pastor, and kindly:
 "Keep thyself firm in the faith, and firm abide in this temper;
 For it makes steadfast and wise when fortune is fair, and when evil,
 Furnishes sweet consolation and animates hopes the sublimest."

 Then made answer the landlord, with thoughts judicious and manly:
 "Often the Rhine's broad stream have I with astonishment greeted,
 As I have neared it again, after travelling abroad upon business.
 Always majestic it seemed, and my mind and spirit exalted.
 But I could never imagine its beautiful banks would so shortly
 Be to a rampart transformed, to keep from our borders the Frenchman,
 And its wide-spreading bed be a moat all passage to hinder.
 See! thus nature protects, the stout-hearted Germans protect us,
 And thus protects us the Lord, who then will he weakly despondent?
 Weary already the combatants, all indications are peaceful.
 Would it might be that when that festival, ardently longed for,
 Shall in our church be observed, when the sacred Te Deum is rising,
 Swelled by the pealing of organ and bells, and the blaring of trumpets,--
 Would it might be that that day should behold my Hermann, sir pastor,
 Standing, his choice now made, with his bride before thee at the altar,
 Making that festal day, that through every land shall be honored,
 My anniversary, too, henceforth of domestic rejoicing!
 But I observe with regret, that the youth so efficient and active
 Ever in household affairs, when abroad is timid and backward.
 Little enjoyment he finds in going about among others;
 Nay, he will even avoid young ladies' society wholly;
 Shuns the enlivening dance which all young persons delight in."

 Thus he spoke and listened; for now was heard in the distance
 Clattering of horses' hoofs drawing near, and the roll of the wagon,
 Which, with furious haste, came thundering under the gateway.




TERPSICHORE

HERMANN

 Now when of comely mien the son came into the chamber,
 Turned with a searching look the eyes of the preacher upon him,
 And, with the gaze of the student, who easily fathoms expression,
 Scrutinized well his face and form and his general bearing.
 Then with a smile he spoke, and said in words of affection:
 "Truly a different being thou comest! I never have seen thee
 Cheerful as now, nor ever beheld I thy glances so beaming.
 Joyous thou comest, and happy: 'tis plain that among the poor people
 Thou hast been sharing thy gifts, and receiving their blessings upon thee."

 Quietly then, and with serious words, the son made him answer:
 "If I have acted as ye will commend, I know not; but I followed
 That which my heart bade me do, as I shall exactly relate you.
 Thou wert, mother, so long in rummaging 'mong thy old pieces,
 Picking and choosing, that not until late was thy bundle together;
 Then too the wine and the beer took care and time in the packing.
 When I came forth through the gateway at last, and out on the high-road,
 Backward the crowd of citizens streamed with women and children,
 Coming to meet me; for far was already the band of the exiles.
 Quicker I kept on my way, and drove with speed to the village,
 Where they were meaning to rest, as I heard, and tarry till morning.
 Thitherward up the new street as I hasted, a stout-timbered wagon,
 Drawn by two oxen, I saw, of that region the largest and strongest;
 While, with vigorous steps, a maiden was walking beside them,
 And, a long staff in her hand, the two powerful creatures was guiding,
 Urging them now, now holding them back; with skill did she drive them.
 Soon as the maiden perceived me, she calmly drew near to the horses,
 And in these words she addressed me: 'Not thus deplorable always
 Has our condition been, as to-day on this journey thou seest.
 I am not yet grown used to asking gifts of a stranger,
 Which he will often unwillingly give, to be rid of the beggar.
 But necessity drives me to speak; for here, on the straw, lies
 Newly delivered of child, a rich land-owner's wife, whom I scarcely
 Have in her pregnancy, safe brought off with the oxen and wagon.
 Naked, now in her arms the new-born infant is lying,
 And but little the help our friends will be able to furnish,
 If in the neighboring village, indeed, where to-day we would rest us,
 Still we shall find them; though much do I fear they already have passed it.
 Shouldst thou have linen to spare of any description, provided
 Thou of this neighborhood art, to the poor in charity give it.'

 "Thus she spoke, and the pale-faced mother raised herself feebly
 Up from the straw, and towards me looked. Then said I in answer:
 'Surely unto the good, a spirit from heaven oft speaketh,
 Making them feel the distress that threatens a suffering brother.
 For thou must know that my mother, already presaging thy sorrows,
 Gave me a bundle to use it straightway for the need of the naked,'
 Then I untied the knots of the string, and the wrapper of father's
 Unto her gave, and gave her as well the shirts and the linen.
 And she thanked me with joy, and cried: 'The happy believe not
 Miracles yet can be wrought: for only in need we acknowledge
 God's own hand and finger, that leads the good to show goodness,
 What unto us he has done through thee, may he do to thee also!
 And I beheld with what pleasure the sick woman handled the linens,
 But with especial delight the dressing-gown's delicate flannel.
 'Let us make haste,' the maid to her said, 'and come to the village,
 Where our people will halt for the night and already are resting.
 There these clothes for the children I, one and all, straightway will portion.'
 Then she saluted again, her thanks most warmly expressing,
 Started the oxen; the wagon went on; but there I still lingered,
 Still held the horses in check; for now my heart was divided
 Whether to drive with speed to the village, and there the provisions
 Share 'mong the rest of the people, or whether I here to the maiden
 All should deliver at once, for her discreetly to portion.
 And in an instant my heart had decided, and quietly driving
 After the maiden, I soon overtook her, and said to her quickly:
 'Hearken, good maiden;--my mother packed up not linen-stuffs only
 Into the carriage, that I should have clothes to furnish the naked;
 Wine and beer she added besides, and supply of provisions:
 Plenty of all these things I have in the box of the carriage.
 But now I feel myself moved to deliver these offerings also
 Into thy hand; for so shall I best fulfil my commission.
 Thou wilt divide them with judgment, while I must by chance be directed.'
 Thereupon answered the maiden: 'I will with faithfulness portion
 These thy gifts, that all shall bring comfort to those who are needy.'
 Thus she spoke, and quickly the box of the carriage I opened,
 Brought forth thence the substantial hams, and brought out the breadstuffs,
 Bottles of wine and beer, and one and all gave to the maiden.
 Willingly would I have given her more, but the carriage was empty.
 All she packed at the sick woman's feet, and went on her journey.
 I, with my horses and carriage, drove rapidly back to the city."

 Instantly now, when Hermann had ceased, the talkative neighbor
 Took up the word, and cried: "Oh happy, in days like the present,
 Days of flight and confusion, who lives by himself in his dwelling,
 Having no wife nor child to be clinging about him in terror!
 Happy I feel myself now, and would not for much be called father;
 Would not have wife and children to-day, for whom to be anxious.
 Oft have I thought of this flight before; and have packed up together
 All my best things already, the chains and old pieces of money
 That were my sainted mother's, of which not one has been sold yet.
 Much would be left behind, it is true, not easily gotten.
 Even the roots and the herbs, that were with such industry gathered,
 I should be sorry to lose, though the worth of the goods is but trifling.
 If my purveyor remained, I could go from my dwelling contented.
 When my cash I have brought away safe, and have rescued my person,
 All is safe: none find it so easy to fly as the single."

 "Neighbor," unto his words young Hermann with emphasis answered:
 "I can in no wise agree with thee here, and censure thy language.
 Is he indeed a man to be prized, who, in good and in evil,
 Takes no thought but for self, and gladness and sorrow with others
 Knows not how to divide, nor feels his heart so impel him?
 Rather than ever to-day would I make up my mind to be married:
 Many a worthy maiden is needing a husband's protection,
 And the man needs an inspiriting wife when ill is impending."

 Thereupon smiling the father replied: "Thus love I to hear thee!
 That is a sensible word such as rarely I've known thee to utter."
 Straightway, however, the mother broke in with quickness, exclaiming:
 "Son, to be sure, thou art right! we parents have set the example;
 Seeing that not in our season of joy did we choose one another;
 Rather the saddest of hours it was that bound us together.
 Monday morning--I mind it well; for the day that preceded
 Came that terrible fire by which our city was ravaged--
 Twenty years will have gone. The day was a Sunday as this is;
 Hot and dry was the season; the water was almost exhausted.
 All the people were strolling abroad in their holiday dresses,
 'Mong the villages partly, and part in the mills and the taverns.
 And at the end of the city the flames began, and went coursing
 Quickly along the streets, creating a draught in their passage.
 Burned were the barns where the copious harvest already was garnered;
 Burned were the streets as far as the market; the house of my father,
 Neighbor to this, was destroyed, and this one also fell with it.
 Little we managed to save. I sat, that sorrowful night through,
 Outside the town on the common, to guard the beds and the boxes.
 Sleep overtook me at last, and when I again was awakened,
 Feeling the chill of the morning that always descends before sunrise,
 There were the smoke and the glare, and the walls and chimneys in ruins.
 Then fell a weight on my heart; but more majestic than ever
 Came up the sun again, inspiring my bosom with courage.
 Then I rose hastily up, with a yearning the place to revisit
 Whereon our dwelling had stood, and to see if the hens had been rescued,
 Which I especially loved, for I still was a child in my feelings.
 Thus as I over the still-smoking timbers of house and of court-yard
 Picked my way, and beheld the dwelling so ruined and wasted,
 Thou camest up to examine the place, from the other direction.
 Under the ruins thy horse in his stall had been buried; the rubbish
 Lay on the spot and the glimmering beams; of the horse we saw nothing.
 Thoughtful and grieving we stood there thus, each facing the other,
 Now that the wall was fallen that once had divided our court-yards.
 Thereupon thou by the hand didst take me, and speak to me, saying,--
 'Lisa, how earnest thou hither? Go back! thy soles must be burning;
 Hot the rubbish is here: it scorches my boots, which are stronger.'
 And thou didst lift me up, and carry me out through thy court-yard.
 There was the door of the house left standing yet with its archway,
 Just as 'tis standing now, the one thing only remaining.
 Then thou didst set me down and kiss me; to that I objected;
 But thou didst answer and say with kindly significant language:
 'See! my house lies in ruins: remain here and help me rebuild it;
 So shall my help in return be given to building thy father's.'
 Yet did I not comprehend thee until thou sentest thy mother
 Unto my father, and quick were the happy espousals accomplished.
 E'en to this day I remember with joy those half-consumed timbers,
 And I can see once more the sun coming up in such splendor;
 For 'twas the day that gave me my husband; and, ere the first season
 Passed of that wild desolation, a son to my youth had been given.
 Therefore I praise thee, Hermann, that thou, with an honest assurance,
 Shouldst, in these sorrowful days, be thinking thyself of a maiden,
 And amid ruins and war shouldst thus have the courage to woo her."

 Straightway, then, and with warmth, the father replied to her, saying:
 "Worthy of praise is the feeling, and truthful also the story,
 Mother, that thou hast related; for so indeed everything happened.
 Better, however, is better. It is not the business of all men
 Thus their life and estate to begin from the very foundation:
 Every one needs not to worry himself as we and the rest did.
 Oh, how happy is he whose father and mother shall give him,
 Furnished and ready, a house which he can adorn with his increase.
 Every beginning is hard; but most the beginning a household.
 Many are human wants, and every thing daily grows dearer,
 So that a man must consider the means of increasing his earnings.
 This I hope therefore of thee, my Hermann, that into our dwelling
 Thou wilt be bringing ere long a bride who is handsomely dowered;
 For it is meet that a gallant young man have an opulent maiden.
 Great is the comfort of home whene'er, with the woman elected,
 Enter the useful presents, besides, in box and in basket.
 Not for this many a year in vain has the mother been busy
 Making her daughter's linens of strong and delicate texture;
 God-parents have not in vain been giving their vessels of silver,
 And the father laid by in his desk the rare pieces of money;
 For there a day will come when she, with her gifts and possessions,
 Shall that youth rejoice who has chosen her out of all others.
 Well do I know how good in a house is a woman's position,
 Who her own furniture round her knows, in kitchen and chamber;
 Who herself the bed and herself the table has covered.
 Only a well-dowered bride should I like to receive to my dwelling.
 She who is poor is sure, in the end, to be scorned by her husband;
 And will as servant be held, who as servant came in with her bundle.
 Men will remain unjust when the season of love is gone over.
 Yes, my Hermann, thy father's old age thou greatly canst gladden,
 If thou a daughter-in-law will speedily bring to my dwelling,
 Out of the neighborhood here,--from the house over yonder, the green one.
 Rich is the man, I can tell thee. His manufactures and traffic
 Daily are making him richer; for whence draws the merchant not profit?
 Three daughters only he has, to divide his fortune among them.
 True that the eldest already is taken; but there is the second
 Still to be had, as well as the third; and not long so, it may be.
 I would never have lingered till now, had I been in thy place;
 But had fetched one of the maidens, as once I bore off thy dear mother."
 Modestly then did the son to the urgent father answer;
 "Truly 'twas my wish too, as well as thine own, to have chosen
 One of our neighbor's daughters, for we had been brought up together;
 Played, in the early days, about the market-place fountain;
 And, from the other boys' rudeness, I often have been their defender.
 That, though, is long since past: the girls, as they grew to be older,
 Properly stayed in the house, and shunned the more boisterous pastimes.
 Well brought up are they, surely! I used sometimes to go over,
 Partly to gratify thee, and because of our former acquaintance:
 But no pleasure I ever could take in being among them;
 For I was always obliged to endure their censures upon me.
 Quite too long was my coat, the cloth too coarse, and the color
 Quite too common; my hair was not cropped, as it should be, and frizzled.
 I was resolved, at last, that I, also, would dress myself finely,
 Just as those office-boys do who always are seen there on Sundays,
 Wearing in summer their half-silken flaps, that dangled about them;
 But I discovered, betimes, they made ever a laughing-stock of me.
 And I was vexed when I saw it,--it wounded my pride; but more deeply
 Felt I aggrieved that they the good-will should so far misinterpret
 That in my heart I bore them,--especially Minna the youngest.
 It was on Easter-day that last I went over to see them;
 Wearing my best new coat, that is now hanging up in the closet,
 And having frizzled my hair, like that of the other young fellows.
 Soon as I entered, they tittered; but that not at me, as I fancied.
 Minna before the piano was seated; the father was present,
 Hearing his daughters sing, and full of delight and good-humor.
 Much I could not understand of all that was said in the singing;
 But of Pamina I often heard, and oft of Tamino:
 And I, besides, could not stay there dumb; so, as soon as she ended,
 Something about the words I asked, and about the two persons.
 Thereupon all were silent and smiled; but the father made answer:
 'Thou knowest no one, my friend, I believe, but Adam and Eve?'
 No one restrained himself longer, but loud laughed out then the maidens,
 Loud laughed out the boys, the old man held his sides for his laughing.
 I, in embarrassment, dropped my hat, and the giggling continued,
 On and on and on, for all they kept playing and singing.
 Back to the house here I hurried, o'ercome with shame and vexation,
 Hung up my coat in the closet, and pulled out the curls with my fingers,
 Swearing that never again my foot should cross over that threshold.
 And I was perfectly right; for vain are the maidens, and heartless.
 E'en to this day, as I hear, I am called by them ever 'Tamino.'"

 Thereupon answered the mother, and said: "Thou shouldest not, Hermann,
 Be so long vexed with the children: indeed, they are all of them children.
 Minna, believe me, is good, and was always disposed to thee kindly.
 'Twas not long since she was asking about thee. Let her be thy chosen!"

 Thoughtfully answered the son: "I know not. That mortification
 Stamped itself in me so deeply, I never could bear to behold her
 Seated before the piano or listen again to her singing."

 Forth broke the father then, and in words of anger made answer:
 "Little of joy will my life have in thee! I said it would be so
 When I perceived that thy pleasure was solely in horses and farming:
 Work which a servant, indeed, performs for an opulent master,
 That thou doest; the father meanwhile must his son be deprived of,
 Who should appear as his pride, in the sight of the rest of the townsmen.
 Early with empty hopes thy mother was wont to deceive me,
 When in the school thy studies, thy reading and writing, would never
 As with the others succeed, but thy seat would be always the lowest.
 That comes about, forsooth, when a youth has no feeling of honor
 Dwelling within his breast, nor the wish to raise himself higher.
 Had but my father so cared for me as thou hast been cared for;
 If he had sent me to school, and provided me thus with instructors,
 I should be other, I trow, than host of the Golden Lion!"

 Then the son rose from his seat and noiselessly moved to the doorway,
 Slowly, and speaking no word. The father, however; in passion
 After him called, "Yes, go, thou obstinate fellow! I know thee!
 Go and look after the business henceforth, that I have not to chide thee;
 But do thou nowise imagine that ever a peasant-born maiden
 Thou for a daughter-in-law shalt bring into my dwelling, the hussy!
 Long have I lived in the world, and know how mankind should be dealt with;
 Know how to entertain ladies and gentlemen so that contented
 They shall depart from my house, and strangers agreeably can flatter.
 Yet I'm resolved that some day I one will have for a daughter,
 Who shall requite me in kind and sweeten my manifold labors;
 Who the piano shall play to me, too; so that there shall with pleasure
 All the handsomest people in town and the finest assemble,
 As they on Sundays do now in the house of our neighbor." Here Hermann
 Softly pressed on the latch, and so went out from the chamber.




THALIA

THE CITIZENS

 Thus did the modest son slip away from the angry upbraiding;
 But in the tone he had taken at first, the father continued:
 "That comes not out of a man which he has not in him; and hardly
 Shall the joy ever be mine of seeing my dearest wish granted:
 That my son may not as his father be, but a better.
 What would become of the house, and what of the city if each one
 Were not with pleasure and always intent on maintaining, renewing,
 Yea, and improving, too, as time and the foreigner teach us!
 Man is not meant, forsooth, to grow from the ground like a mushroom,
 Quickly to perish away on the spot of ground that begot him,
 Leaving no trace behind of himself and his animate action!
 As by the house we straightway can tell the mind of the master,
 So, when we walk through a city, we judge of the persons who rule it.
 For where the towers and walls are falling to ruin; where offal
 Lies in heaps in the gutters, and alleys with offal are littered;
 Where from its place has started the stone, and no one resets it;
 Where the timbers are rotting away, and the house is awaiting
 Vainly its new supports,--that place we may know is ill governed.
 Since if not from above work order and cleanliness downward,
 Easily grows the citizen used to untidy postponement;
 Just as the beggar grows likewise used to his ragged apparel.
 Therefore I wished that our Hermann might early set out on some travels;
 That he at least might behold the cities of Strasburg and Frankfort,
 Friendly Mannheim, too, that is cheerful and evenly builded.
 He that has once beheld cities so cleanly and large, never after
 Ceases his own native city, though small it may be, to embellish.
 Do not the strangers who come here commend the repairs in our gateway,
 Notice our whitewashed tower, and the church we have newly rebuilded?
 Are not all praising our pavement? the covered canals full of water,
 Laid with a wise distribution, which furnish us profit and safety,
 So that no sooner does fire break out than 'tis promptly arrested?
 Has not all this come to pass since the time of our great conflagration?
 Builder I six times was named by the council, and won the approval,
 Won moreover the heartfelt thanks of all the good burghers,
 Actively carrying out what I planned, and also fulfilling
 What had by upright men been designed, and left uncompleted.
 Finally grew the same zeal in every one of the council;
 All now labor together, and firmly decided already
 Stands it to build the new causeway that shall with the highroad connect us.
 But I am sorely afraid that will not be the way with our children.
 Some think only of pleasure and perishable apparel;
 Others will cower at home, and behind the stove will sit brooding.
 One of this kind, as I fear, we shall find to the last in our Hermann."

 Straightway answered and said the good and intelligent mother:
 "Why wilt thou always, father, be doing our son such injustice?
 That least of all is the way to bring thy wish to fulfilment.
 We have no power to fashion our children as suiteth our fancy;
 As they are given by God, we so must have them and love them;
 Teach them as best we can, and let each of them follow his nature.
 One will have talents of one sort, and different talents another.
 Every one uses his own; in his own individual fashion,
 Each must be happy and good. I will not have my Hermann found fault with;
 For he is worthy, I know, of the goods he shall one day inherit;
 Will be an excellent landlord, a pattern to burghers and builders;
 Neither in council, as I can foresee, will he be the most backward.
 But thou keepest shut up in his breast all the poor fellow's spirit,
 Finding such fault with him daily, and censuring as thou but now hast."
 And on the instant she quitted the room, and after him hurried,
 Hoping she somewhere might find him, and might with her words of affection
 Cheer him again, her excellent son, for well he deserved it.

 Thereupon when she was gone, the father thus smiling continued:
 "What a strange folk, to be sure, are these women; and just like the children;
 Both of them bent upon living according as suiteth their pleasure,
 While we others must never do aught but flatter and praise them.
 Once for all time holds good the ancients' trustworthy proverb:
 'Whoever goes not forward comes backward.' So must it be always."

 Thereupon answered and said, in a tone of reflection, the doctor:
 "That, sir neighbor, I willingly grant; for myself I am always
 Casting about for improvement,--things new, so they be not too costly.
 But what profits a man, who has not abundance of money,
 Being thus active and stirring, and bettering inside and outside?
 Only too much is the citizen cramped: the good, though he know it,
 Has he no means to acquire because too slender his purse is,
 While his needs are too great; and thus is he constantly hampered.
 Many the things I had done; but then the cost of such changes
 Who does not fear, especially now in this season of danger?
 Long since my house was smiling upon me in modish apparel!
 Long since great panes of glass were gleaming in all of the windows!
 But who can do as the merchant does, who, with his resources,
 Knows the methods as well by which the best is arrived at?
 Look at that house over yonder,--the new one; behold with what splendor
 'Gainst the background of green stand out the white spirals of stucco!
 Great are the panes in the windows; and how the glass sparkles and glitters,
 Casting quite into the shade the rest of the market-place houses!
 Yet just after the fire were our two houses the finest,
 This of the Golden Lion, and mine of the sign of the Angel.
 So was my garden, too, throughout the whole neighborhood famous:
 Every traveller stopped and gazed through the red palisadoes,
 Caught by the beggars there carved in stone and the dwarfs of bright colors.
 Then whosoever had coffee served in the beautiful grotto,--
 Standing there now all covered with dust and Partly in ruins,--
 Used to be mightily pleased with the glimmering light of the mussels
 Spread out in beautiful order; and even the eye of the critic
 Used by the sight of my corals and potter's ore to be dazzled.
 So in my parlor, too, they would always admire the painting,
 Where in a garden are gaily dressed ladies and gentlemen walking,
 And with their taper fingers are plucking and holding the flowers.
 But who would look at it now! In sooth, so great my vexation
 Scarcely I venture abroad. All now must be other and tasteful,
 So they call it; and white are the laths and benches of wood-work;
 Everything simple and smooth; no carving longer or gilding
 Can be endured, and the woods from abroad are of all the most costly.
 Well, I too should be glad could I get for myself something novel;
 Glad to keep up with the times, and be changing my furniture often;
 Yet must we all be afraid of touching the veriest trifle.
 For who among us has means for paying the work-people's wages
 Lately I had an idea of giving the Archangel Michael,
 Making the sign of my shop, another fresh coating of gilding,
 And to the terrible dragon about his feet that is winding;
 But I e'en let him stay browned as he is: I dreaded the charges."




EUTERPE

MOTHER AND SON

 Thus entertaining themselves, the men sat talking. The mother
 Went meanwhile to look for her son in front of the dwelling,
 First on the settle of stone, whereon 'twas his wont to be seated.
 When she perceived him not there, she went farther to look in the stable,
 If he were caring perhaps for his noble horses, the stallions,
 Which he as colts had bought, and whose care he intrusted to no one.
 And by the servant she there was told: He is gone to the garden.
 Then with a nimble step she traversed the long, double courtyards,
 Leaving the stables behind, and the well-builded barns, too, behind her;
 Entered the garden, that far as the walls of the city extended;
 Walked through its length, rejoiced as she went in every thing growing;
 Set upright the supports on which were resting the branches
 Heavily laden with apples, and burdening boughs of the pear-tree.
 Next some caterpillars removed from a stout, swelling cabbage;
 For an industrious woman allows no step to be wasted.
 Thus was she come at last to the end of the far-reaching garden,
 Where stood the arbor embowered in woodbine; nor there did she find him,
 More than she had hitherto in all her search through the garden.
 But the wicket was standing ajar, which out of the arbor,
 Once by particular favor, had been through the walls of the city
 Cut by a grandsire of hers, the worshipful burgomaster.
 So the now dried-up moat she next crossed over with comfort,
 Where, by the side of the road, direct the well-fenced vineyard,
 Rose with a steep ascent, its slope exposed to the sunshine.
 Up this also she went, and with pleasure as she was ascending
 Marked the wealth of the clusters, that scarce by their leafage were hidden.
 Shady and covered the way through the lofty middlemost alley,
 Which upon steps that were made of unhewn blocks you ascended.
 There were the Muscatel, and there were the Chasselas hanging
 Side by side, of unusual size and colored with purple,
 All set out with the purpose of decking the visitor's table;
 While with single vine-stocks the rest of the hillside was covered,
 Bearing inferior clusters, from which the delicate wine comes.
 Thus up the slope she went, enjoying already the vintage,
 And that festive day on which the whole country, rejoicing,
 Picks and tramples the grapes, and gathers the must into vessels:
 Fireworks, when it is evening, from every direction and corner
 Crackle and blaze, and so the fairest of harvests is honored.
 But more uneasy she went, her son after twice or thrice calling,
 And no answer receiving, except from the talkative echo,
 That with many repeats rang back from the towers of the city.

 Strange it was for her to seek him; he never had gone to a distance
 That he told her not first, to spare his affectionate mother
 Every anxious thought, and fear that aught ill had befallen.
 Still did she constantly hope that, if further she went, she should find him;
 For the two doors of the vineyard, the lower as well as the upper,
 Both were alike standing open. So now she entered the cornfield,
 That with its broad expanse the ridge of the hill covered over.
 Still was the ground that she walked on her own; and the crops she rejoiced in,--
 All of them still were hers, and hers was the proud-waving grain, too,
 Over the whole broad field in golden strength that was stirring.
 Keeping the ridgeway, the footpath, between the fields she went onward,
 Having the lofty pear-tree in view, which stood on the summit,
 And was the boundary-mark of the fields that belonged to her dwelling.
 Who might have planted it, none could know, but visible was it
 Far and wide through the country; the fruit of the pear-tree was famous.
 'Neath it the reapers were wont to enjoy their meal at the noon-day,
 And the shepherds were used to tend their flocks in its shadow.
 Benches of unhewn stones and of turf they found set about it.
 And she had not been mistaken, for there sat her Hermann, and rested,--
 Sat with his head on his hand, and seemed to be viewing the landscape
 That to the mountains lay: his back was turned to his mother.
 Towards him softly she crept, and lightly touched on the shoulder;
 Quick he turned himself round: there were tears in his eyes as he met her.

 "Mother, how hast thou surprised me!" he said in confusion; and quickly
 Wiped the high-spirited youth his tears away. But the mother,
 "What! do I find thee weeping, my son?" exclaimed in amazement.
 "Nay, that is not like thyself: I never before have so seen thee!
 Tell me, what burdens thy heart? what drives thee here, to be sitting
 Under the pear-tree alone? These tears in thine eyes, what has brought them?"

 Then, collecting himself, the excellent youth made her answer:
 "Truly no heart can that man have in his bosom of iron,
 Who is insensible now to the needs of this emigrant people;
 He has no brains in his head, who not for his personal safety,
 Not for his fatherland's weal, in days like the present is anxious.
 Deeply my heart had been touched by the sights and sounds of the morning;
 Then I went forth and beheld the broad and glorious landscape
 Spreading its fertile slopes in every direction about us,
 Saw the golden grain inclining itself to the reapers,
 And the promise of well-filled barns from the plentiful harvest.
 But, alas, how near is the foe! The Rhine with its waters
 Guards us, indeed; but, ah, what now are rivers and mountains
 'Gainst that terrible people that onward bears like a tempest!
 For they summon their youths from every quarter together,
 Call up their old men too, and press with violence forward.
 Death cannot frighten the crowd: one multitude follows another.
 And shall a German dare to linger behind in his homestead?
 Hopes he perhaps to escape the everywhere threatening evil?
 Nay, dear mother, I tell thee, to-day has made me regretful
 That I was lately exempt, when out of our townsmen were chosen
 Those who should serve in the army. An only son I am truly,
 Also our business is great, and the charge of our household is weighty.
 Yet were it better, I deem, in the front to offer resistance
 There on the border, than here to await disaster and bondage.
 So has my spirit declared, and deep in my innermost bosom
 Courage and longing have now been aroused to live for my country,
 Yea, and to die, presenting to others a worthy example.
 If but the strength of Germany's youth were banded together
 There on the frontier, resolved that it never would yield to the stranger,
 Ah, he should not on our glorious soil be setting his foot-steps,
 Neither consuming before our eyes the fruit of our labor,
 Ruling our men, and making his prey of our wives and our daughters.
 Hark to me, mother: for I in the depths of my heart am determined
 Quickly to do, and at once, what appears to me right and in reason;
 For he chooses not always the best who longest considers.
 Hearken, I shall not again return to the house; but directly
 Go from this spot to the city, and there present to the soldiers
 This right arm and this heart, to be spent in the fatherland's service.
 Then let my father say if there be no feeling of honor
 Dwelling within my breast, nor a wish to raise myself higher."
 Then with significant words spoke the good and intelligent mother,
 While from her eyes the quick-starting tears were silently falling:
 "Son, what change has come o'er thee to-day, and over thy temper,
 That thou speakest no more, as thou yesterday didst, and hast always,
 Open and free, to thy mother, and tellest exactly thy wishes?
 Any one else, had he heard thee thus speak, would in sooth have commended,
 And this decision of thine would have highly approved as most noble,
 Being misled by thy tone and by thy significant language.
 Yet have I nothing but censure to speak; for better I know thee.
 Thou concealest thy heart, and thy thoughts are not such as thou tellest.
 Well do I know that it is not the drum, not the trumpet that calls thee:
 Neither in uniform wouldst thou figure in sight of the maidens;
 Since, for all thou art honest and brave, it is thy vocation
 Here in quiet to care for the farm and provide for the household.
 Tell me honestly, therefore, what goads thee to such a decision?"

 Earnestly answered the son: "Nay, thou art mistaken, dear mother:
 One day is not like another. The youth matures into manhood:
 Better in stillness oft ripening to deeds than when in the tumult
 Wildering and wild of existence, that many a youth has corrupted.
 And, for as still as I am and was always, there yet in my bosom
 Has such a heart been shaped as abhors all wrong and injustice;
 And I have learned aright between worldly things to distinguish.
 Arm and foot, besides, have been mightily strengthened by labor.
 All this, I feel, is true: I dare with boldness maintain it.
 Yet dost thou blame me with reason, O mother! for thou hast surprised me
 Using a language half truthful and half that of dissimulation.
 For, let me honestly own,--it is not the near danger that calls me
 Forth from my father's house; nor is it the lofty ambition
 Helpful to be to my country, and terrible unto the foeman.
 They were but words that I spoke: they only were meant for concealing
 Those emotions from thee with which my heart is distracted;
 And so leave me, O mother! for, since the wishes are fruitless
 Which in my bosom I cherish, my life must go fruitlessly over.
 For, as I know, he injures himself who is singly devoted,
 When for the common cause the whole are not working together."

 "Hesitate not," replied thereupon the intelligent mother,
 "Every thing to relate me, the smallest as well as the greatest.
 Men will always be hasty, their thoughts to extremes ever running:
 Easily out of their course the hasty are turned by a hindrance.
 Whereas a woman is clever in thinking of means, and will venture
 E'en on a roundabout way, adroitly to compass her object.
 Let me know every thing, then; say wherefore so greatly excited
 'As I ne'er saw thee before, why thy blood is coursing so hotly,
 Wherefore, against thy will, tears are filling thine eyes to o'erflowing."

 Then he abandoned himself, the poor boy, to his sorrow, and weeping,
 Weeping aloud on his kind mother's breast, he brokenly answered:
 "Truly my father's words to-day have wounded me sorely,--
 Words which I have not deserved; not to-day, nor at any time have I:
 For it was early my greatest delight to honor my parents.
 No one knew more, so I deemed, or was wiser than those who begot me,
 And had with strictness ruled throughout the dark season of childhood.
 Many the things, in truth, I with patience endured from my playmates,
 When the good-will that I bore them they often requited with malice.
 Often I suffered their flings and their blows to pass unresented;
 But if they ventured to ridicule father, when he of a Sunday
 Home from Church would come, with his solemn and dignified bearing;
 If they made fun of his cap-string, or laughed at the flowers of the wrapper
 He with such stateliness wore, which was given away but this morning,--
 Threateningly doubled my fist in an instant; with furious passion
 Fell I upon them, and struck out and hit, assailing them blindly,
 Seeing not where. They howled as the blood gushed out from their noses:
 Scarcely they made their escape from my passionate kicking and beating.
 Then, as I older grew, I had much to endure from my father;
 Violent words he oft vented on me, instead of on others,
 When, at the board's last session, the council had roused his displeasure,
 And I was made to atone for the quarrels and wiles of his colleagues.
 Thou has pitied me often thyself; for much did I suffer,
 Ever remembering with cordial respect the kindness of parents,
 Solely intent on increasing for us their goods and possessions,
 Much denying themselves in order to save for their children.
 But, alas! saving alone, for the sake of a tardy enjoyment,--
 That is not happiness: pile upon pile, and acre on acre,
 Make us not happy, no matter how fair our estates may be rounded.
 For the father grows old, and with him will grow old the children,
 Losing the joy of the day, and bearing the care of tomorrow.
 Look thou below, and see how before us in glory are lying,
 Fair and abundant, the corn-fields; beneath them, the vineyard and garden;
 Yonder the stables and barns; our beautiful line of possessions.
 But when I look at the dwelling behind, where up in the gable
 We can distinguish the window that marks my room in the attic;
 When I look back, and remember how many a night from that window
 I for the moon have watched; for the sun, how many a morning!
 When the healthful sleep of a few short hours sufficed me,--
 Ah, so lonely they seem to me then, the chamber and courtyard,
 Garden and glorious field, away o'er the hill that is stretching;
 All so desert before me lie: 'tis the wife that is wanting."

 Thereupon spoke the good mother, and thus with intelligence answered:
 "Son, not greater thy wish to bring thee a bride to thy chamber,
 That thou mayst find thy nights a beautiful part of existence,
 And that the work of the day may gain independence and freedom,
 Than is thy father's wish too, and thy mother's. We always have counselled,--
 Yea, we have even insisted,--that thou shouldst select thee a maiden.
 But I was ever aware, and now my heart gives me assurance,
 That till the hour appointed is come, and the maiden appointed
 Shall with the hour appear, the choice will be left for the future,
 While more strong than all else will be fear of grasping the wrong one.
 If I may say it, my son, I believe thou already hast chosen;
 For thy heart has been touched, and been made more than wontedly tender.
 Speak it out honestly, then; for my soul has told me beforehand:
 That same maiden it is, the exile, whom thou hast elected."

 "Thou has said, mother!" the son thereupon with eagerness answered.
 "Yes, it is she; and if I to-day as my bride do not bring her
 Home to our dwelling, she from me will go, perhaps vanish for ever,
 Lost in the war's confusion and sad movings hither and thither.
 Mother, for ever in vain would then our abundant possessions
 Prosper before me, and seasons to come be in vain to me fruitful.
 Yea, I should hold in aversion the wonted house and the garden:
 Even my mother's love, alas! would not comfort my sorrow.
 Every tie, so I feel in my heart, by love is unloosened
 Soon as she fastens her own; and not the maid is it only
 Leaves behind father and mother, to follow the man she has chosen.
 He too, the youth, no longer knows aught of mother and father,
 When he the maiden, his only beloved, sees vanishing from him.
 Suffer me, then, to go hence wherever despair shall impel me:
 Since by my father himself the decisive words have been spoken;
 Since his house can no longer be mine if he shut out the maiden,
 Her whom alone as my bride I desire to bring to our dwelling."

 Thereupon quickly made answer the good and intelligent mother:
 "How like to rocks, forsooth, two men will stand facing each other!
 Proud and not to be moved, will neither draw near to his fellow;
 Neither will stir his tongue to utter the first word of kindness.
 Therefore I tell thee, my son, a hope yet lives in my bosom,
 So she be honest and good, thy father will let thee espouse her,
 Even though poor, and against a poor girl so decisive his sentence.
 Many a thing he is wont to speak out in his violent fashion
 Which he yet never performs; and so what he denies will consent to.
 Yet he requires a kindly word, and is right to require it: He is the father!
 Besides we know that his wrath after dinner,--
 When he most hastily speaks, and questions all others' opinions,--
 Signifies naught; the full force of his violent will is excited
 Then by the wine, which lets him not heed the language of others;
 None but himself does he see and feel. But now is come evening,
 Talk upon various subjects has passed between him and his neighbors.
 Gentle, he is; I am sure now his little excitement is over,
 And he can feel how unjust his passion has made him to others.
 Come, let us venture at once: success is alone to the valiant!
 Further we need the friends, still sitting together there with him;
 And in especial the worthy pastor will give us assistance."

 Thus she hastily spoke, and up from the stone then arising,
 Drew from his seat her son, who willingly followed. In silence
 Both descended the hill, their important purpose revolving.




POLYHYMNIA

THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD

 HERE the three men, however, still sat conversing together,
 With mine host of the Lion, the village doctor, and pastor;
 And their talk was still on the same unvarying subject,
 Turning it this way and that, and viewing from every direction.
 But with his sober judgment the excellent pastor made answer:
 "Here will I not contradict you. I know that man should be always
 Striving for that which is better; indeed, as we see, he is reaching
 Always after the higher, at least some novelty craving.
 But be careful ye go not too far, for with this disposition
 Nature has given us pleasure in holding to what is familiar;
 Taught us in that to delight to which we have long been accustomed.
 Every condition is good that is founded on reason and nature.
 Many are man's desires, yet little it is that he needeth;
 Seeing the days are short and mortal destiny bounded.
 Ne'er would I censure the man whom a restless activity urges,
 Bold and industrious, over all pathways of land and of ocean,
 Ever untiring to roam; who takes delight in the riches,
 Heaping in generous abundance about himself and his children.
 Yet not unprized by me is the quiet citizen also,
 Making the noiseless round of his own inherited acres,
 Tilling the ground as the ever-returning seasons command him.
 Not with every year is the soil transfigured about him;
 Not in haste does the tree stretch forth, as soon as 'tis planted,
 Full-grown arms towards heaven and decked with plenteous blossoms.
 No: man has need of patience, and needful to him are also
 Calmness and clearness of mind, and a pure and right understanding.
 Few are the seeds he intrusts to earth's all-nourishing bosom;
 Few are the creatures he knows how to raise and bring to perfection.
 Centred are all his thoughts alone on that which is useful.
 Happy to whom by nature a mind of such temper is given,
 For he supports us all! And hail, to the man whose abode is
 Where in a town the country pursuits with the city are blended.
 On him lies not the pressure that painfully hampers the farmer,
 Nor is he carried away by the greedy ambition of cities;
 Where they of scanty possessions too often are given to aping,
 Wives and daughters especially, those who are higher and richer.
 Blessed be therefore thy son in his life of quiet employment;
 Blessed the wife, of like mind with himself, whom he one day shall choose him."

 Thus he spoke; and scarce had he ended when entered the mother,
 Holding her son by the hand, and so led him up to her husband.
 "Father," she said, "how oft when we two have been chatting together,
 Have we rejoiced in the thought of Hermann's future espousal,
 When he should bring his bride to be the light of our dwelling!
 Over and over again the matter we pondered: this maiden
 Fixing upon for him first, and then that, with the gossip of parents.
 But that day is now come; and Heaven at last has the maiden
 Brought to him hither, and shown him; and now his heart has decided.
 Said we not always then he should have his own choice in the matter?
 Was it not just now thy wish that he might with lively affection
 Feel himself drawn to some maiden? The hour is come that we hoped for.
 Yes; he has felt and has chosen and come to a manly decision.
 That same maiden it is that met him this morning, the stranger:
 Say he may have her, or else, as he swears, his life shall be single."

 "Give her me, father," so added the son: "my heart has elected
 Clear and sure; she will be to you both the noblest of daughters."

 But the father was silent. Then hastily rose the good pastor,
 Took up the word and said: "The moment alone is decisive;
 Fixes the life of man, and his future destiny settles.
 After long taking of counsel, yet only the work of a moment
 Every decision must be; and the wise alone seizes the right one.
 Dangerous always it is comparing the one with the other
 When we are making our choice, and so confusing our feelings.
 Hermann is pure. From childhood up I have known him, and never
 E'en as a boy was he wont to be reaching for this and the other:
 What he desired was best for him too, and he held to it firmly.
 Be not surprised and alarmed that now has appeared of a sudden,
 What thou hast wished for so long. It is true that the present appearance
 Bears not the form of the wish, exactly as thou hadst conceived it:
 For our wishes oft hide from ourselves the object we wish for;
 Gifts come down from above in the shapes appointed by Heaven.
 Therefore misjudge not the maiden who now of thy dearly beloved,
 Good and intelligent son has been first to touch the affections:
 Happy to whom at once his first love's hand shall be given,
 And in whose heart no tenderest wish must secretly languish.
 Yes: his whole bearing assures me that now his fate is decided.
 Genuine love matures in a moment the youth into manhood;
 He is not easily moved; and I fear that if this be refused him,
 Sadly his years will go by, those years that should be the fairest,"

 Straightway then in a thoughtful tone the doctor made answer,
 On whose tongue for a long time past the words had been trembling:
 "Pray let us here as before pursue the safe middle course only.
 Make haste slowly: that was Augustus the emperor's motto.
 Willingly I myself place at my well-beloved neighbor's disposal,
 Ready to do him what service I can with my poor understanding.
 Youth most especially stands in need of some one to guide it.
 Let me therefore go forth that I may examine the maiden,
 And may question the people among whom she lives and who know her.
 Me 'tis not easy to cheat: I know how words should be valued."

 Straightway the son broke in, and with wing'ed words made he answer:
 "Do so, neighbor, and go and make thine inquiries; but with thee
 I should be glad if our minister here were joined in the errand:
 Two such excellent men would be irreproachable judges.
 O my father! believe me, she's none of those wandering maidens,
 Not one of those who stroll through the land in search of adventure,
 And who seek to ensnare inexperienced youth in their meshes.
 No: the hard fortunes of war, that universal destroyer,
 Which is convulsing the earth and has hurled from its deep foundations
 Many a structure already, have sent the poor girl into exile.
 Are not now men of high birth, the most noble, in misery roaming?
 Princes fly in disguise and kings are in banishment living.
 So alas! also is she, the best among all of her sisters,
 Driven an exile from home; yet, her personal sorrows forgetting,
 She is devoted to others; herself without help, she is helpful.
 Great is the want and the suffering over the earth that are spreading:
 Shall not some happiness, too, be begotten of all this affliction,
 And shall not I in the arms of my wife, my trusted companion,
 Look back with joy to the war, as do ye to the great conflagration?"

 Outspoke the father then in a tone of decision, and answered:
 "Strangely thy tongue has been loosened, my son, which many a year past
 Seemed to have stuck in thy mouth, and only to move on compulsion!
 I must experience to-day, it would seem, what threatens all fathers,
 That the son's headstrong will the mother with readiness favors,
 Showing too easy indulgence; and every neighbor sides with them
 When there is aught to be carried against the father and husband.
 But I will not oppose you, thus banded together: how could I?
 For I already perceive here tears and defiance beforehand.
 Go ye therefore, inquire, in God's name, bring me the daughter.
 But if not so, then the boy is to think no more of the maiden."

 Thus the father. The son cried out with joyful demeanor,
 "Ere it is evening the noblest of daughters shall hither be brought you,
 Such as no man with sound sense in his breast can fail to be pleased with.
 Happy, I venture to hope, will be also the excellent maiden.
 Yes; she will ever be grateful for having had father and mother
 Given once more in you, and such as a child most delights in.
 Now I will tarry no longer, but straightway harness the horses,
 Drive forth our friends at once on the footsteps of my beloved,
 Leaving them then to act for themselves, as their wisdom shall dictate,
 Guide myself wholly, I promise, according to what they determine,
 And, until I may call her my own, ne'er look on the maiden."
 Thus he went forth: the others meanwhile remained in discussion,
 Rapid and earnest, considering deeply their great undertaking.

 Hermann hasted straightway to the stable, where quietly standing
 Found he the spirited stallions, the clean oats quickly devouring,
 And the well-dried hay that was cut from the richest of meadows.
 On them without delay the shining bits he adjusted,
 Hastily drew the straps through the buckles of beautiful plating,
 Firmly fastened then the long broad reins, and the horses
 Led without to the court-yard, whither the willing assistant
 Had with ease, by the pole, already drawn forward the carriage.
 Next to the whipple-tree they with care by the neatly kept traces
 Joined the impetuous strength of the freely travelling horses.
 Whip in hand took Hermann his seat and drove under the doorway.
 Soon as the friends straightway their commodious places had taken,
 Quickly the carriage rolled off, and left the pavement behind it,
 Left behind it the walls of the town and the fresh-whitened towers.
 Thus drove Hermann on till he came to the well-known causeway.
 Rapidly, loitering nowhere, but hastening up hill and down hill.
 But as he now before him perceived the spire of the village,
 And no longer remote the garden-girt houses were lying,
 Then in himself he thought that here he would rein up the horses.

 Under the solemn shade of lofty linden-trees lying,
 Which for centuries past upon this spot had been rooted,
 Spread in front of the village a broad and grass-covered common,
 Favorite place of resort for the peasants and neighboring townsfolk.
 Here, at the foot of the trees, sunk deep in the ground was a well-spring;
 When you descended the steps, stone benches you found at the bottom,
 Stationed about the spring, whose pure, living waters were bubbling
 Ceaselessly forth, hemmed in by low walls for convenience of drawing.
 Hermann resolved that here he would halt, with his horses and carriage,
 Under the shade of the trees. He did so, and said to the others;
 "Here alight, my friends, and go your ways to discover
 Whether the maiden in truth be worthy the hand that I offer.
 That, she is so, I believe; naught new or strange will ye tell me.
 Had I to act for myself, I should go with speed to the village,
 Where a few words from the maiden's own lips should determine my fortune.
 Ye will with readiness single her out from all of the others,
 For there can scarcely be one that to her may be likened in bearing.
 But I will give you, besides, her modest attire for a token:
 Mark, then, the stomacher's scarlet, that sets off the arch of her bosom,
 Prettily laced, and the bodice of black fitting close to her figure;
 Neatly the edge of her kerchief is plaited into a ruffle,
 Which with a simple grace her chin's rounded outline encircles;
 Freely and lightly rises above it the head's dainty oval;
 And her luxuriant hair over silver bodkins is braided;
 Down from under her bodice, the full, blue petticoat falling,
 Wraps itself, when she is walking, about her neatly shaped ankles.
 Yet one thing will I say, and would make it my earnest petition,--
 Speak not yourselves with the maiden, nor let your intent be discovered;
 Rather inquire of others, and hearken to what they may tell you.
 When ye have tidings enough to satisfy father and mother,
 Then return to me here, and we will consider what further.
 So did I plan it all out in my mind while driving you hither."

 Thus he spoke. The friends thereupon went their way to the village,
 Where, in the houses and gardens and barns, the people were swarming;
 Wagons on wagons stood crowded together along the broad highway.
 Men for the harnessed horses and lowing cattle were caring,
 While the women were busy in drying their clothes on the hedges,
 And in the running brook the children were merrily splashing.
 Making their way through the pressure of wagons, of people and cattle,
 Went the commissioned spies, and to right and to left looked about them,
 If they a figure might see that answered the maiden's description;
 But not one of them all appeared the beautiful damsel.
 Denser soon grew the press. A contest arose round the wagons
 'Mongst the threatening men, wherein blended the cries of the women.
 Rapidly then to the spot, and with dignified step, came an elder,
 Joined the clamoring group, and straightway the uproar was silenced,
 As he commanded peace, and rebuked with a fatherly sternness.
 "Has, then, misfortune," he cried, "not yet so bound us together,
 That we have finally learned to bear and forbear one another,
 Though each one, it may be, do not measure his share of the labor?
 He that is happy, forsooth, is contentious! Will sufferings never
 Teach you to cease from your brawls of old between brother and brother?
 Grudge not one to another a place on the soil of the stranger;
 Rather divide what ye have, as yourselves, ye would hope to find mercy."

 Thus spoke the man and all became silent: restored to good humor,
 Peaceably then the people arranged their cattle and wagons.
 But when the clergyman now had heard what was said by the stranger,
 And had the steadfast mind of the foreign justice discovered,
 He to the man drew near and with words of meaning addressed him:
 "True it is, father, that when in prosperity people are living,
 Feeding themselves from the earth, which far and wide opens her bosom,
 And in the years and months renews the coveted blessings,--
 All goes on of itself, and each himself deems the wisest,
 Deems the best, and so they continue abiding together,
 He of greatest intelligence ranking no higher than others;
 All that occurs, as if of itself, going quietly forward.
 But let disaster unsettle the usual course of existence,
 Tear down the buildings about us, lay waste the crops and the garden,
 Banish the husband and wife from their old, familiar-grown dwelling,
 Drive them to wander abroad through nights and days of privation,--
 Then, ah then! we look round us to see what man is the wisest,
 And no longer in vain his glorious words will be spoken.
 Tell me, art thou not judge among this fugitive people,
 Father, who thus in an instant canst bid their passions be quiet?
 Thou dost appear to-day as one of those earliest leaders,
 Who through deserts and wanderings guided the emigrant nations.
 Yea, I could even believe I were speaking with Joshua or Moses."

 Then with serious look the magistrate answered him, saying:
 "Truly our times might well be compared with all others in strangeness,
 Which are in history mentioned, profane or sacred tradition;
 For who has yesterday lived and to-day in times like the present,
 He has already lived years, events are so crowded together.
 If I look back but a little, it seems that my head must be hoary
 Under the burden of years, and yet my strength is still active.
 Well may we of this day compare ourselves unto that people
 Who, from the burning bush, beheld in the hour of their danger
 God the Lord: we also in cloud and in fire have beheld him."

 Seeing the priest was inclined to speak yet more with the stranger,
 And was desirous of learning his story and that of his people,
 Privately into his ear his companion hastily whispered:
 "Talk with the magistrate further, and lead him to speak of the maiden.
 I, however, will wander in search, and as soon as I find her,
 Come and report to thee here." The minister nodded, assenting;
 And through the gardens, hedges, and barns, went the spy on his errand.




CLIO

THE AGE

 Now when the foreign judge had been by the minister questioned
 As to his people's distress, and how long their exile had lasted,
 Thus made answer the man: "Of no recent date are our sorrows;
 Since of the gathering bitter of years our people have drunken,--
 Bitterness all the more dreadful because such fair hope had been blighted.
 Who will pretend to deny that his heart swelled high in his bosom,
 And that his freer breast with purer pulses was beating;
 When we beheld the new sun arise in his earliest splendor,
 When of the rights of men we heard, which to all should be common,
 Were of a righteous equality told, and inspiriting freedom?
 Every one hoped that then he should live his own life, and the fetters,
 Binding the various lands, appeared their hold to be loosing,--
 Fetters that had in the hand of sloth been held and self-seeking.
 Looked not the eyes of all nations, throughout that calamitous season,
 Towards the world's capital city, for so it had long been considered,
 And of that glorious title was now, more than ever, deserving?

 "Were not the names of those men who first delivered the message,
 Names to compare with the highest that under the heavens are spoken?
 Did not, in every man, grow courage and spirit and language?
 And, as neighbors, we, first of all, were zealously kindled.
 Thereupon followed the war, and armed bodies of Frenchmen
 Pressed to us nearer; yet nothing but friendship they seemed to be bringing;
 Ay, and they brought it too; for exalted the spirit within them:
 They with rejoicing the festive trees of liberty planted,
 Promising every man what was his own, and to each his own ruling.
 High beat the heart of the youths, and even the aged were joyful;
 Gaily the dance began about the newly raised standard.
 Thus had they speedily won, these overmastering Frenchmen,
 First the spirits of men by the fire and dash of their bearing,
 Then the hearts of the women with irresistible graces.
 Even the pressure of hungry war seemed to weigh on us lightly,
 So before our vision did hope hang over the future,
 Luring our eyes abroad into newly opening pathways.
 Oh, how joyful the time when with her belov'ed the maiden
 Whirls in the dance, the longed-for day of their union awaiting!
 But more glorious that day on which to our vision the highest
 Heart of man can conceive seemed near and attainable to us.
 Loosened was every tongue, and men--the aged, the stripling--
 Spoke aloud in words that were full of high feeling and wisdom.
 Soon, however, the sky was o'ercast. A corrupt generation
 Fought for the right of dominion, unworthy the good to establish;
 So that they slew one another, their new-made neighbors and brothers
 Held in subjection, and then sent the self-seeking masses against us.
 Chiefs committed excesses and wholesale plunder upon us,
 While those lower plundered and rioted down to the lowest:
 Every one seemed but to care that something be left for the morrow.
 Great past endurance the need, and daily grew the oppression:
 They were the lords of the day; there was none to hear our complaining.
 Then fell trouble and rage upon even the quietest spirit.
 One thought only had all, and swore for their wrongs to have vengeance,
 And for the bitter loss of their hope thus doubly deluded.
 Presently Fortune turned and declared on the side of the German,
 And with hurried marches the French retreated before us.
 Ah! then as never before did we feel the sad fortunes of warfare:
 He that is victor is great and good,--or at least he appears SO,--
 And he, as one of his own, will spare the man he has conquered,
 Him whose service he daily needs, and whose property uses.
 But no law the fugitive knows, save of self-preservation,
 And, with a reckless greed, consumes all the possessions about him;
 Then are his passions also inflamed: the despair that is in him
 Out of his heart breaks forth, and takes shape in criminal action.
 Nothing is further held sacred; but all is for plunder. His craving
 Turns in fury on woman, and pleasure is changed into horror.
 Death he sees everywhere round him, and madly enjoys his last moments,

 "Taking delight in blood, in the shrieking of anguish exulting.
 Thereupon fiercely arose in our men the stern resolution
 What had been lost to avenge, and defend whate'er was remaining,
 Every man sprang to his arms, by the flight of the foeman encouraged,
 And by his blanching cheeks, and his timorous, wavering glances.
 Ceaselessly now rang out the clanging peal of the tocsin.
 Thought of no danger to come restrained their furious anger.
 Quick into weapons of war the husbandman's peaceful utensils
 All were converted; dripped with blood the scythe and the ploughshare.
 Quarter was shown to none: the enemy fell without mercy.
 Fury everywhere raged and the cowardly cunning of weakness.
 Ne'er may I men so carried away by injurious passion
 See again! the sight of the raging wild beast would be better.
 Let not man prattle of freedom, as if himself he could govern!
 Soon as the barriers are torn away, then all of the evil
 Seems let loose, that by law had been driven deep back into corners."

 "Excellent man!" thereupon with emphasis answered the pastor:
 "Though thou misjudgest mankind, yet can I not censure thee for it.
 Evil enough, I confess, thou hast had to endure from man's passions,
 Yet wouldst thou look behind over this calamitous season,
 Thou wouldst acknowledge thyself how much good thou also hast witnessed.
 How many excellent things that would in the heart have hidden,
 Had not danger aroused them, and did not necessity's pressure
 Bring forth the angel in man, and make him a god of deliv'rance."

 Thereupon answered and said the reverend magistrate, smiling:
 "There thou remindest me aptly of how we console the poor fellow,
 After his house has been burned, by recounting the gold and the silver
 Melted and scattered abroad in the rubbish, that still is remaining.
 Little enough, it is true; but even that little is precious.
 Then will the poor wretch after it dig and rejoice if he find it.
 Thus I likewise with happier thoughts will gratefully turn me
 Towards the few beautiful deeds of which I preserve the remembrance.
 Yes, I will not deny, I have seen old quarrels forgotten,
 Ill to avert from the state; I also have witnessed how friendship,
 Love of parent and child, can impossibilities venture;
 Seen how the stripling at once matured into man; how the aged
 Grew again young; and even the child into youth was developed,
 Yea, and the weaker sex too, as we are accustomed to call it,
 Showed itself brave and strong and ready for every emergence.
 Foremost among them all, one beautiful deed let me mention,
 Bravely performed by the hand of a girl, an excellent maiden;
 Who, with those younger than she, had been left in charge of a farmhouse,
 Since there, also, the men had marched against the invader.
 Suddenly fell on the house a fugitive band of marauders,
 Eager for booty, who crowded straightway to the room of the women.

 "There they beheld the beautiful form of the fully grown maiden,
 Looked on the charming young girls, who rather might still be called children.
 Savage desire possessed them; at once with merciless passion
 They that trembling band assailed and the high-hearted maiden.
 But she had snatched in an instant the sword of one from its scabbard,
 Felled him with might to the ground, and stretched him bleeding before her.
 Then with vigorous strokes she bravely delivered the maidens,
 Smiting yet four of the robbers; who saved themselves only by flying.
 Then she bolted the gates, and, armed, awaited assistance."

 Now when this praise the minister heard bestowed on the maiden,
 Rose straightway for his friend a feeling of hope in his bosom,
 And he had opened his lips to inquire what further befell her,
 If on this mournful flight she now with her people were present;
 When with a hasty step the village doctor approached them,
 Twitched the clergyman's coat, and said in his ear in a whisper:
 "I have discovered the maiden at last among several hundreds;
 By the description I knew her, so come, let thine own eyes behold her!
 Bring too the magistrate with thee, that so we may hear him yet further."
 But as they turned to go, the justice was summoned to leave them,
 Sent for by some of his people by whom his counsel was needed.

 Straightway the preacher, however, the lead of the doctor had followed
 Up to a gap in the fence where his finger he meaningly pointed.
 "Seest thou the maiden?" he said: "she has made some clothes for the baby
 Out of the well-known chintz,--I distinguish it plainly; and further
 There are the covers of blue that Hermann gave in his bundle.
 Well and quickly, forsooth, she has turned to advantage the presents.
 Evident tokens are these, and all else answers well the description.
 Mark how the stomacher's scarlet sets off the arch of her bosom,
 Prettily laced, and the bodice of black fits close to her figure;
 Neatly the edge of her kerchief is plaited into a ruffle,
 Which, with a simple grace, her chin's rounded outline encircles;
 Freely and lightly rises above it the bead's dainty oval,
 And her luxuriant hair over silver bodkins is braided.
 Now she is sitting, yet still we behold her majestical stature,
 And the blue petticoat's ample plaits, that down from her bosom
 Hangs in abundant folds about her neatly shaped ankles,
 She without question it is; come, therefore, and let us discover
 Whether she honest and virtuous be, a housewifely maiden."

 Then, as the seated figure he studied, the pastor made answer:
 "Truly, I find it no wonder that she so enchanted the stripling,
 Since, to a man's experienced eye, she seems lacking in nothing.
 Happy to whom mother Nature a shape harmonious has given!

 "Such will always commend him, and he can be nowhere a stranger.
 All approach with delight, and all are delighted to linger,
 If to the outward shape correspond but a courteous spirit.
 I can assure thee, in her the youth has found him a maiden,
 Who, in the days to come, his life shall gloriously brighten,
 Standing with womanly strength in every necessity by him.
 Surely the soul must be pure that inhabits a body so perfect,
 And of a happy old age such vigorous youth is the promise."

 Thereupon answered and said the doctor in language of caution:
 "Often appearances cheat; I like not to trust to externals.
 For I have oft seen put to the test the truth of the proverb:
 Till thou a bushel of salt with a new acquaintance hast eaten,
 Be not too ready to trust him; for time alone renders thee certain
 How ye shall fare with each other, and how well your friendship shall prosper.
 Let us then rather at first make inquiries among the good people
 By whom the maiden is known, and who can inform us about her."

 "Much I approve of thy caution," the preacher replied as he followed.
 "Not for ourselves is the suit, and 'tis delicate wooing for others."

 Towards the good magistrate, then, the men directed their footsteps,
 Who was again ascending the street in discharge of his duties.

 Him the judicious pastor at once addressed and with caution.
 "Look! we a maiden have here descried in the neighboring garden,
 Under an apple-tree sitting, and making up garments for children

 "Out of second-hand stuff that somebody doubtless has given;
 And we were pleased with her aspect: she seems like a girl to be trusted.
 Tell us whatever thou knowest: we ask it with honest intentions."

 Soon as the magistrate nearer had come, and looked into the garden,
 "Her thou knowest already," he said; "for when I was telling
 Of the heroic deed performed by the hand of that maiden,
 When she snatched the man's sword, and delivered herself and her charges,
 This was the one! she is vigorous born, as thou seest by her stature;
 Yet she is good as strong, for her aged kinsman she tended
 Until the day of his death, which was finally hastened by sorrow
 Over his city's distress, and his own endangered possessions.
 Also, with quiet submission, she bore the death of her lover,
 Who a high-spirited youth, in the earliest flush of excitement,
 Kindled by lofty resolve to fight for a glorious freedom,
 Hurried to Paris, where early a terrible death he encountered.
 For as at home, so there, his foes were deceit and oppression."

 Thus the magistrate spoke. The others saluted and thanked him,
 And from his purse a gold-piece the pastor drew forth:--for the silver
 He had some hours before already in charity given,
 When he in mournful groups had seen the poor fugitives passing;--
 And to the magistrate handed it, saying: "Apportion the money
 'Mongst thy destitute people, and God vouchsafe it an increase."
 But the stranger declined it, and, answering, said: "We have rescued
 Many a dollar among us, with clothing and other possessions,
 And shall return, as I hope, ere yet our stock is exhausted."

 Then the pastor replied, and pressed the money upon him:
 "None should be backward in giving in days like the present, and no one
 Ought to refuse to accept those gifts which in kindness are offered.
 None can tell how long he may hold what in peace he possesses,
 None how much longer yet he shall roam through the land of the stranger,
 And of his farm be deprived, and deprived of the garden that feeds him."

 "Ay, to be sure!" in his bustling way interrupted the doctor:
 "If I had only some money about me, ye surely should have it,
 Little and big; for certainly many among you must need it.
 Yet I'll not go without giving thee something to show what my will is,
 Even though sadly behind my good-will must lag the performance."
 Thus, as he spoke, by its straps his embroidered pocket of leather,
 Where his tobacco was kept, he drew forth,--enough was now in it
 Several pipes to fill,--and daintily opened, and portioned.
 "Small is the gift," he added. The justice, however, made answer:
 "Good tobacco can ne'er to the traveller fail to be welcome."
 Then did the village doctor begin to praise his canister.

 But the clergyman drew him away, and they quitted the justice.
 "Let us make haste," said the thoughtful man: "the youth's waiting in torture;
 Come I let him hear, as soon as he may, the jubilant tidings."

 So they hastened their steps, and came to where under the lindens
 Hermann against the carriage was leaning. The horses were stamping
 Wildly the turf; he held them in check, and, buried in musing,
 Stood, into vacancy gazing before him; nor saw the two envoys,
 Till, as they came, they called out and made to him signals of triumph.
 E'en as far off as they then were, the doctor began to address him;
 But they were presently nearer come and then the good pastor
 Grasped his hand and exclaimed, interrupting the word of his comrade:
 "Hail to thee, O young man! thy true eye and heart have well chosen;
 Joy be to thee and the wife of thy youth; for of thee she is worthy.
 Come then and turn us the wagon, and drive straightway to the village,
 There the good maid to woo, and soon bring her home to thy dwelling."

 Still, however, the young man stood, without sign of rejoicing
 Hearing his messenger's words, though heavenly they were and consoling.
 Deeply he sighed as he said: "With hurrying wheels we came hither,
 And shall be forced, perchance, to go mortified homeward and slowly.
 For disquiet has fallen upon me since here I've been waiting,
 Doubt and suspicion and all that can torture the heart of a lover.
 Think ye we have but to come, and that then the maiden will follow
 Merely because we are rich, while she is poor and an exile?

 "Poverty, too, makes proud, when it comes unmerited! Active
 Seems she to be, and contented, and so of the world is she mistress.
 Think ye a maiden like her, with the manners and beauty that she has,
 Can into woman have grown, and no worthy man's love have attracted?
 Think ye that love until now can have been shut out from her bosom?
 Drive not thither too rashly: we might to our mortification
 Have to turn softly homewards our horses' heads. For my fear is
 That to some youth already this heart has been given; already
 This brave hand has been clasped, has pledged faith to some fortunate lover.
 Then with my offer, alas! I should stand in confusion before her."

 Straightway the pastor had opened his lips to speak consolation,
 When his companion broke in, and said in his voluble fashion:
 "Years ago, forsooth, unknown had been such a dilemma.
 All such affairs were then conducted in regular fashion.
 Soon as a bride for their son had been by the parents selected,
 First some family friend they into their councils would summon,
 Whom they afterwards sent as a suitor to visit the parents
 Of the elected bride. Arrayed in his finest apparel,
 Soon after dinner on Sunday he sought the respectable burgher,
 When some friendly words were exchanged upon general subjects,
 He knowing how to direct the discourse as suited his purpose.
 After much circumlocution he finally mentioned the daughter,
 Praising her highly; and praising the man and the house that had sent him.
 Persons of tact perceived his intent, and the politic envoy
 Readily saw how their minds were disposed, and explained himself further.
 Then were the offer declined, e'en the 'no' brought not mortification;
 But did it meet with success, the suitor was ever thereafter
 Made the chief guest in the house on every festive occasion.
 For, through the rest of their lives, the couple ne'er failed to remember
 That 'twas by his experienced hand the first knot had been gathered.
 All that, however, is changed, and, with many another good custom,
 Quite fallen out of the fashion; for every man woos for himself now.
 Therefore let every man hear to his face pronounced the refusal,
 If a refusal there be, and stand shamed in the sight of the maiden!"

 "Let that be as it may!" made answer the youth, who had scarcely
 Unto the words paid heed; but in silence had made his decision.
 "I will go thither myself, will myself hear my destiny spoken
 Out of the lips of a maiden in whom I a confidence cherish
 Greater than heart of man has e'er before cherished in woman.
 Say what she will, 'twill be good and wise; of that I am certain.
 Should I behold her never again, yet this once will I see her;
 Yet this once the clear gaze of those dark eyes will encounter,
 If I must press her ne'er to my heart, yet that neck and that bosom
 Will I behold once more, that my arm so longs to encircle;
 Once more that mouth will see, whose kiss and whose 'yes' would for ever
 Render me happy, from which a 'no' will for ever destroy me.
 But ye must leave me alone. Do not wait for me here; but return ye
 Back to my father and mother again, and give them the knowledge
 That their son has not been deceived, that the maiden is worthy.
 So then leave me alone! I shall follow the footpath that crosses
 Over the hill by the pear-tree, and thence descends through our vineyard,
 Taking a shorter way home. And oh, may I bring to our dwelling,
 Joyful and quick my beloved! but perhaps I alone may come creeping
 Over that path to the house, and ne'er again tread it with gladness."

 Thus he spoke, and gave up the reins to the hand of the pastor,
 Who understandingly grasped them, the foaming horses controlling,
 Speedily mounted the carriage, and sat in the seat of the driver.

 But thou didst hesitate, provident neighbor, and say in remonstrance:
 "Heart and soul and spirit, my friend, I willingly trust thee;
 But as for life and limb, they are not in the safest of keeping,
 When the temporal reins are usurped by the hand of the clergy."

 But thou didst laugh at his words, intelligent pastor, and answer:
 "Sit thee down, and contentedly trust me both body and spirit;
 For, in holding the reins, my hand grew long ago skilful,
 Long has my eye been trained in making the nicest of turnings;
 For we were practised well in driving the carriage in Strasburg,
 When I the youthful baron accompanied thither; then daily
 Rolled the carriage, guided by me, through the echoing gateway,
 Out over dusty roads till we reached the meadows and lindens,
 Steering through groups of the town's-folk beguiling the day there with walking."

 Thereupon, half-reassured, the neighbor ascended the wagon,
 Sat like one who for a prudent leap is holding him ready,
 And the stallions sped rapidly homeward, desiring their stable.
 Clouds of dust whirled up from under their powerful hoofbeats.
 Long the youth stood there yet, and saw the dust in its rising,
 Saw the dust as it settled again: he stood there unheeding.




ERATO

DOROTHEA

 Like as the traveller, who, when the sun is approaching its setting,
 Fixes his eyes on it once again ere quickly it vanish,
 Then on the sides of the rocks, and on all the darkening bushes,
 Sees its hovering image; whatever direction he look in
 That hastes before, and flickers and gleams in radiant colors,--
 So before Hermann's eyes moved the beautiful shape of the maiden
 Softly, and seeming to follow the path that led into the cornfield.
 But he aroused from his wildering dream and turned himself slowly
 Towards where the village lay and was wildered again; for again came
 Moving to meet him the lofty form of the glorious maiden.
 Fixedly gazed he upon her; herself it was and no phantom.
 Bearing in either hand a larger jar and a smaller,
 Each by the handle, with busy step she came on to the fountain.
 Joyfully then he hastened to meet her; the sight of her gave him
 Courage and strength; and thus the astonished girl he accosted:
 "Do I then find thee, brave-hearted maiden, so soon again busy,
 Rendering aid unto others, and happy in bringing them comfort?
 Say why thou comest alone to this well which lies at such a distance,
 When all the rest are content with the water they find in the village?
 This has peculiar virtues, 'tis true; and the taste is delicious.
 Thou to that mother wouldst bring it, I trow, whom thy faithfulness rescued."

 Straightway with cordial greeting the kindly maiden made answer:
 "Here has my walk to the spring already been amply rewarded,
 Since I have found the good friend who bestowed so abundantly on us;
 For a pleasure not less than the gifts is the sight of the giver.
 Come, I pray thee, and see for thyself who has tasted thy bounty;
 Come, and the quiet thanks receive of all it has solaced.
 But that thou straightway the reason mayst know for which I am hither
 Come to draw, where pure and unfailing the water is flowing,
 This I must tell thee,--that all the water we have in the village
 Has by improvident people been troubled with horses and oxen
 Wading direct through the source which brings the inhabitants water.
 And furthermore they have also made foul with their washings and rinsings
 All the troughs of the village, and all the fountains have sullied;
 For but one thought is in all, and that how to satisfy quickest
 Self and the need of the moment, regardless of what may come after."

 Thus she spoke, and the broad stone steps meanwhile had descended
 With her companion beside her, and on the low wall of the fountain
 Both sat them down. She bent herself over to draw, and he also
 Took in his hand the jar that remained, and bent himself over,
 And in the blue of the heavens, they, seeing their image reflected,
 Friendly greetings and nods exchanged in the quivering mirror.

 "Give me to drink," the youth thereupon in his gladness petitioned,
 And she handed the pitcher. Familiarly sat they and rested,
 Both leaning over their jars, till she presently asked her companion:
 "Tell me, why I find thee here, and without thy horses and wagon,
 Far from the place where I met thee at first? how camest thou hither?"

 Thoughtful he bent his eyes on the ground, then quietly raised them
 Up to her face, and, meeting with frankness the gaze of the maiden,
 Felt himself solaced and stilled. But then impossible was it,
 That he of love should speak; her eye told not of affection,
 Only of clear understanding, requiring intelligent answer.
 And he composed himself quickly, and cordially said to the maiden:
 "Hearken to me, my child, and let me reply to thy question.
 'Twas for thy sake that hither I came; why seek to conceal it?
 Know I live happy at home with both my affectionate parents,
 Faithfully giving my aid their house and estates in directing,
 Being an only son, and because our affairs are extensive.
 Mine is the charge of the farm; my father bears rule in the household;
 While the presiding spirit of all is the diligent mother.
 But thine experience doubtless has taught thee how grievously servants,
 Now through deceit, and now through their carelessness, harass the mistress,
 Forcing her ever to change and replace one fault with another.
 Long for that reason my mother has wished for a maid in the household,
 Who not with hand alone, but with heart, too, will lend her assistance,
 Taking the daughter's place, whom, alas! she was early deprived of.
 How when to-day by the wagon I saw thee, so ready and cheerful,
 Witnessed the strength of thine arms, and thy limbs of such healthful proportion,
 When thy intelligent speech I heard, I was smitten with wonder.
 Hastening homeward, I there to my parents and neighbors the stranger
 Praised as she well deserved. But I now am come hither to tell thee
 What is their wish as mine.--Forgive me my stammering language."

 "Hesitate not," she, answering, said, "to tell me what follows.
 Thou dost not give me offence; I have listened with gratitude to thee:
 Speak it out honestly therefore; the sound of it will not alarm me.
 Thou wouldst engage me as servant to wait on thy father and mother,
 And to look after the well-ordered house of which ye are the owners;
 And thou thinkest in me to find them a capable servant,
 One who is skilled in her work, and not of a rude disposition.
 Short thy proposal has been, and short shall be also my answer.
 Yes, I will go with thee home, and the call of fate I will follow.
 Here my duty is done: I have brought the newly made mother
 Back to her kindred again, who are all in her safety rejoicing.
 Most of our people already are gathered; the others will follow.
 All think a few days more will certainly see them returning
 Unto their homes; for such is the exile's constant delusion.
 But by no easy hope do I suffer myself to be cheated
 During these sorrowful days which promise yet more days of sorrow.
 All the bands of the world have been loosed, and what shall unite them,
 Saving alone the need, the need supreme, that is on us?
 If in a good man's house I can earn my living by service,
 Under the eye of an excellent mistress, I gladly will do it;
 Since of doubtful repute, must be always a wandering maiden.
 Yes, I will go with thee, soon as I first shall have carried the pitchers
 Back to my friends, and prayed the good people to give me their blessing.
 Come thou must see them thyself, and from their hands must receive me."

 Joyfully hearkened the youth to the willing maiden's decision,
 Doubtful whether he ought not at once to make honest confession.
 Yet it appeared to him best to leave her awhile in her error,
 Nor for her love to sue, before leading her home to his dwelling.
 Ah! and the golden ring he perceived on the hand of the maiden,
 Wherefore he let her speak on, and gave diligent ear to her language.

 "Come," she presently said, "Let us back to the village; for maidens
 Always are sure to be blamed if they tarry too long at the fountain.
 Yet how delightful it is to chat by the murmuring water!"

 Then from their seats they rose, and both of them turned to the fountain
 One more look behind, and a tender longing possessed them.
 Both of the water-jars then in silence she took by the handle,
 Carried them up the steps, while behind her followed her lover.
 One of the pitchers he begged her to give him to lighten the burden.
 "Nay, let it be!" she said: "I carry them better so balanced.
 Nor shall the master, who is to command, be doing me service.
 Look not so gravely upon me, as thinking my fortune a hard one.
 Early a woman should learn to serve, for that is her calling;
 Since through service alone she finally comes to the headship,
 Comes to the due command that is hers of right in the household.
 Early the sister must wait on her brother, and wait on her parents;
 Life must be always with her a perpetual coming and going,
 Or be a fetching and carrying, making and doing for others.
 Happy for her be she wonted to think no way is too grievous,
 And if the hours of the night be to her as the hours of the daytime;
 If she find never a needle too fine, nor a labor too trifling;
 Wholly forgetful of self, and caring to live but in others!
 For she will surely, as mother, have need of every virtue,
 When, in the time of her illness, the cries of her infant arouse her
 Calling for food from her weakness, and cares are to suffering added.
 Twenty men bound into one were not able to bear such a burden;
 Nor is it meant that they should, yet should they with gratitude view it."

 Thus she spoke, and was come, meanwhile, with her silent companion,
 Far as the floor of the barn, at the furthermost end of the garden,
 Where was the sick woman lying, whom, glad, she had left with her daughters,
 Those late rescued maidens: fair pictures of innocence were they.
 Both of them entered the barn; and, e'en as they did so, the justice,
 Leading a child in each hand, came in from the other direction.
 These had been lost, hitherto, from the sight of their sorrowing mother;
 But in the midst of the crowd the old man now had descried them.
 Joyfully sprang they forward to meet their dear mother's embraces,
 And to salute with delight their brother, their unknown companion.
 Next upon Dorothea they sprang with affectionate greeting,
 Asking for bread and fruit, but more than all else for some water.
 So then she handed the water about; and not only the children
 Drank, but the sick woman too, and her daughters, and with them the justice.
 All were refreshed, and highly commended the glorious water;
 Acid it was to the taste, and reviving, and wholesome to drink of.

 Then with a serious face the maiden replied to them, saying:
 "Friends, for the last time now to your mouth have I lifted my pitcher;
 And for the last time by me have your lips been moistened with water.
 But henceforth in the heat of the day when the draught shall refresh you,
 When in the shade ye enjoy your rest beside a clear fountain,
 Think of me then sometimes and of all my affectionate service,
 Prompted more by my love than the duty I owed you as kindred.
 I shall acknowledge as long as I live the kindness ye've shown me.
 'Tis with regret that I leave you; but every one now is a burden,
 More than a help to his neighbor, and all must be finally scattered
 Far through a foreign land, if return to our homes be denied us.
 See, here stands the youth to whom we owe thanks for the presents.
 He gave the cloak for the baby, and all these welcome provisions.
 Now he is come, and has asked me if I will make one in his dwelling,
 That I may serve therein his wealthy and excellent parents.
 And I refuse not the offer; for maidens must always be serving;
 Burdensome were it for them to rest and be served in the household.
 Therefore I follow him gladly. A youth of intelligence seems he,
 And so will also the parents be, as becometh the wealthy.
 So then farewell, dear friend; and mayst thou rejoice in thy nursling,
 Living, and into thy face already so healthfully looking!
 When thou shalt press him against thy breast in these gay-colored wrappings,
 Oh, then remember the kindly youth who bestowed them upon us,
 And who me also henceforth, thy sister, will shelter and nourish.
 Thou, too, excellent man!" she said as she turned to the justice;
 "Take my thanks that in many a need I have found thee a father."
 Then she knelt down on the floor by the side of the newly made mother,
 Kissing the weeping woman, and taking her low-whispered blessing.
 Thou, meanwhile, worshipful justice, wast speaking to Hermann and saying:
 "Justly mayst thou, my friend, be counted among the good masters,
 Careful to manage their household affairs with capable servants.
 For I have often observed how in sheep, as in horses and oxen,
 Men conclude never a bargain without making closest inspection,
 While with a servant who all things preserves, if honest and able,
 And who will every thing lose and destroy, if he set to work falsely,
 Him will a chance or an accident make us admit to our dwelling,
 And we are left, when too late, to repent an o'er hasty decision.
 Thou understandest the matter it seems; because thou hast chosen,
 Thee and thy parents to serve in the house, a maid who is honest.
 Hold her with care; for as long as thy household is under her keeping,
 Thou shalt not want for a sister, nor yet for a daughter thy parents."

 Many were come, meanwhile, near relatives all of the mother,
 Bringing her various gifts, and more suitable quarters announcing.
 All of them, hearing the maiden's decision, gave Hermann their blessing,
 Coupled with glances of meaning, while each made his special reflections.
 Hastily one and another would say in the ear of his neighbor:
 "If in the master a lover she find, right well were she cared for."
 Hermann took her at last by the hand, and said as he did so:
 "Let us be going; the day is declining, and distant the city."
 Eager and voluble then the women embraced Dorothea;
 Hermann drew her away; but other adieus must be spoken:
 Lastly the children with cries fell upon her and terrible weeping,
 Clung to her garments, and would not their dear second mother should leave them.
 But in a tone of command the women said, one and another:
 "Hush now, children, she's going to the town, and will presently bring you
 Plenty of nice sweet cake that was by your brother bespoken
 When by the stork just now he was brought past the shop of the baker.
 Soon you will see her come back with sugar-plums splendidly gilded."
 Then did the little ones loose their hold, and Hermann, though hardly,
 Tore her from further embraces away, and far-waving kerchiefs.




MELPOMENE

HERMANN AND DOROTHEA

 Towards the setting sun the two thus went on their journey:
 Close he had wrapped himself round with clouds portending a tempest.
 Out from the veil, now here and now there, with fiery flashes,
 Gleaming over the field shot forth the ominous lightning.
 "May not these threatening heavens," said Hermann, "be presently sending
 Hailstones upon us and violent rains; for fair is the harvest."
 And in the waving luxuriant grain they delighted together:
 Almost as high it reached as the lofty shapes that moved through it.

 Thereupon spoke the maiden, and said to her guide and companion:
 "Friend, unto whom I soon am to owe so kindly a fortune,
 Shelter and home, while many an exile's exposed to the tempest,
 Tell me concerning thy parents, I pray thee, and teach me to know them,
 Them whom with all my heart I desire to serve in the future.
 Who understands his master, more easily gives satisfaction,
 Having regard to the things which to him seem chief in importance,
 And on the doing of which his firm-set mind is determined.
 Tell me therefore, I pray, how to win thy father and mother."

 And to her question made answer the good and intelligent Hermann:
 "Ah, what wisdom thou showest, thou good, thou excellent maiden,
 Asking thus first of all concerning the tastes of my parents!
 Know that in vain hitherto I have labored in serving my father,
 Taking upon me as were it my own, the charge of the household;
 Early and late at work in the fields, and o'erseeing the vineyard.
 But my mother I fully content, who can value my service;
 And thou wilt also appear in her eyes the worthiest of maidens,
 If for the house thou carest, as were it thine own thou wast keeping.
 Otherwise is it with father, who cares for the outward appearance.
 Do not regard me, good maiden, as one who is cold and unfeeling,
 That unto thee a stranger I straightway discover my father.
 Nay, I assure thee that never before have words such as these are
 Freely dropped from my tongue, which is not accustomed to prattle;
 But from out of my bosom thou lurest its every secret.
 Some of the graces of life my good father covets about him,
 Outward signs of affection he wishes, as well as of honor;
 And an inferior servant might possibly give satisfaction,
 Who could turn these to account, while he might be displeased with a better."

 Thereupon said she with joy, the while her hastening footsteps
 Over the darkening pathway with easy motion she quickened:
 "Truly I hope to them both I shall equally give satisfaction:
 For in thy mother's nature I find such an one as mine own is,
 And to the outward graces I've been from my childhood accustomed.
 Greatly was courtesy valued among our neighbors the Frenchmen,
 During their earlier days; it was common to noble and burgher,
 As to the peasant, and every one made it the rule of his household.
 So, on the side of us Germans, the children were likewise accustomed
 Daily to bring to their parents, with kissing of hands and with curtseys,
 Morning good-wishes, and all through the day to be prettily mannered.
 Every thing thus that I learned, and to which I've been used from my childhood,
 All that my heart shall suggest, shall be brought into play for thy father.
 But who shall tell me of thee, and how thyself shouldst be treated,
 Thou the only son of the house, and henceforth my master?"

 Thus she said, and e'en as she spoke they stood under the pear-tree.
 Down from the heavens the moon at her full was shedding her splendor.
 Night had come on, and wholly obscured was the last gleam of sunlight,
 So that contrasting masses lay side by side with each other,
 Clear and bright as the day, and black with the shadows of midnight;
 Gratefully fell upon Hermann's ear the kindly asked question
 Under the shade of the glorious tree, the spot he so treasured,
 Which but this morning had witnessed the tears he had shed for the exile.
 And while they sat themselves down to rest them here for a little,
 Thus spoke the amorous youth, as he grasped the hand of the maiden:
 "Suffer thy heart to make answer, and follow it freely in all things."
 Yet naught further he ventured to say although so propitious
 Seemed the hour: he feared he should only haste on a refusal.
 Ah, and he felt besides the ring on her finger, sad token!
 Therefore they sat there, silent and still, beside one another.

 First was the maiden to speak: "How sweet is this glorious moonlight!"
 Said she at length: "It is as the light of the day in its brightness.
 There in the city I plainly can see the houses and courtyards,
 And in the gable--methinks I can number its panes-is a window."

 "What thou seest," the modest youth thereupon made her answer,--
 "What thou seest is our dwelling, to which I am leading thee downward,
 And that window yonder belongs to my room in the attic,
 Which will be thine perhaps, for various changes are making.
 All these fields, too, are ours; they are ripe for the harvest to-morrow.
 Here in the shade we will rest, and partake of our noontide refreshment.
 But it is time we began our descent through the vineyard and garden;
 For dost thou mark how yon threatening storm-cloud comes nearer and nearer,
 Charged with lightning, and ready our fair full moon to extinguish?"

 So they arose from their seats, and over the cornfields descended,
 Through the luxuriant grain, enjoying the brightness of evening,
 Until they came to the vineyard, and so entered into its shadow.
 Then he guided her down o'er the numerous blocks that were lying,
 Rough and unhewn on the pathway, and served as the steps of the alley.
 Slowly the maiden descended, and leaning her hands on his shoulder,
 While with uncertain beams, the moon through the leaves overlooked them,
 Ere she was veiled by the cloud, and so left the couple in darkness.
 Carefully Hermann's strength supported the maid that hung o'er him;
 But, not knowing the path and the rough-hewn steps that led down it,
 Missed she her footing, her ankle turned, and she surely had fallen,
 Had not the dexterous youth his arm outstretched in an instant,
 And his beloved upheld. She gently sank on his shoulder;
 Breast was pressed against breast, and cheek against cheek. Thus he stood there
 Fixed as a marble statue, the force of will keeping him steadfast,
 Drew her not to him more closely, but braced himself under her pressure.
 Thus he the glorious burden felt, the warmth of her bosom,
 And the perfume of her breath, that over his lips was exhaling;
 Bore with the heart of a man the majestic form of the woman.

 But she with playfulness said, concealing the pain that she suffered:
 "That is a sign of misfortune, so timorous persons would tell us,
 When on approaching a house we stumble not far from the threshold;
 And for myself, I confess, I could wish for a happier omen.
 Let us here linger awhile that thy parents may not have to blame thee,
 Seeing a limping maid, and thou seem an incompetent landlord."




URANIA

PROSPECT

 Muses, O ye who the course of true love so willingly favor,
 Ye who thus far on his way the excellent youth have conducted,
 Even before the betrothal have pressed to his bosom the maiden;
 Further your aid vouchsafe this charming pair in uniting,
 Straightway dispersing the clouds which over their happiness lower!
 Yet first of all declare what is passing meanwhile at the Lion.

 Now for the third time again the mother impatient had entered
 Where were assembled the men, whom anxious but now she had quitted;
 Spoke of the gathering storm, and the moonlight's rapid obscuring;
 Then of her son's late tarrying abroad and the dangers of nightfall;
 Sharply upbraided her friends that without having speech of the maiden,
 And without urging his suit, they had parted from Hermann so early.

 "Make it not worse than it is," the father replied with displeasure.
 "For, as thou seest, we tarry ourselves and are waiting the issue."

 Calmly, however, from where he was sitting the neighbor made answer:
 "Never in hours of disquiet like this do I fail to be grateful
 Unto my late, blessed father, who every root of impatience
 Tore from my heart when a child, and left no fibre remaining;
 So that I learned on the instant to wait as do none of your sages."

 "Tell us," the pastor returned, "what legerdemain he made use of."
 "That will I gladly relate, for all may draw from it a lesson;"
 So made the neighbor reply. "When a boy I once stood of a Sunday
 Full of impatience, and looking with eagerness out for the carriage
 Which was to carry us forth to the spring that lies under the lindens.
 Still the coach came not. I ran, like a weasel, now hither, now thither,
 Up stairs and down, and forward and back, 'twixt the door and the window;
 Even my fingers itched to be moving; I scratched on the tables,
 Went about pounding and stamping, and hardly could keep me from weeping.
 All was observed by the calm-tempered man; but at last when my folly
 Came to be carried too far, by the arm he quietly took me,
 Led me away to the window, and spoke in this serious language:
 'Seest thou yonder the carpenter's shop that is closed for the Sunday?
 He will re-open to-morrow, when plane and saw will be started,
 And will keep on through the hours of labor from morning till evening.
 But consider you this,--a day will be presently coming
 When that man shall himself be astir and all of his workmen,
 Making a coffin for thee to be quickly and skilfully finished.
 Then that house of boards they will busily bring over hither,
 Which must at last receive alike the impatient and patient,
 And which is destined soon with close-pressing roof to be covered.'
 Straightway I saw the whole thing in my mind as if it were doing;
 Saw the boards fitting together, and saw the black color preparing,
 Sat me down patiently then, and in quiet awaited the carriage.
 Now when others I see, in seasons of anxious expectance,
 Running distracted about, I cannot but think of the coffin."

 Smiling, the pastor replied: "The affecting picture of death stands
 Not as a dread to the wise, and not as an end to the pious.
 Those it presses again into life, and teaches to use it;
 These by affliction it strengthens in hope to future salvation.
 Death becomes life unto both. Thy father was greatly mistaken
 When to a sensitive boy he death in death thus depicted.
 Let us the value of nobly ripe age, point out to the young man,
 And to the aged the youth, that in the eternal progression
 Both may rejoice, and life may in life thus find its completion."

 But the door was now opened, and showed the majestical couple.
 Filled with amaze were the friends, and amazed the affectionate parents,
 Seeing the form of the maid so well matched with that of her lover.
 Yea, the door seemed too low to allow the tall figures to enter,
 As they together now appeared coming over the threshold.

 Hermann, with hurried words, presented her thus to his parents:
 "Here is a maiden," he said; "such a one as ye wish in the household.
 Kindly receive her, dear father: she merits it well; and thou, mother,
 Question her straightway on all that belongs to a housekeeper's duty,
 That ye may see how well she deserves to ye both to be nearer."

 Quickly he then drew aside the excellent clergyman, saying:
 "Help me, O worthy sir, and speedily out of this trouble;
 Loosen, I pray thee, this knot, at whose untying I tremble.
 Know that 'tis not as a lover that I have brought hither the maiden;
 But she believes that as servant she comes to the house, and I tremble
 Lest in displeasure she fly as soon as there's mention of marriage.
 But be it straightway decided; for she no longer in error
 Thus shall be left, and I this suspense no longer can suffer.
 Hasten and show us in this a proof of the wisdom we honor."

 Towards the company then the clergyman instantly turned him;
 But already, alas! had the soul of the maiden been troubled,
 Hearing the father's speech; for he, in his sociable fashion,
 Had in these playful words, with the kindest intention addressed her:
 "Ay, this is well, my child! with delight I perceive that my Hermann
 Has the good taste of his father, who often showed his in his young days,
 Leading out always the fairest to dance, and bringing the fairest
 Finally home as his wife; our dear little mother here that was.
 For by the bride that a man shall elect we can judge what himself is,
 Tell what the spirit is in him, and whether he feel his own value.
 Nor didst thou need for thyself, I'll engage, much time for decision;
 For, in good sooth, methinks, he's no difficult person to follow."

 Hermann had heard but in part; his limbs were inwardly trembling,
 And of a sudden a stillness had fallen on all of the circle.

 But by these words of derision, for such she could not but deem them,
 Wounded, and stung to the depths of her soul, the excellent maiden,
 Stood, while the fugitive blood o'er her cheeks and e'en to her bosom,
 Poured its flush. But she governed herself, and her courage collecting,
 Answered the old man thus, her pain not wholly concealing:
 "Truly for such a reception thy son had in no wise prepared me,
 When he the ways of his father described, the excellent burgher.
 Thou art a man of culture, I know, before whom I am standing;
 Dealest with every one wisely, according as suits his position;
 But thou hast scanty compassion, it seems, on one such as I am,
 Who, a poor girl, am now crossing thy threshold with purpose to serve thee;
 Else, with such bitter derision, thou wouldst not have made me remember
 How far removed my fortune from that of thyself and thy son is.
 True, I come poor to thy house, and bring with me naught but my bundle
 Here where is every abundance to gladden the prosperous inmates.
 Yet I know well myself; I feel the relations between us,
 Say, is it noble, with so much of mockery straightway to greet me,
 That I am sent from the house while my foot is scarce yet on the threshold?"

 Anxiously Hermann turned and signed to his ally the pastor
 That he should rush to the rescue and straightway dispel the delusion.
 Then stepped the wise man hastily forward and looked on the maiden's
 Tearful eyes, her silent pain and repressed indignation,
 And in his heart was impelled not at once to clear up the confusion,
 Rather to put to the test the girl's disquieted spirit.
 Therefore he unto her said in language intended to try her:
 "Surely, thou foreign-born maiden, thou didst not maturely consider,
 When thou too rashly decidedst to enter the service of strangers,
 All that is meant by the placing thyself 'neath the rule of a master;
 For by our hand to a bargain the fate of the year is determined,
 And but a single 'yea' compels to much patient endurance.
 Not the worst part of the service the wearisome steps to be taken,
 Neither the bitter sweat of a labor that presses unceasing;
 Since the industrious freeman must toil as well as the servant.
 But 'tis to bear with the master's caprice when he censures unjustly,
 Or when, at variance with self, he orders now this, now the other;
 Bear with the petulance, too, of the mistress, easily angered,
 And with the rude, overbearing ways of unmannerly children.
 All this is hard to endure, and yet to go on with thy duties
 Quickly, without delay, nor thyself grow sullen and stubborn.
 Yet thou appearest ill fitted for this, since already so deeply
 Stung by the father's jests: whereas there is nothing more common
 Than for a girl to be teased on account of a youth she may fancy."

 Thus he spoke. The maiden had felt the full force of his language,
 And she restrained her no more; but with passionate outburst her feelings
 Made themselves way; a sob broke forth from her now heaving bosom,
 And, while the scalding tears poured down, she straightway made answer:
 "Ah, that rational man who thinks to advise us in sorrow,
 Knows not how little of power his cold words have in relieving
 Ever a heart from that woe which a sovereign fate has inflicted.
 Ye are prosperous and glad; how then should a pleasantry wound you?
 Yet but the lightest touch is a source of pain to the sick man.
 Nay, concealment itself, if successful, had profited nothing.
 Better show now what had later increased to a bitterer anguish,
 And to an inward consuming despair might perhaps have reduced me.
 Let me go back! for here in this house I can tarry no longer.
 I will away, and wander in search of my hapless companions,
 Whom I forsook in their need; for myself alone choosing the better.
 This is my firm resolve, and I therefore may make a confession
 Which might for years perhaps have else lain hid in my bosom.
 Deeply indeed was I hurt by the father's words of derision;
 Not that I'm sensitive, proud beyond what is fitting a servant;
 But that my heart in truth had felt itself stirred with affection
 Towards the youth who to-day had appeared to my eyes as a savior.
 When he first left me there on the road, he still remained present,
 Haunting my every thought; I fancied the fortunate maiden
 Whom as a bride, perhaps, his heart had already elected.
 When at the fountain I met him again, the sight of him wakened
 Pleasure as great as if there had met me an angel from heaven;
 And with what gladness I followed, when asked to come as his servant.
 True, that I flattered myself in my heart,--I will not deny it,--
 While we were hitherward coming, I might peradventure deserve him,
 Should I become at last the important stay of the household.
 Now I, alas! for the first time see what risk I was running,
 When I would make my home so near to the secretly loved one;
 Now for the first time feel how far removed a poor maiden
 Is from an opulent youth, no matter how great her deserving.
 All this I now confess, that my heart ye may not misinterpret,
 In that 'twas hurt by a chance to which I owe my awaking.
 Hiding my secret desires, this dread had been ever before me,
 That at some early day he would bring him a bride to his dwelling;
 And ah, how could I then my inward anguish have suffered!
 Happily I have been warned, and happily now has my bosom
 Been of its secret relieved, while yet there is cure for the evil.
 But no more; I have spoken; and now shall nothing detain me
 Longer here in a house where I stay but in shame and confusion,
 Freely confessing my love and that foolish hope that I cherished.
 Not the night which abroad is covered with lowering storm clouds;
 Not the roll of the thunder--I hear its peal--shall deter me;
 Not the pelt of the rain which without is beating in fury;
 Neither the blustering tempest; for all these things have I suffered
 During our sorrowful flight, and while the near foe was pursuing.
 Now I again go forth, as I have so long been accustomed,
 Carried away by the whirl of the times, and from every thing parted.
 Fare ye well! I tarry no longer; all now is over."

 Thus she spoke and back to the door she hastily turned her,
 Still bearing under her arm, as she with her had brought it, her bundle.
 But with both of her arms the mother seized hold of the maiden,
 Clasping her round the waist, and exclaiming, amazed and bewildered:
 "Tell me, what means all this? and these idle tears, say, what mean they?
 I will not let thee depart: thou art the betrothed of my Hermann."

 But still the father stood, observing the scene with displeasure,
 Looked on the weeping girl, and said in a tone of vexation:
 "This then must be the return that I get for all my indulgence,
 That at the close of the day this most irksome of all things should happen!
 For there is naught I can tolerate less than womanish weeping,
 Violent outcries, which only involve in disorder and passion,
 What with a little of sense had been more smoothly adjusted.
 Settle the thing for yourselves: I'm going to bed; I've no patience
 Longer to be a spectator of these your marvellous doings."
 Quickly he turned as he spoke, and hastened to go to the chamber
 Where he was wonted to rest, and his marriage bed was kept standing,
 But he was held by his son, who said in a tone of entreaty:
 "Father, hasten not from us, and be thou not wroth with the maiden.
 I, only I, am to blame as the cause of all this confusion,
 Which by his dissimulation our friend unexpectedly heightened.
 Speak, O worthy sir; for to thee my cause I intrusted.
 Heap not up sorrow and anger, but rather let all this be ended;
 For I could hold thee never again in such high estimation,
 If thou shouldst show but delight in pain, not superior wisdom."

 Thereupon answered and said the excellent clergyman, smiling:
 "Tell me, what other device could have drawn this charming confession
 Out of the good maiden's lips, and thus have revealed her affection?
 Has not thy trouble been straightway transformed into gladness and rapture?
 Therefore speak up for thyself; what need of the tongue of another?"

 Thereupon Hermann came forward, and spoke in these words of affection:
 "Do not repent of thy tears, nor repent of these passing distresses;
 For they complete my joy, and--may I not hope it-thine also?
 Not to engage the stranger, the excellent maid, as a servant,
 Unto the fountain I came; but to sue for thy love I came thither.
 Only, alas! my timorous look could thy heart's inclination
 Nowise perceive; I read in thine eyes of nothing but kindness,
 As from the fountain's tranquil mirror thou gavest me greeting.
 Might I but bring thee home, the half of my joy was accomplished.
 But thou completest it unto me now; oh, blest be thou for it!"
 Then with a deep emotion the maiden gazed on the stripling;
 Neither forbade she embrace and kiss, the summit of rapture,
 When to a loving pair they come as the longed-for assurance,
 Pledge of a lifetime of bliss, that appears to them now never-ending.

 Unto the others, meanwhile, the pastor had made explanation.
 But with feeling and grace the maid now advanced to the father,
 Bent her before him, and kissing the hand he would fain have withholden,
 Said: "Thou wilt surely be just and forgive one so startled as I was,
 First for my tears of distress, and now for the tears of my gladness.
 That emotion forgive me, and oh! forgive me this also.
 For I can scarce comprehend the happiness newly vouchsafed me.
 Yes, let that first vexation of which I, bewildered, was guilty
 Be too the last. Whatever the maid of affectionate service
 Faithfully promised, shall be to thee now performed by the daughter."
 Straightway then, concealing his tears, the father embraced her,
 Cordially, too, the mother came forward and kissed her with fervor,
 Pressing her hands in her own: the weeping women were silent.

 Thereupon quickly he seized, the good and intelligent pastor,
 First the father's hand, and the wedding-ring drew from his finger,--
 Not so easily either: the finger was plump and detained it,--
 Next took the mother's ring also, and with them betrothed he the children,
 Saying: "These golden circlets once more their office performing
 Firmly a tie shall unite, which in all things shall equal the old one,
 Deeply is this young man imbued with love of the maiden,
 And, as the maiden confesses, her heart is gone out to him also.
 Here do I therefore betroth you and bless for the years that are coming,
 With the consent of the parents, and having this friend as a witness."

 Then the neighbor saluted at once, and expressed his good wishes;
 But when the clergyman now the golden circlet was drawing
 Over the maiden's hand, he observed with amazement the other,
 Which had already by Hermann been anxiously marked at the fountain.
 And with a kindly raillery thus thereupon he addressed her:
 "So, then thy second betrothal is this? let us hope the first bridegroom
 May not appear at the altar, and so prohibit the marriage."

 But she, answering, said: "Oh, let me to this recollection
 Yet one moment devote; for so much is due the good giver,
 Him who bestowed it at parting, and never came back to his kindred.
 All that should come he foresaw, when in haste the passion for freedom,
 When a desire in the newly changed order of things to be working,
 Urged him onward to Paris, where chains and death he encountered.
 'Fare thee well,' were his words; 'I go, for all is in motion
 Now for a time on the earth, and every thing seems to be parting.
 E'en in the firmest states fundamental laws are dissolving;
 Property falls away from the hand of the ancient possessor;
 Friend is parted from friend; and so parts lover from lover.
 Here I leave thee, and where I shall find thee again, or if ever,
 Who can tell? Perhaps these words are our last ones together.
 Man's but a stranger here on the earth, we are told and with reason;
 And we are each of us now become more of strangers than ever.
 Ours no more is the soil, and our treasures are all of them changing:
 Silver and gold are melting away from their time-honored patterns.
 All is in motion as though the already-shaped world into chaos
 Meant to resolve itself backward into night, and to shape itself over.
 Mine thou wilt keep thine heart, and should we be ever united
 Over the ruins of earth, it will be as newly made creatures,
 Beings transformed and free, no longer dependent on fortune;
 For can aught fetter the man who has lived through days such as these are!
 But if it is not to be, that, these dangers happily over,
 Ever again we be granted the bliss of mutual embraces,
 Oh, then before thy thoughts so keep my hovering image
 That with unshaken mind thou be ready for good or for evil!
 Should new ties allure thee again, and a new habitation,
 Enter with gratitude into the joys that fate shall prepare thee;
 Love those purely who love thee; be grateful to them who show kindness.
 But thine uncertain foot should yet be planted but lightly,
 For there is lurking the twofold pain of a new separation.
 Blessings attend thy life; but value existence no higher
 Than thine other possessions, and all possessions are cheating!'
 Thus spoke the noble youth, and never again I beheld him.
 Meanwhile I lost my all, and a thousand times thought of his warning.
 Here, too, I think of his words, when love is sweetly preparing
 Happiness for me anew, and glorious hopes are reviving,
 Oh forgive me, excellent friend, that e'en while I hold thee
 Close to my side I tremble! So unto the late-landed sailor
 Seem the most solid foundations of firmest earth to be rocking."

 Thus she spoke, and placed the two rings on her finger together.
 But her lover replied with a noble and manly emotion:
 "So much the firmer then, amid these universal convulsions,
 Be, Dorothea, our union! We two will hold fast and continue,
 Firmly maintaining ourselves, and the right to our ample possessions.
 For that man, who, when times are uncertain, is faltering in spirit,
 Only increases the evil, and further and further transmits it;
 While he refashions the world, who keeps himself steadfastly minded.
 Poorly becomes it the German to give to these fearful excitements
 Aught of continuance, or to be this way and that way inclining.
 This is our own! let that be our word, and let us maintain it!
 For to those resolute peoples respect will be ever accorded,
 Who for God and the laws, for parents, women and children,
 Fought and died, as together they stood with their front to the foeman.
 Thou art mine own; and now what is mine, is mine more than ever.
 Not with anxiety will I preserve it, and trembling enjoyment;
 Rather with courage and strength. To-day should the enemy threaten,
 Or in the future, equip me thyself and hand me my weapons.
 Let me but know that under thy care are my house and dear parents,
 Oh! I can then with assurance expose my breast to the foeman.
 And were but every man minded like me, there would be an upspring
 Might against might, and peace should revisit us all with its gladness."

========================================
========================================

EGMONT

A Tragedy In Five Acts


By Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe


Translated by Anna Swanwick




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

In 1775, when Goethe was twenty-six, and before he went to Weimar, he
began to write "Egmont" After working on it at intervals for twelve
years, he finished it at Rome in 1787.

The scene of the drama is laid in the Low Countries at the beginning of
the revolt against Spain. In the fifteenth century Philip of Burgundy
had usurped dominion over several of the provinces of the Netherlands,
and through him they had passed into the power of his descendant, the
Emperor Charles V. This powerful ruler abolished the constitutional
rights of the provinces, and introduced the Inquisition in order to
stamp out Protestantism. Prominent among his officers was the Fleming,
Lamoral, Count Egmont, upon whom he lavished honors and opportunities of
service--opportunities so well improved that, by his victories over
the French at Saint-Quentin (1557) and Gravelines (1558) Egmont made a
reputation as one of the most brilliant generals in Europe, and became
the idol of his countrymen. When in 1559 a new Regent of the Netherlands
was to be created, the people hoped that Philip II, who had succeeded
Charles, would choose Egmont; but instead he appointed his half-sister
Margaret, Duchess of Parma. Under the new Regent the persecution of
the Protestants was rigorously pressed, and in 1565 Egmont, though a
Catholic, was sent to Madrid to plead for clemency. He was received
by the King with every appearance of cordiality, but shortly after
his return home the Duke of Alva was sent to the Netherlands with
instructions to put down with an iron hand all resistance to his
master's will. How terribly he carried out his orders has been told by
Prescott and Motley. Egmont was an early victim, but his martyrdom, with
that of Count Horn, and later the assassination of William of Orange,
roused the Netherlands to a resistance that ended only with the complete
throwing off of the Spanish yoke.

Such in outline is the background chosen by Goethe for his tragedy. With
many changes in detail, the dramatist has still preserved a picture of
a historical situation of absorbing interest, and has painted a group
of admirable portraits. The drama has long been a favorite on the stage,
where it enjoys the advantage of Beethoven's musical setting.




EGMONT




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  Margaret of Parma, (Daughter of Charles V., and Regent of the
  Netherlands)
  Count Egmont, (Prince of Gaure)
  The Duke of Alva
  William of Orange
  Ferdinand, (his natural Son)
  Machiavel, in the service of the Regent
  Richard, (Egmont's Private Secretary)

  Silva, Gomez, (in the service of Alva)
  Clara, (the Beloved of Egmont)
  Her Mother
  Brackenburg, (a Citizen's Son), and Vansen, (a Clerk)
  Soest, (a Shopkeeper), Jetter, (a Tailor), A Carpenter, A Soapboiler
  (Citizens of Brussels)
  Buyck, (a Hollander), a Soldier under Egmont
  Ruysum, (a Frieslander), an invalid Soldier, and deaf
  People, Attendants, Guards, &c.

  The Scene is laid in Brussels.




ACT I



SCENE I.--Soldiers and Citizens (with cross-bows)

Jetter (steps forward, and bends his cross-bow). Soest, Buyck, Ruysum

Soest. Come, shoot away, and have done with it! You won't beat me! Three
black rings, you never made such a shot in all your life. And so I'm
master for this year.

Jetter. Master and king to boot; who envies you? You'll have to pay
double reckoning; 'tis only fair you should pay for your dexterity.

Buyck. Jetter, I'll buy your shot, share the prize, and treat the
company. I have already been here so long, and am a debtor for so many
civilities. If I miss, then it shall be as if you had shot.

Soest. I ought to have a voice, for in fact I am the loser. No matter!
Come, Buyck, shoot away.

Buyck (shoots). Now, corporal, look out!--One! Two! Three! Four!

Soest. Four rings! So be it!

All. Hurrah! Long live the King! Hurrah! Hurrah!

Buyck. Thanks, sirs, master even were too much! Thanks for the honour.

Jetter. You have no one to thank but yourself. Ruysum. Let me tell you--

Soest. How now, grey-beard?

Ruysum. Let me tell you!--He shoots like his master, he shoots like
Egmont.

Buyck. Compared with him I am only a bungler. He aims with the rifle
as no one else does. Not only when he's lucky or in the vein; no! he
levels, and the bull's-eye is pierced. I have learned from him. He were
indeed a blockhead, who could serve under him and learn nothing!--But,
sirs, let us not forget! A king maintains his followers; and so, wine
here, at the king's charge!

Jetter. We have agreed among ourselves that each--

Buyck. I am a foreigner, and a king, and care not a jot for your laws
and customs.

Jetter. Why, you are worse than the Spaniard, who has not yet ventured
to meddle with them.

Ruysum. What does he say?

Soest (loud to Ruysum). He wants to treat us; he will not hear of our
clubbing together, the king paying only a double share.

Ruysum. Let him! under protest, however! 'Tis his master's fashion, too,
to be munificent, and to let the money flow in a good cause. (Wine is
brought.)

All. Here's to his Majesty! Hurrah!

Jetter (to Buyck). That means your Majesty, of course, Buyck. My hearty
thanks, if it be so.

Soest. Assuredly! A Netherlander does not find it easy to drink the
health of his Spanish majesty from his heart.

Ruysum. Who?

Soest (aloud). Philip the Second, King of Spain.

Ruysum. Our most gracious king and master! Long life to him.

Soest. Did you not like his father, Charles the Fifth, better?

Ruysum. God bless him! He was a king indeed! His hand reached over the
whole earth, and he was all in all. Yet, when he met you, he'd greet you
just as one neighbour greets another,--and if you were frightened, he
knew so well how to put you at your ease--ay, you understand me--he
walked out, rode out, just as it came into his head, with very few
followers. We all wept when he resigned the government here to his son.
You understand me--he is another sort of man, he's more majestic.

Jetter. When he was here, he never appeared in public, except in pomp
and royal state. He speaks little, they say.

Soest. He is no king for us Netherlanders. Our princes must be joyous
and free like ourselves, must live and let live. We will neither be
despised nor oppressed, good-natured fools though we be.

Jetter. The king, methinks, were a gracious sovereign enough, if he had
only better counsellors.

Soest. No, no! He has no affection for us Netherlanders; he has no
heart for the people; he loves us not; how then can we love him? Why
is everybody so fond of Count Egmont? Why are we all so devoted to
him? Why, because one can read in his face that he loves us; because
joyousness, open-heartedness, and good-nature, speak in his eyes;
because he possesses nothing that he does not share with him who needs
it, ay, and with him who needs it not. Long live Count Egmont! Buyck, it
is for you to give the first toast; give us your master's health.

Buyck. With all my heart; here's to Count Egmont! Hurrah!

Ruysum Conqueror of St. Quintin.

Buyck. The hero of Gravelines.

All. Hurrah!

Ruysum. St. Quintin was my last battle. I was hardly able to crawl
along, and could with difficulty carry my heavy rifle. I managed,
notwithstanding, to singe the skin of the French once more, and, as a
parting gift, received a grazing shot in my right leg.

Buyck. Gravelines! Ha, my friends, we had sharp work of it there!
The victory was all our own. Did not those French dogs carry fire and
desolation into the very heart of Flanders? We gave it them, however!
The old hard-listed veterans held out bravely for a while, but we pushed
on, fired away, and laid about us, till they made wry faces, and their
lines gave way. Then Egmont's horse was shot under him; and for a long
time we fought pell-mell, man to man, horse to horse, troop to troop,
on the broad, flat, sea-sand. Suddenly, as if from heaven, down came
the cannon shot from the mouth of the river, bang, bang, right into
the midst of the French. These were English, who, under Admiral Malin,
happened to be sailing past from Dunkirk. They did not help us much,
'tis true; they could only approach with their smallest vessels, and
that not near enough;--besides, their shot fell sometimes among our
troops. It did some good, however! It broke the French lines, and raised
our courage. Away it went. Helter-skelter! topsy-turvy! all struck
dead, or forced into the water; the fellows were drowned the moment
they tasted the water, while we Hollanders dashed in after them. Being
amphibious, we were as much in our element as frogs, and hacked away
at the enemy, and shot them down as if they had been ducks. The few
who struggled through, were struck dead in their flight by the peasant
women, armed with hoes and pitchforks. His Gallic majesty was compelled
at once to hold out his paw and make peace. And that peace you owe to
us, to the great Egmont.

All. Hurrah, for the great Egmont! Hurrah! Hurrah!

Jetter. Had they but appointed him Regent, instead of Margaret of Parma!

Soest. Not so! Truth is truth! I'll not hear Margaret abused. Now it is
my turn. Long live our gracious lady!

All. Long life to her!

Soest. Truly, there are excellent women in that family. Long live the
Regent!

Jetter. Prudent is she, and moderate in all she does; if she would only
not hold so fast and stiffly with the priests. It is partly her fault,
too, that we have the fourteen new mitres in the land. Of what use are
they, I should like to know? Why, that foreigners may be shoved into the
good benefices, where formerly abbots were chosen out of the chapters!
And we're to believe it's for the sake of religion. We know better.
Three bishops were enough for us; things went on decently and reputably.
Now each must busy himself as if he were needed; and this gives rise
every moment to dissensions and ill-will. And the more you agitate the
matter, so much the worse it grows. (They drink.)

Soest. But it was the will of the king; she cannot alter it, one way or
another.

Jetter. Then we may not even sing the new psalms; but ribald songs,
as many as we please. And why? There is heresy in them, they say, and
heaven knows what. I have sung some of them, however; they are new, to
be sure, but I see no harm in them.

Buyck. Ask their leave, forsooth! In our province, we sing just what
we please. That's because Count Egmont is our stadtholder, who does not
trouble himself about such matters. In Ghent, Ypres, and throughout the
whole of Flanders, anybody sings them that chooses. (Aloud to Ruysum.)
There is nothing more harmless than a spiritual song--Is there, father?

Ruysum. What, indeed! It is a godly work, and truly edifying.

Jetter. They say, however, that they are not of the right sort, not of
their sort, and, since it is dangerous, we had better leave them alone.
The officers of the Inquisition are always lurking and spying about;
many an honest fellow has already fallen into their clutches. They had
not gone so far as to meddle with conscience! If they will not allow
me to do what I like, they might at least let me think and sing as I
please.

Soest. The Inquisition won't do here. We are not made like the
Spaniards, to let our consciences be tyrannized over. The nobles must
look to it, and clip its wings betimes.

Jetter. It is a great bore. Whenever it comes into their worships' heads
to break into my house, and I am sitting there at my work, humming a
French psalm, thinking nothing about it, neither good nor bad--singing
it just because it is in my throat;--forthwith I'm a heretic, and am
clapped into prison. Or if I am passing through the country, and stand
near a crowd listening to a new preacher, one of those who have come
from Germany; instantly I'm called a rebel, and am in danger of losing
my head! Have you ever heard one of these preachers?

Soest. Brave fellows! Not long ago, I heard one of them preach in a
field, before thousands and thousands of people. A different sort
of dish he gave us from that of our humdrum preachers, who, from the
pulpit, choke their hearers with scraps of Latin. He spoke from his
heart; told us how we had till now been led by the nose, how we had
been kept in darkness, and how we might procure more light;--ay, and he
proved it all out of the Bible.

Jetter. There may be something in it. I always said as much, and have
often pondered over the matter. It has long been running in my head.

Buyck. All the people run after them.

Soest. No wonder, since they hear both what is good and what is new.

Jetter. And what is it all about? Surely they might let every one preach
after his own fashion.

Buyck. Come, sirs! While you are talking, you; forget the wine and the
Prince of Orange.

Jetter. We must not forget him. He's a very wall of defence. In thinking
of him, one fancies, that if one could only hide behind him, the devil
himself could not get at one. Here's to William of Orange! Hurrah!

All. Hurrah! Hurrah!

Soest. Now, grey-beard, let's have your toast.

Ruysum. Here's to old soldiers! To all soldiers! War for ever!

Buyck. Bravo, old fellow. Here's to all soldiers. War for ever!

Jetter. War! War! Do ye know what ye are shouting about? That it should
slip glibly from your tongue is natural enough; but what wretched work
it is for us, I have not words to tell you. To be stunned the whole
year round by the beating of the drum; to hear of nothing except how one
troop marched here, and another there; how they came over this height,
and halted near that mill; how many were left dead on this field, and
how many on that; how they press forward, and how one wins, and another
loses, without being able to comprehend what they are fighting about;
how a town is taken, how the citizens are put to the sword, and how it
fares with the poor women and innocent children. This is a grief and a
trouble, and then one thinks every moment, "Here they come! It will be
our turn next."

Soest. Therefore every citizen must be practised in the use of arms.

Jetter. Fine talking, indeed, for him who has a wife and children. And
yet I would rather hear of soldiers than see them.

Buyck. I might take offence at that.

Jetter. It was not intended for you, countryman. When we got rid of the
Spanish garrison, we breathed freely again.

Soest. Faith! They pressed on you heavily enough.

Jetter. Mind your own business.

Soest. They came to sharp quarters with you.

Jetter. Hold your tongue.

Soest. They drove him out of kitchen, cellar, chamber--and bed. (They
laugh.)

Jetter. You are a blockhead.

Buyck. Peace, sirs! Must the soldier cry peace? Since you will not hear
anything about us, let us have a toast of your own--a citizen's toast.

Jetter. We're all ready for that! Safety and peace!

Soest. Order and freedom!

Buyck. Bravo! That will content us all.

(They ring their glasses together, and joyously repeat the words, but in
such a manner that each utters a different sound, and it becomes a kind
of chant. The old man listens, and at length joins in.)

All. Safety and peace! Order and freedom!



SCENE II.---Palace of the Regent

Margaret of Parma (in a hunting dress). Courtiers, Pages, Servants

Regent. Put off the hunt, I shall not ride to-day. Bid Machiavel attend
me.

[Exeunt all but the Regent.

The thought of these terrible events leaves me no repose! Nothing can
amuse, nothing divert my mind. These images, these cares are always
before me. The king will now say that these are the natural fruits of
my kindness, of my clemency; yet my conscience assures me that I have
adopted the wisest, the most prudent course. Ought I sooner to have
kindled, and spread abroad these flames with the breath of wrath? My
hope was to keep them in, to let them smoulder in their own ashes. Yes,
my inward conviction, and my knowledge of the circumstances, justify my
conduct in my own eyes; but in what light will it appear to my brother!
For, can it be denied that the insolence of these foreign teachers waxes
daily more audacious? They have desecrated our sanctuaries, unsettled
the dull minds of the people, and conjured up amongst them a spirit of
delusion. Impure spirits have mingled among the insurgents, horrible
deeds have been perpetrated, which to think of makes one shudder, and of
these a circumstantial account must be transmitted instantly to court.
Prompt and minute must be my communication, lest rumour outrun my
messenger, and the king suspect that some particulars have been
purposely withheld. I can see no means, severe or mild, by which to stem
the evil. Oh, what are we great ones on the waves of humanity? We
think to control them, and are ourselves driven to and fro, hither and
thither.

[Enter Machiavel.

Regent. Are the despatches to the king prepared?

Machiavel. In an hour they will be ready for your signature.

Regent. Have you made the report sufficiently circumstantial?

Machiavel. Full and circumstantial, as the king loves to have it. I
relate how the rage of the iconoclasts first broke out at St. Omer. How
a furious multitude, with staves, hatchets, hammers, ladders, and cords,
accompanied by a few armed men, first assailed the chapels, churches,
and convents, drove out the worshippers, forced the barred gates, threw
everything into confusion, tore down the altars, destroyed the statues
of the saints, defaced the pictures, and dashed to atoms, and trampled
under foot, whatever came in their way that was consecrated and holy.
How the crowd increased as it advanced, and how the inhabitants of Ypres
opened their gates at its approach. How, with incredible rapidity, they
demolished the cathedral, and burned the library of the bishop. How
a vast multitude, possessed by the like frenzy, dispersed themselves
through Menin, Comines, Verviers, Lille, nowhere encountered opposition;
and how, through almost the whole of Flanders, in a single moment, the
monstrous conspiracy declared itself, and was accomplished.

Regent. Alas! Your recital rends my heart anew; and the fear that
the evil will wax greater and greater, adds to my grief. Tell me your
thoughts, Machiavel!

Machiavel. Pardon me, your Highness, my thoughts will appear to you
but as idle fancies; and though you always seem well satisfied with my
services, you have seldom felt inclined to follow my advice. How often
have you said in jest: "You see too far, Machiavel! You should be an
historian; he who acts, must provide for the exigence of the hour." And
yet have I not predicted this terrible history? Have I not foreseen it
all?

Regent. I too foresee many things, without being able to avert them.

Machiavel. In one word, then:---you will not be able to suppress the
new faith. Let it be recognized, separate its votaries from the true
believers, give them churches of their own, include them within the pale
of social order, subject them to the restraints of law,--do this, and
you will at once tranquillize the insurgents. All other measures will
prove abortive, and you will depopulate the country.

Regent. Have you forgotten with what aversion the mere suggestion of
toleration was rejected by my brother? Know you not, how in every letter
he urgently recommends to me the maintenance of the true faith? That he
will not hear of tranquility and order being restored at the expense of
religion? Even in the provinces, does he not maintain spies, unknown to
us, in order to ascertain who inclines to the new doctrines? Has he not,
to our astonishment, named to us this or that individual residing in our
very neighbourhood, who, without its being known, was obnoxious to the
charge of heresy? Does he not enjoin harshness and severity? and am I
to be lenient? Am I to recommend for his adoption measures of indulgence
and toleration? Should I not thus lose all credit with him, and at once
forfeit his confidence?

Machiavel. I know it. The king commands and puts you in full possession
of his intentions. You are to restore tranquillity and peace by measures
which cannot fail still more to embitter men's minds, and which must
inevitably kindle the flames of war from one extremity of the country to
the other. Consider well what you are doing. The principal merchants
are infected--nobles, citizens, soldiers. What avails persisting in
our opinion, when everything is changing around us? Oh, that some good
genius would suggest to Philip that it better becomes a monarch to
govern burghers of two different creeds, than to excite them to mutual
destruction.

Regent. Never let me hear such words again. Full well I know that
the policy of statesmen rarely maintains truth and fidelity; that
it excludes from the heart candour, charity, toleration. In secular
affairs, this is, alas! only too true; but shall we trifle with God as
we do with each other? Shall we be indifferent to our established faith,
for the sake of which so many have sacrificed their lives? Shall we
abandon it to these far-fetched, uncertain, and self-contradicting
heresies?

Machiavel. Think not the worse of me for what I have uttered.

Regent. I know you and your fidelity. I know too that a man may be
both honest and sagacious, and yet miss the best and nearest way to the
salvation of his soul. There are others, Machiavel, men whom I esteem,
yet whom I needs must blame.

Machiavel. To whom do you refer?

Regent. I must confess that Egmont caused me to-day deep and heart-felt
annoyance.

Machiavel. How so?

Regent. By his accustomed demeanour, his usual indifference and levity.
I received the fatal tidings as I was leaving church, attended by him
and several others. I did not restrain my anguish, I broke forth into
lamentations, loud and deep, and turning to him, exclaimed, "See what
is going on in your province! Do you suffer it, Count, you, in whom the
king confided so implicitly?"

Machiavel. And what was his reply?

Regent. As if it were a mere trifle, an affair of no moment,
he answered: "Were the Netherlanders but satisfied as to their
constitution! The rest would soon follow."

Machiavel. There was, perhaps, more truth than discretion or piety in
his words. How can we hope to acquire and to maintain the confidence
of the Netherlander, when he sees that we are more interested in
appropriating his possessions, than in promoting his welfare, temporal
or spiritual? Does the number of souls saved by the new bishops exceed
that of the fat benefices they have swallowed? And are they not for the
most part foreigners? As yet, the office of stadtholder has been held
by Netherlanders; but do not the Spaniards betray their great and
irresistible desire to possess themselves of these places? Will not
people prefer being governed by their own countrymen, and according to
their ancient customs, rather than by foreigners, who, from their first
entrance into the land, endeavour to enrich themselves at the general
expense, who measure everything by a foreign standard, and who exercise
their authority without cordiality or sympathy?

Regent. You take part with our opponents?

Machiavel. Assuredly not in my heart. Would that with my understanding I
could be wholly on our side!

Regent. If such your disposition, it were better I should resign the
regency to them; for both Egmont and Orange entertained great hopes
of occupying this position. Then they were adversaries, now they are
leagued against me, and have become friends--inseparable friends.

Machiavel. A dangerous pair.

Regent. To speak candidly, I fear Orange.--I fear for Egmont.--Orange
meditates some dangerous scheme, his thoughts are far-reaching, he is
reserved, appears to accede to everything, never contradicts, and while
maintaining the show of reverence, with clear foresight accomplishes his
own designs.

Machiavel. Egmont, on the contrary, advances with a bold step, as if the
world were all his own.

Regent. He bears his head as proudly as if the hand of majesty were not
suspended over him.

Machiavel. The eyes of all the people are fixed upon him, and he is the
idol of their hearts.

Regent. He has never assumed the least disguise, and carries himself as
if no one had a right to call him to account. He still bears the name
of Egmont. Count Egmont is the title by which he loves to hear himself
addressed, as though he would fain be reminded that his ancestors were
masters of Guelderland. Why does he not assume his proper title,--Prince
of Gaure? What object has he in view? Would he again revive extinguished
claims?

Machiavel. I hold him for a faithful servant of the king.

Regent. Were he so inclined, what important service could he not render
to the government? Whereas, now, without benefiting himself, he has
caused us unspeakable vexation. His banquets and entertainment have
done more to unite the nobles and to knit them together than the most
dangerous secret associations. With his toasts, his guests have drunk in
a permanent intoxication, a giddy frenzy, that never subsides. How often
have his facetious jests stirred up the minds of the populace? and what
an excitement was produced among the mob by the new liveries, and the
extravagant devices of his followers!

Machiavel. I am convinced he had no design.

Regent. Be that as it may, it is bad enough. As I said before, he
injures us without benefiting himself. He treats as a jest matters of
serious import; and, not to appear negligent and remiss, we are forced
to treat seriously what he intended as a jest. Thus one urges on the
other; and what we are endeavouring to avert is actually brought to
pass. He is more dangerous than the acknowledged head of a conspiracy;
and I am much mistaken if it is not all remembered against him at court.
I cannot deny that scarcely a day passes in which he does not wound
me--deeply wound me.

Machiavel. He appears to me to act on all occasions, according to the
dictates of his conscience.

Regent. His conscience has a convenient mirror. His demeanour is often
offensive. He carries himself as if he felt he were the master here, and
were withheld by courtesy alone from making us feel his supremacy; as if
he would not exactly drive us out of the country; there'll be no need
for that.

Machiavel. I entreat you, put not too harsh a construction upon his
frank and joyous temper, which treats lightly matters of serious moment.
You but injure yourself and him.

Regent. I interpret nothing. I speak only of inevitable consequences,
and I know him. His patent of nobility and the Golden Fleece upon his
breast strengthen his confidence, his audacity. Both can protect him
against any sudden outbreak of royal displeasure. Consider the matter
closely, and he is alone responsible for the whole mischief that has
broken out in Flanders. From the first, he connived at the proceedings
of the foreign teachers, avoided stringent measures, and perhaps
rejoiced in secret that they gave us so much to do. Let me alone; on
this occasion, I will give utterance to that which weighs upon my heart;
I will not shoot my arrow in vain. I know where he is vulnerable. For he
is vulnerable.

Machiavel. Have you summoned the council? Will Orange attend?

Regent. I have sent for him to Antwerp. I will lay upon their shoulders
the burden of responsibility; they shall either strenuously co-operate
with me in quelling the evil, or at once declare themselves rebels. Let
the letters be completed without delay, and bring them for my signature.
Then hasten to despatch the trusty Vasca to Madrid, he is faithful and
indefatigable; let him use all diligence, that he may not be anticipated
by common report, that my brother, may receive the intelligence first
through him. I will myself speak with him ere he departs.

Machiavel. Your orders shall be promptly and punctually obeyed.



SCENE III.--Citizen's House

Clara, her Mother, Brackenburg

Clara. Will you not hold the yarn for me, Brackenburg?

Brackenburg. I entreat you, excuse me, Clara.

Clara. What ails you? Why refuse me this trifling service?

Brackenburg. When I hold the yarn, I stand as it were spell-bound before
you, and cannot escape your eyes.

Clara. Nonsense! Come and hold!

Mother. (knitting in her arm-chair). Give us a song! You used to be merry
once, and I had always something to laugh at.

Brackenburg. Once!

Clara. Well, let us sing.

Brackenburg. As you please.

Clara. Merrily, then, and sing away! 'Tis a soldier's song, my
favourite.

(She winds yarn, and sings with Brackenburg.)

     The drum is resounding,
     And shrill the fife plays;
     My love, for the battle,
     His brave troop arrays;
     He lifts his lance high,
     And the people he sways.
     My blood it is boiling!
     My heart throbs pit-pat!
     Oh, had I a jacket,
     With hose and with hat!
     How boldly I'd follow,
     And march through the gate;
     Through all the wide province
     I'd follow him straight.
     The foe yield, we capture
     Or shoot them! Ah, me!
     What heart-thrilling rapture
     A soldier to be!

(During the song, Brackenburg has frequently looked at Clara; at length
his voice falters, his eyes fill with tears, he lets the skein fall, and
goes to the window. Clara finishes the song alone, her Mother motions to
her, half displeased, she rises, advances a few steps towards him, turns
back, as if irresolute, and again sits down.)

Mother. What is going on in the street, Brackenburg? I hear soldiers
marching.

Brackenburg. It is the Regent's body-guard.

Clara. At this hour? What can it mean? (She rises and joins Brackenburg
at the window.) That is not the daily guard; it is more numerous! almost
all the troops! Oh, Brackenburg, go! Learn what it means. It must be
something unusual. Go, good Brackenburg, do me this favour.

Brackenburg. I am going! I will return immediately. (He offers his hand
to Clara, and she gives him hers.)

[Exit Brackenburg.

Mother. Thou sendest him away so soon!

Clara. I am curious; and, besides--do not be angry, Mother--his presence
pains me. I never know how I ought to behave towards him. I have done
him a wrong, and it goes to my very heart to see how deeply he feels it.
Well, it can't be helped now!

Mother. He is such a true-hearted fellow!

Clara. I cannot help it, I must treat him kindly. Often without a
thought, I return the gentle, loving pressure of his hand. I reproach
myself that I am deceiving him, that I am nourishing in his heart a vain
hope. I am in a sad plight! God knows, I do not willingly deceive him. I
do not wish him to hope, yet I cannot let him despair!

Mother. That is not as it should be.

Clara. I liked him once, and in my soul I like him still I could have
married him; yet I believe I was never really in love with him.

Mother. Thou wouldst always have been happy with him.

Clara. I should have been provided for, and have led a quiet life.

Mother. And through thy fault it has all been trifled away.

Clara, I am in a strange position. When I think how it has come to
pass, I know it, indeed, and I know it not. But I have only to look
upon Egmont, and I understand it all; ay, and stranger things would seem
natural then. Oh, what a man he is! All the provinces worship him. And
in his arms, should I not be the happiest creature in the world?

Mother. And how will it be in the future?

Clara. I only ask, does he love me?--does he love me?--as if there were
any doubt about it.

Mother. One has nothing but anxiety of heart with one's children. Always
care and sorrow, whatever may be the end of it! It cannot come to good!
Thou hast made thyself wretched! Thou hast made thy Mother wretched too.

Clara (quietly). Yet thou didst allow it in the beginning.

Mother. Alas! I was too indulgent; I am always too indulgent.

Clara. When Egmont rode by, and I ran to the window, did you chide
me then? Did you not come to the window yourself? When he looked up,
smiled, nodded, and greeted me, was it displeasing to you? Did you not
feel yourself honoured in your daughter?

Mother. Go on with your reproaches.

Clara (with emotion). Then, when he passed more frequently, and we felt
sure that it was on my account that he came this way, did you not remark
it yourself with secret joy? Did you call me away when I stood behind
the window-pane and awaited him?

Mother. Could I imagine that it would go so far?

Clara (with faltering voice, and repressed tears). And then, one
evening, when, enveloped in his mantle, he surprised us as we sat at
our lamp, who busied herself in receiving him, while I remained, lost in
astonishment, as if fastened to my chair?

Mother. Could I imagine that the prudent Clara would so soon be carried
away by this unhappy love? I must now endure that my daughter--

Clara (bursting into tears). Mother! How can you? You take pleasure in
tormenting me!

Mother (weeping). Ay, weep away! Make me yet more wretched by thy grief.
Is it not misery enough that my only daughter is a castaway?

Clara (rising, and speaking coldly). A castaway! The beloved of Egmont
a castaway!--What princess would not envy the poor Clara a place in his
heart? Oh, Mother,--my own Mother, you were not wont to speak thus! Dear
Mother, be kind!--Let the people think, let the neighbours whisper what
they like--this chamber, this lowly house is a paradise, since Egmont's
love dwelt here.

Mother. One cannot help liking him, that is true. He is always so kind,
frank, and open-hearted.

Clara. There is not a drop of false blood in his veins. And then,
Mother, he is indeed the great Egmont; yet, when he comes to me, how
tender he is, how kind! How he tries to conceal from me his rank, his
bravery! How anxious he is about me! so entirely the man, the friend,
the lover.

Mother. DO you expect him to-day?

Clara. Have you not seen how often I go to the window? Have you not
noticed how I listen to every noise at the door?--Though I know that
he will not come before night, yet, from the time when I rise in the
morning, I keep expecting him every moment. Were I but a boy, to follow
him always, to the court and everywhere! Could I but carry his colours
in the field--!

Mother. You were always such a lively, restless creature; even as a
little child, now wild, now thoughtful. Will you not dress yourself a
little better?

Clara. Perhaps, Mother, if I want something to do.--Yesterday, some of
his people went by, singing songs in honour. At least his name was in
the songs! The rest I could not understand. My heart leaped up into my
throat,--I would fain have called them back if I had not felt ashamed.

Mother. Take care! Thy impetuous nature will ruin all. Thou wilt betray
thyself before the people; as, not long ago, at thy cousin's, when thou
roundest out the woodcut with the description, and didst exclaim, with a
cry: "Count Egmont!"--I grew as red as fire.

Clara. Could I help crying out? It was the battle of Gravelines, and
I found in the picture the letter C. and then looked for it in the
description below. There it stood, "Count Egmont, with his horse shot
under him." I shuddered, and afterwards I could not help laughing at
the woodcut figure of Egmont, as tall as the neighbouring tower of
Gravelines, and the English ships at the side.--When I remember how
I used to conceive of a battle, and what an idea I had, as a girl, of
Count Egmont; when I listened to descriptions of him, and of all the
other earls and princes;--and think how it is with me now!

[Enter Brackenburg.

Clara. Well, what is going on?

Brackenburg. Nothing certain is known. It is rumoured that an
insurrection has lately broken out in Flanders; the Regent is afraid of
its spreading here. The castle is strongly garrisoned, the burghers are
crowding to the gates, and the streets are thronged with people. I will
hasten at once to my old father. (As if about to go.)

Clara. Shall we see you to-morrow? I must change my dress a little. I
am expecting my cousin, and I look too untidy. Come, Mother, help me a
moment. Take the book, Brackenburg, and bring me such another story.

Mother. Farewell.

Brackenburg (extending his hand). Your hand.

Clara (refusing hers). When you come next.

[Exeunt Mother and DAUGHTER.

Brackenburg (alone). I had resolved to go away again at once; and yet,
when she takes me at my word, and lets me leave her, I feel as if I
could go mad,--Wretched man! Does the fate of thy fatherland, does the
growing disturbance fail to move thee?--Are countryman and Spaniard the
same to thee? and carest thou not who rules, and who is in the right? I
wad a different sort of fellow as a schoolboy!--Then, when an exercise
in oratory was given; "Brutus' Speech for Liberty," for instance, Fritz
was ever the first, and the rector would say: "If it were only spoken
more deliberately, the words not all huddled together."--Then my blood
boiled, and longed for action.--Now I drag along, bound by the eyes of
a maiden. I cannot leave her! yet she, alas, cannot love
me!--ah--no---she--she cannot have entirely rejected me--not
entirely--yet half love is no love!--I will endure it no longer!--Can
it be true what a friend lately whispered in my ear, that she secretly
admits a man into the house by night, when she always sends me away
modestly before evening? No, it cannot be true! It is a lie! A base,
slanderous lie! Clara is as innocent as I am wretched.--She has rejected
me, has thrust me from her heart--and shall I live on thus? I cannot,
I will not endure it. Already my native land is convulsed by internal
strife, and do I perish abjectly amid the tumult? I will not endure it!
When the trumpet sounds, when a shot falls, it thrills through my bone
and marrow! But, alas, it does not rouse me! It does not summon me to
join the onslaught, to rescue, to dare.--Wretched, degrading position!
Better end it at once! Not long ago, I threw myself into the water; I
sank--but nature in her agony was too strong for me; I felt that I could
swim, and saved myself against my will. Could I but forget the time when
she loved me, seemed to love me!--Why has this happiness penetrated my
very bone and marrow? Why have these hopes, while disclosing to me a
distant paradise, consumed all the enjoyment of life?--And that first,
that only kiss!--Here (laying his hand upon the table), here we were
alone,--she had always been kind and friendly towards me,--then she
seemed to soften,--she looked at me,--my brain reeled,--I felt her lips
on mine,--and--and now?--Die, wretch! Why dost thou hesitate? (He draws
a phial from his pocket.) Thou healing poison, it shall not have been
in vain that I stole thee from my brother's medicine chest! From this
anxious fear, this dizziness, this death-agony, thou shalt deliver me at
once.




ACT II


SCENE I.--Square in Brussels

Jetter and a Master Carpenter (meeting)

Carpenter. Did I not tell you beforehand? Eight days ago, at the guild,
I said there would be serious disturbances?

Jetter. Is it, then, true that they have plundered the churches in
Flanders?

Carpenter. They have utterly destroyed both churches and chapels. They
have left nothing standing but the four bare walls. The lowest rabble!
And this it is that damages our good cause. We ought rather to have
laid our claims before the Regent, formally and decidedly, and then have
stood by them. If we speak now, if we assemble now, it will be said that
we are joining the insurgents.

Jetter. Ay, so every one thinks at first. Why should you thrust your
nose into the mess? The neck is closely connected with it.

Carpenter. I am always uneasy when tumults arise among the mob--among
people who have nothing to lose. They use as a pretext that to which we
also must appeal, and plunge the country in misery.

[Enter Soest.

Soest. Good day, sirs! What news? Is it true that the image-breakers are
coming straight in this direction?

Carpenter. Here they shall touch nothing, at any rate.

Soest. A soldier came into my shop just now to buy tobacco; I questioned
him about the matter. The Regent, though so brave and prudent a lady,
has for once lost her presence of mind. Things must be bad indeed
when she thus takes refuge behind her guards. The castle is strongly
garrisoned. It is even rumoured that she means to fly from the town.

Carpenter. Forth she shall not go! Her presence protects us, and we
will ensure her safety better than her mustachioed gentry. If she only
maintains our rights and privileges, we will stand faithfully by her.

[Enter a Soapboiler.

Soapboiler. An ugly business this! a bad business! Troubles are
beginning; all things are going wrong! Mind you keep quiet, or they'll
take you also for rioters.

Soest. Here come the seven wise men of Greece.

Soapboiler. I know there are many who in secret hold with the
Calvinists, abuse the bishops, and care not for the king. But a loyal
subject, a sincere Catholic--!

(By degrees others join the speakers, and listen.)

[Enter Vansen.

Vansen. God save you, sirs! What news?

Carpenter. Have nothing to do with him, he's a dangerous fellow.

Jetter. Is he not secretary to Dr. Wiets?

Carpenter. He has already had several masters. First he was a clerk, and
as one patron after another turned him off, on account of his roguish
tricks, he now dabbles in the business of notary and advocate, and is a
brandy-drinker to boot. (More people gather round and stand in groups.)

Vansen. So here you are, putting your heads together. Well, it is worth
talking about.

Soest. I think so too.

Vansen. Now if only one of you had heart and another head enough for the
work, we might break the Spanish fetters at once.

Soest. Sirs! you must not talk thus. We have taken our oath to the king.

Vansen. And the king to us. Mark that!

Jetter. There's sense in that? Tell us your opinion.

Others. Hearken to him; he's a clever fellow. He's sharp enough. I had
an old master once, who possessed a collection of parchments, among
which were charters of ancient constitutions, contracts, and privileges.
He set great store, too, by the rarest books. One of these contained our
whole constitution; how, at first, we Netherlanders had princes of our
own, who governed according to hereditary laws, rights, and usages; how
our ancestors paid due honour to their sovereign so long as he governed
them equitably; and how they were immediately on their guard the moment
he was for overstepping his bounds. The states were down upon him
at once; for every province, however small, had its own chamber and
representatives.

Carpenter. Hold your tongue! We knew that long ago! Every honest citizen
learns as much about the constitution as he needs.

Jetter. Let him speak; one may always learn something.

Soest. He is quite right.

Several Citizens. Go on! Go on! One does not hear this every day.

Vansen. You citizens, forsooth! You live only in the present; and as
you tamely follow the trade inherited from your fathers, so you let the
government do with you just as it pleases. You make no inquiry into the
origin, the history, or the rights of a Regent; and in consequence of
this negligence, the Spaniard has drawn the net over your ears.

Soest. Who cares for that, if one has only daily bread?

Jetter. The devil! Why did not some one come forward and tell us this in
time?

Vansen. I tell it you now. The King of Spain, whose good fortune it is
to bear sway over these provinces, has no right to govern them otherwise
than the petty princes who formerly possessed them separately. Do you
understand that?

Jetter. Explain it to us.

Vansen. Why, it is as clear as the sun. Must you not be governed
according to your provincial laws? How comes that?

A Citizen. Certainly!

Vansen. Has not the burgher of Brussels a different law from the burgher
of Antwerp? The burgher of Antwerp from the burgher of Ghent? How comes
that?

Another Citizen. By heavens!

Vansen. But if you let matters run on thus, they will soon tell you a
different story. Fie on you! Philip, through a woman, now ventures to
do what neither Charles the Bold, Frederick the Warrior, nor Charles the
Fifth could accomplish.

Soest. Yes, yes! The old princes tried it also.

Vansen. Ay! But our ancestors kept a sharp look-out. If they thought
themselves aggrieved by their sovereign, they would perhaps get his son
and heir into their hands, detain him as a hostage, and surrender him
only on the most favourable conditions. Our fathers were men! They knew
their own interests! They knew how to lay hold on what they wanted, and
to get it established! They were men of the right sort! and hence it
is that our privileges are so dearly defined, our liberties so well
secured.

Soest. What are you saying about our liberties?

All. Our liberties! our privileges! Tell us about our privileges.

Vansen. All the provinces have their peculiar advantages, but we of
Brabant are the most splendidly provided for. I have read it all.

Soest. Say on.

Jetter. Let us hear.

A Citizen. Pray do.

Vansen. First, it stands written:--The Duke of Brabant shall be to us a
good and faithful sovereign.

Soest. Good! Stands it so?

Jetter. Faithful? Is that true?

Vansen. As I tell you. He is bound to us as we are to him. Secondly: In
the exercise of his authority he shall neither exert arbitrary
power, nor exhibit caprice, himself, nor shall he, either directly or
indirectly, sanction them in others.

Jetter. Bravo! Bravo! Not exert arbitrary power.

Soest. Nor exhibit caprice.

Another. And not sanction them in others! That is the main point. Not
sanction them, either directly or indirectly.

Vansen. In express words.

Jetter. Get us the book.

A Citizen. Yes, we must see it.

Others. The book! The book!

Another. We will to the Regent with the book.

Another. Sir doctor, you shall be spokesman.

Soapboiler. Oh, the dolts!

Others. Something more out of the book!

Soapboiler. I'll knock his teeth down his throat if he says another
word.

People. We'll see who dares to lay hands upon him. Tell us about our
privileges! Have we any more privileges?

Vansen. Many, very good and very wholesome ones too. Thus it stands: The
sovereign shall neither benefit the clergy, nor increase their number,
without the consent of the nobles and of the states. Mark that! Nor
shall he alter the constitution of the country.

Soest. Stands it so?

Vansen. I'll show it you, as it was written down two or three centuries
ago.

A Citizen. And we tolerate the new bishops? The nobles must protect us,
we will make a row else!

Others. And we suffer ourselves to be intimidated by the Inquisition?

Vansen. It is your own fault.

People. We have Egmont! We have Orange! They will protect our interests.

Vansen. Your brothers in Flanders are beginning the good work.

Soapboiler. Dog! (Strikes him.)

(Others oppose the Soapboiler, and exclaim,) Are you also a Spaniard?

Another. What! This honourable man?

Another. This learned man?

(They attack the Soapboiler.)

Carpenter. For heaven's sake, peace!

(Others mingle in the fray.)

Carpenter. Citizens, what means this?

(Boys whistle, throw stones, set on dogs; citizens stand and gape,
people come running up, others walk quietly to and fro, others play all
sorts of pranks, shout and huzza.)

Others. Freedom and privilege! Privilege and freedom!

[Enter Egmont, with followers.

Egmont. Peace! Peace! good people. What is the matter? Peace, I say!
Separate them.

Carpenter. My good lord, you come like an angel from heaven. Hush! See
you nothing? Count Egmont! Honour to Count Egmont!

Egmont. Here, too! What are you about? Burgher against burgher! Does not
even the neighbourhood of our royal mistress oppose a barrier to this
frenzy? Disperse yourselves, and go about your business. 'Tis a bad
sign when you thus keep holiday on working days. How did the disturbance
begin?

(The tumult gradually subsides, and the people gather around Egmont.)

Carpenter. They are fighting about their privileges.

Egmont. Which they will forfeit through their own folly,--and who are
you? You seem honest people.

Carpenter. 'Tis our wish to be so.

Egmont. Your calling?

Carpenter. A Carpenter, and master of the guild.

Egmont. And you?

Soest. A shopkeeper.

Egmont. And you?

Jetter. A tailor.

Egmont. I remember, you were employed upon the liveries of my people.
Your name is Jetter.

Jetter. To think of your grace remembering it!

Egmont. I do not easily forget any one whom I have seen or conversed
with. Do what you can, good people, to keep the peace; you stand in bad
repute enough already. Provoke not the king still farther. The power,
after all, is in his hands. An honest burgher, who maintains himself
industriously, has everywhere as much freedom as he wants.

Carpenter. That now is just our misfortune! With all due deference,
your grace, 'tis the idle portion of the community, your drunkards and
vagabonds, who quarrel for want of something to do, and clamour about
privilege because they are hungry; they impose upon the curious and the
credulous, and, in order to obtain a pot of beer, excite disturbances
that will bring misery upon thousands. That is just what they want. We
keep our houses and chests too well guarded; they would fain drive us
away from them with fire-brands.

Egmont. You shall have all needful assistance; measures have been taken
to stem the evil by force. Make a firm stand against the new doctrines,
and do not imagine that privileges are secured by sedition, Remain at
home; suffer no crowds to assemble in the streets. Sensible people can
accomplish much.

(In the meantime the crowd has for the most part dispersed.)

Carpenter. Thanks, your excellency--thanks for your good opinion!
We will do what in us lies. (Exit Egmont.) A gracious lord! A true
Netherlander! Nothing of the Spaniard about him.

Jetter. If we had only him for a Regent? 'Tis a pleasure to follow him.

Soest. The king won't hear of that. He takes care to appoint his own
people to the place.

Jetter. Did you notice his dress? It was of the newest fashion--after
the Spanish cut.

Carpenter. A handsome gentleman.

Jetter. His head now were a dainty morsel for a heads-man.

Soest. Are you mad? What are you thinking about?

Jetter. It is stupid enough that such an idea should come into one's
head! But so it is. Whenever I see a fine long neck, I cannot help
thinking how well it would suit the block. These cursed executions! One
cannot get them out of one's head. When the lads are swimming, and I
chance to see a naked back, I think forthwith of the dozens I have seen
beaten with rods. If I meet a portly gentleman, I fancy I already see
him roasting at the stake. At night, in my dreams, I am tortured in
every limb; one cannot have a single hour's enjoyment; all merriment and
fun have long been forgotten. These terrible images seem burnt in upon
my brain.



SCENE II.--Egmont's residence

His Secretary (at a desk with papers. He rises impatiently)

Secretary. Still he comes not! And I have been waiting already full two
hours, pen in hand, the paper before me; and just to-day I was anxious
to be out so early. The floor burns under my feet. I can with difficulty
restrain my impatience. "Be punctual to the hour:" Such was his parting
injunction; now he comes not. There is so much business to get through,
I shall not have finished before midnight. He overlooks one's faults, it
is true; methinks it would be better though, were he more strict, so he
dismissed one at the appointed time. One could then arrange one's plans.
It is now full two hours since he left the Regent; who knows whom he may
have chanced to meet by the way?

[Enter Egmont.

Egmont. Well, how do matters look?

Secretary. I am ready, and three couriers are waiting.

Egmont. I have detained you too long; you look somewhat out of humour.

Secretary. In obedience to your command I have already been in
attendance for some time. Here are the papers!

Egmont. Donna Elvira will be angry with me, when she learns that I have
detained you.

Secretary. You are pleased to jest.

Egmont. No, no. Be not ashamed. I admire your taste. She is pretty, and
I have no objection that you should have a friend at the castle. What
say the letters?

Secretary. Much, my lord, but withal little that is satisfactory.

Egmont. 'Tis well that we have pleasures at home, we have the less
occasion to seek them from abroad. Is there much that requires
attention?

Secretary. Enough, my lord; three couriers are in attendance.

Egmont. Proceed! The most important.

Secretary. All is important.

Egmont. One after the other; only be prompt.

Secretary. Captain Breda sends an account of the occurrences that have
further taken place in Ghent and the surrounding districts. The tumult
is for the most part allayed.

Egmont. He doubtless reports individual acts of folly and temerity?

Secretary. He does, my lord.

Egmont. Spare me the recital.

Secretary. Six of the mob who tore down the image of the Virgin at
Verviers have been arrested. He inquires whether they are to be hanged
like the others.

Egmont. I am weary of hanging; let them be flogged and discharged.

Secretary. There are two women among them; are they to be flogged also?

Egmont. He may admonish them and let them go.

Secretary. Brink, of Breda's company, wants to marry; the captain hopes
you will not allow it. There are so many women among the troops, he
writes, that when on the march, they resemble a gang of gypsies rather
than regular soldiers.

Egmont. We must overlook it in his case. He is a fine young fellow, and
moreover entreated me so earnestly before I came away. This must be
the last time, however; though it grieves me to refuse the poor fellows
their best pastime; they have enough without that to torment them.

Secretary. Two of your people, Seter and Hart, have ill-treated a
damsel, the daughter of an inn-keeper. They got her alone and she could
not escape from them.

Egmont. If she be an honest maiden and they used violence, let them be
flogged three days in succession; and if they have any property, let him
retain as much of it as will portion the girl.

Secretary. One of the foreign preachers has been discovered passing
secretly through Comines. He swore that he was on the point of leaving
for France. According to orders, he ought to be beheaded.

Egmont. Let him be conducted quietly to the frontier, and there
admonished that, the next time, he will not escape so easily.

Secretary. A letter from your steward. He writes that money comes in
slowly, he can with difficulty send you the required sum within the
week; the late disturbances have thrown everything into the greatest
confusion.

Egmont. Money must be had! It is for him to look to the means.

Secretary. He says he will do his utmost, and at length proposes to sue
and imprison Raymond, who has been so long in your debt.

Egmont. But he has promised to pay!

Secretary. The last time he fixed a fortnight himself.

Egmont. Well, grant him another fortnight; after that he may proceed
against him.

Secretary. You do well. His non-payment of the money proceeds not from
inability, but from want of inclination. He will trifle no longer
when he sees that you are in earnest. The steward further proposes to
withhold, for half a month, the pensions which you allow to the old
soldiers, widows, and others. In the meantime some expedient may be
devised; they must make their arrangements accordingly.

Egmont. But what arrangements can be made here? These poor people want
the money more than I do. He must not think of it.

Secretary. How then, my lord, is he to raise the required sum?

Egmont. It is his business to think of that. He was told so in a former
letter.

Secretary. And therefore he makes these proposals.

Egmont. They will never do;--he must think of something else. Let him
suggest expedients that are admissible, and, before all, let him procure
the money.

Secretary. I have again before me the letter from Count Oliva. Pardon
my recalling it to your remembrance. Before all others, the aged count
deserves a detailed reply. You proposed writing to him with your own
hand. Doubtless, he loves you as a father.

Egmont. I cannot command the time;--and of all detestable things,
writing is to me the most detestable. You imitate my hand so admirably,
do you write in my name. I am expecting Orange. I cannot do it;--I wish,
however, that something soothing should be written, to allay his fears.

Secretary. Just give me a notion of what you wish to communicate; I
will at once draw up the answer, and lay it before you. It shall be so
written that it might pass for your hand in a court of justice.

Egmont. Give me the letter. (After glancing over it.) Dear, excellent,
old man! Wert thou then so cautious in thy youth? Didst thou never mount
a breach? Didst thou remain in the rear of battle at the suggestion of
prudence?--What affectionate solicitude! He has indeed my safety and
happiness at heart, but considers not, that he who lives but to save his
life, is already dead.--Charge him not to be anxious on my account; I
act as circumstances require, and shall be upon my guard. Let him
use his influence at court in my favour, and be assured of my warmest
thanks.

Secretary. Is that all? He expects still more.

Egmont. What can I say? If you choose to write more fully, do so. The
matter turns upon a single point; he would have me live as I cannot
live. That I am joyous, live fast, take matters easily, is my good
fortune; nor would I exchange it for the safety of a sepulchre. My
blood rebels against the Spanish mode of life, nor have I the least
inclination to regulate my movements by the new and cautious measures of
the court. Do I live only to think of life? Am I to forego the enjoyment
of the present moment in order to secure the next? And must that in its
turn be consumed in anxieties and idle fears?

Secretary. I entreat you, my lord, be not so harsh towards the venerable
man. You are wont to be friendly towards every one. Say a kindly word to
allay the anxiety of your noble friend. See how considerate he is, with
what delicacy he warns you.

Egmont. Yet he harps continually on the same string. He knows of old
how I detest these admonitions. They serve only to perplex and are of
no avail. What if I were a somnambulist, and trod the giddy summit of a
lofty house,--were it the part of friendship to call me by my name,
to warn me of my danger, to waken, to kill me? Let each choose his own
path, and provide for his own safety.

Secretary. It may become you to be without a fear, but those who know
and love you--

Egmont (looking over the letter). Then he recalls the old story of our
sayings and doings, one evening, in the wantonness of conviviality
and wine; and what conclusions and inferences were thence drawn and
circulated throughout the whole kingdom! Well, we had a cap and bells
embroidered on the sleeves of our servants' liveries, and afterwards
exchanged this senseless device for a bundle of arrows;--a still more
dangerous symbol for those who are bent upon discovering a meaning where
nothing is meant, These and similar follies were conceived and brought
forth in a moment of merriment. It was at our suggestion that a noble
troop, with beggars' wallets, and a self-chosen nickname, with mock
humility recalled the King's duty to his remembrance. It was at our
suggestion too--well, what does it signify? Is a carnival jest to be
construed into high treason? Are we to be grudged the scanty, variegated
rags, wherewith a youthful spirit and heated imagination would adorn the
poor nakedness of life? Take life too seriously, and what is it worth?
If the morning wake us to no new joys, if in the evening we have
no pleasures to hope for, is it worth the trouble of dressing and
undressing? Does the sun shine on me to-day, that I may reflect on what
happened yesterday? That I may endeavour to foresee and control, what
can neither be foreseen nor controlled,--the destiny of the morrow?
Spare me these reflections, we will leave them to scholars and
courtiers. Let them ponder and contrive, creep hither and thither,
and surreptitiously achieve their ends.--If you can make use of these
suggestions, without swelling your letter into a volume, it is well.
Everything appears of exaggerated importance to the good old man. 'Tis
thus the friend, who has long held our hand, grasps it more warmly ere
he quits his hold.

Secretary. Pardon me, the pedestrian grows dizzy when he beholds the
charioteer drive past with whirling speed.

Egmont. Child! Child! Forbear! As if goaded by invisible spirits, the
sun-steeds of time bear onward the light car of our destiny; and nothing
remains for us but, with calm self-possession, firmly to grasp the
reins, and now right, now left, to steer the wheels here from the
precipice and there from the rock. Whither he is hasting, who knows?
Does any one consider whence he came?

Secretary. My lord! my lord!

Egmont. I stand high, but I can and must rise yet higher. Courage,
strength, and hope possess my soul. Not yet have I attained the height
of my ambition; that once achieved, I will stand firmly and without
fear. Should I fall, should a thunder-clap, a storm-blast, ay, a false
step of my own, precipitate me into the abyss, so be it! I shall lie
there with thousands of others. I have never disdained, even for a
trifling stake, to throw the bloody die with my gallant comrades; and
shall I hesitate now, when all that is most precious in life is set upon
the cast?

Secretary. Oh, my lord! you know not what you say! May Heaven protect
you!

Egmont Collect your papers. Orange is coming. Dispatch what is most
urgent, that the couriers may set forth before the gates are closed.
The rest may wait. Leave the Count's letter till to-morrow. Fail not
to visit Elvira, and greet her from me. Inform yourself concerning the
Regent's health. She cannot be well, though she would fain conceal it.

[Exit Secretary.

[Enter Orange.

Egmont. Welcome, Orange; you appear somewhat disturbed.

Orange. What say you to our conference with the Regent?

Egmont. I found nothing extraordinary in her manner of receiving us.
I have often seen her thus before. She appeared to me to be somewhat
indisposed.

Orange. Marked you not that she was more reserved than usual? She
began by cautiously approving our conduct during the late insurrection;
glanced at the false light in which, nevertheless, it might be viewed;
and finally turned the discourse to her favourite topic--that her
gracious demeanour, her friendship for us Netherlanders, had never been
sufficiently recognized, never appreciated as it deserved; that nothing
came to a prosperous issue; that for her part she was beginning to grow
weary of it; that the king must at last resolve upon other measures. Did
you hear that?

Egmont. Not all; I was thinking at the time of something else. She is
a woman, good Orange, and all women expect that every one shall submit
passively to their gentle yoke; that every Hercules shall lay aside his
lion's skin, assume the distaff, and swell their train; and, because
they are themselves peaceably inclined, imagine forsooth, that the
ferment which seizes a nation, the storm which powerful rivals excite
against one another, may be allayed by one soothing word, and the most
discordant elements be brought to unite in tranquil harmony at their
feet. 'Tis thus with her; and since she cannot accomplish her object,
why she has no resource left but to lose her temper, to menace us with
direful prospects for the future, and to threaten to take her departure.

Orange. Think you not that this time she will fulfil her threat?

Egmont. Never! How often have I seen her actually prepared for the
journey? Whither should she go? Being here a stadtholder, a queen, think
you that she could endure to spend her days in insignificance at her
brother's court, or to repair to Italy, and there drag on her existence
among her old family connections?

Orange. She is held incapable of this determination, because you have
already seen her hesitate and draw back; nevertheless, it lies in her
to take this step; new circumstances may impel her to the long-delayed
resolve. What if she were to depart, and the king to send another?

Egmont. Why, he would come, and he also would have business enough upon
his hands. He would arrive with vast projects and schemes to reduce
all things to order, to subjugate and combine; and to-day he would be
occupied with this trifle, to-morrow with that, and the day following
have to deal with some unexpected hindrance. He would spend one month
in forming plans, another in mortification at their failure, and half
a year would be consumed in cares for a single province. With him also
time would pass, his head grow dizzy, and things hold on their ordinary
course, till instead of sailing into the open sea, according to the plan
which he had previously marked out, he might thank if, amid the tempest,
he were able to keep his vessel off the rocks.

Orange. What if the king were advised to try an experiment?

Egmont. Which should be--?

Orange. To try how the body would get on without the head.

Egmont. How?

Orange. Egmont, our interests have for years weighed upon my heart; I
ever stand as over a chess-board, and regard no move of my adversary as
insignificant; and as men of science carefully investigate the secrets
of nature, so I hold it to be the duty, ay, the very vocation of a
prince, to acquaint himself with the dispositions and intentions of
all parties. I have reason to fear an outbreak. The king has long acted
according to certain principles; he finds that they do not lead to a
prosperous issue; what more probable than that he should seek it some
other way?

Egmont. I do not believe it. When a man grows old, has attempted much,
and finds that the world cannot be made to move according to his will,
he must needs grow weary of it at last.

Orange. One thing has yet to be attempted.

Egmont. What?

Orange. To spare the people, and to put an end to the princes.

Egmont. How many have long been haunted by this dread? There is no cause
for such anxiety.

Orange. Once I felt anxious; gradually I became suspicious; suspicion
has at length grown into certainty.

Egmont. Has the king more faithful servants than ourselves?

Orange. We serve him after our own fashion; and, between ourselves,
it must be confessed that we understand pretty well how to make the
interests of the king square with our own.

Egmont. And who does not? He has our duty and submission, in so far as
they are his due.

Orange. But what if he should arrogate still more, and regard as
disloyalty what we esteem the maintenance of our just rights?

Egmont. We shall know in that case how to defend ourselves. Let him
assemble the Knights of the Golden Fleece; we will submit ourselves to
their decision.

Orange. What if the sentence were to precede the trial? punishment, the
sentence?

Egmont. It were an injustice of which Philip is incapable; a folly which
I cannot impute either to him or to his counsellors.

Orange. And how if they were both unjust and foolish?

Egmont. No, Orange, it is impossible. Who would venture to lay hands on
us? The attempt to capture us were a vain and fruitless enterprize. No,
they dare not raise the standard of tyranny so high. The breeze
that should waft these tidings over the land would kindle a mighty
conflagration. And what object would they have in view? The king alone
has no power either to judge or to condemn us and would they attempt our
lives by assassination? They cannot intend it. A terrible league would
unite the entire people. Direful hate and eternal separation from the
crown of Spain would, on the instant, be forcibly declared.

Orange. The flames would then rage over our grave, and the blood of our
enemies flow, a vain oblation. Let us consider, Egmont.

Egmont. But how could they effect this purpose?

Orange. Alva is on the way.

Egmont. I do not believe it.

Orange. I know it.

Egmont. The Regent appeared to know nothing of it.

Orange. And, therefore, the stronger is my conviction. The Regent will
give place to him. I know his blood-thirsty disposition, and he brings
an army with him.

Egmont. To harass the provinces anew? The people will be exasperated to
the last degree.

Orange. Their leaders will be secured.

Egmont. No! No!

Orange. Let us retire, each to his province. There we can strengthen
ourselves; the Duke will not begin with open violence.

Egmont. Must we not greet him when he comes?

Orange. We will delay.

Egmont. What if, on his arrival, he should summon us in the king's name?

Orange. We will answer evasively.

Egmont. And if he is urgent?

Orange. We will excuse ourselves.

Egmont. And if he insist?

Orange. We shall be the less disposed to come.

Egmont. Then war is declared; and we are rebels. Do not suffer prudence
to mislead you, Orange. I know it is not fear that makes you yield.
Consider this step.

Orange. I have considered it.

Egmont. Consider for what you are answerable if you are wrong. For the
most fatal war that ever yet desolated a country. Your refusal is the
signal that at once summons the provinces to arms, that justifies every
cruelty for which Spain has hitherto so anxiously sought a pretext. With
a single nod you will excite to the direst confusion what, with patient
effort, we have so long kept in abeyance. Think of the towns, the
nobles, the people; think of commerce, agriculture, trade! Realize the
murder, the desolation! Calmly the soldier beholds his comrade fall
beside him in the battlefield. But towards you, carried downwards by the
stream, shall float the corpses of citizens, of children, of maidens,
till, aghast with horror, you shall no longer know whose cause you are
defending, since you shall see those, for whose liberty you drew
the sword, perishing around you. And what will be your emotions when
conscience whispers, "It was for my own safety that I drew it "?

Orange. We are not ordinary men, Egmont. If it becomes us to sacrifice
ourselves for thousands, it becomes us no less to spare ourselves for
thousands.

Egmont. He who spares himself becomes an object of suspicion ever to
himself.

Orange. He who is sure of his own motives can, with confidence, advance
or retreat.

Egmont. Your own act will render certain the evil that you dread.

Orange. Wisdom and courage alike prompt us to meet an inevitable evil.

Egmont. When the danger is imminent the faintest hope should be taken
into account.

Orange We have not the smallest footing left; we are on the very brink
of the precipice.

Egmont. Is the king's favour on ground so narrow?

Orange. Not narrow, perhaps, but slippery.

Egmont. By heavens! he is belied. I cannot endure that he should be so
meanly thought of! He is Charles's son, and incapable of meanness.

Orange. Kings of course do nothing mean.

Egmont. He should be better known.

Orange. Our knowledge counsels us not to await the result of a dangerous
experiment.

Egmont. No experiment is dangerous, the result of which we have the
courage to meet.

Orange. You are irritated, Egmont.

Egmont. I must see with my own eyes.

Orange. Oh that for once you saw with mine! My friend, because your eyes
are open, you imagine that you see. I go! Await Alva's arrival, and God
be with you! My refusal to do so may perhaps save you. The dragon may
deem the prey not worth seizing, if he cannot swallow us both. Perhaps
he may delay, in order more surely to execute his purpose; in the
meantime you may see matters in their true light. But then, be prompt!
Lose not a moment! Save,--oh, save yourself! Farewell!--Let nothing
escape your vigilance:--how many troops he brings with him; how he
garrisons the town; what force the Regent retains; how your friends are
prepared. Send me tidings--Egmont--Egmont. What would you?

Orange (grasping his hand). Be persuaded! Go with me!

Egmont. How! Tears, Orange!

Orange. To weep for a lost friend is not unmanly.

Egmont. You deem me lost?

Orange. You are lost! Consider! Only a brief respite is left you.
Farewell.

[Exit.

Egmont (alone). Strange that the thoughts of other men should exert such
an influence over us. These fears would never have entered my mind; and
this man infects me with his solicitude. Away! 'Tis a foreign drop in my
blood! Kind nature, cast it forth! And to erase the furrowed lines from
my brow there yet remains indeed a friendly means.




ACT III


SCENE I.--Palace of the Regent Margaret of Parma

Regent. I might have expected it. Ha! when we live immersed in anxiety
and toil, we imagine that we achieve the utmost that is possible;
while he, who, from a distance, looks on and commands, believes that he
requires only the possible. O ye kings! I had not thought it could have
galled me thus. It is so sweet to reign!--and to abdicate? I know not
how my father could do so; but I will also.

Machiavel appears in the back-ground

Regent. Approach, Machiavel. I am thinking over this letter from my
brother.

Machiavel. May I know what it contains?

Regent. As much tender consideration for me as anxiety for his states.
He extols the firmness, the industry, the fidelity, with which I have
hitherto watched over the interests of his Majesty in these provinces.
He condoles with me that the unbridled people occasion me so much
trouble. He is so thoroughly convinced of the depth of my views, so
extraordinarily satisfied with the prudence of my conduct, that I must
almost say the letter is too politely written for a king--certainly for
a brother.

Machiavel. It is not the first time that he has testified to you his
just satisfaction.

Regent. But the first time that it is a mere rhetorical figure.

Machiavel. I do not understand you.

Regent. You soon will.--For after this preamble he is of opinion that
without soldiers, without a small army indeed,---I shall always cut a
sorry figure here! We did wrong, he says, to withdraw our troops from
the provinces at the remonstrance of the inhabitants; a garrison, he
thinks, which shall press upon the neck of the burgher, will prevent
him, by its weight, from making any lofty spring.

Machiavel. It would irritate the public mind to the last degree.

Regent. The king thinks, however, do you hear?--he thinks that a clever
general, one who never listens to reason, will be able to deal promptly
with all parties;--people and nobles, citizens and peasants; he
therefore sends, with a powerful army, the Duke of Alva.

Machiavel. Alva?

Regent. You are surprised.

Machiavel. You say, he sends, he asks doubtless whether he should send.

Regent. The king asks not, he sends.

Machiavel. You will then have an experienced warrior in your service.

Regent. In my service? Speak out, Machiavel.

Machiavel. I would not anticipate you.

Regent. And I would I could dissimulate. It wounds me--wounds me to
the quick. I had rather my brother would speak his mind than attach his
signature to formal epistles drawn up by a Secretary of state.

Machiavel. Can they not comprehend?--

Regent. I know them both within and without. They would fain make a
clean sweep; and since they cannot set about it themselves, they give
their confidence to any one who comes with a besom in his hand. Oh,
it seems to me as if I saw the king and his council worked upon this
tapestry.

Machiavel. So distinctly!

Regent. No feature is wanting. There are good men among them. The honest
Roderigo, so experienced and so moderate, who does not aim too high, yet
lets nothing sink too low; the upright Alonzo, the diligent Freneda, the
steadfast Las Vargas, and others who join them when the good party are
in power. But there sits the hollow-eyed Toledan, with brazen front and
deep fire-glance, muttering between his teeth about womanish softness,
ill-timed concession, and that women can ride trained steeds, well
enough, but are themselves bad masters of the horse, and the like
pleasantries, which, in former times, I have been compelled to hear from
political gentlemen.

Machiavel. You have chosen good colours for your picture.

Regent. Confess, Machiavel, among the tints from which I might select,
there is no hue so livid, so jaundice-like, as Alva's complexion,
and the colour he is wont to paint with. He regards every one as a
blasphemer or traitor, for under this head they can all be racked,
impaled, quartered, and burnt at pleasure. The good I have accomplished
here appears as nothing seen from a distance, just because it is good.
Then he dwells on every outbreak that is past, recalls every disturbance
that is quieted, and brings before the king such a picture of mutiny,
sedition, and audacity, that we appear to him to be actually devouring
one another, when with us the transient explosion of a rude people has
long been forgotten. Thus he conceives a cordial hatred for the poor
people; he views them with horror, as beasts and monsters; looks around
for fire and sword, and imagines that by such means human beings are
subdued.

Machiavel. You appear to me too vehement; you take the matter too
seriously. Do you not remain Regent?

Regent. I am aware of that. He will bring his instructions. I am old
enough in state affairs to understand how people can be supplanted,
without being actually deprived of office. First, he will produce a
commission, couched in terms somewhat obscure and equivocal; he will
stretch his authority, for the power is in his hands; if I complain,
he will hint at secret instructions; if I desire to see them, he will
answer evasively; if I insist, he will produce a paper of totally
different import; and if this fail to satisfy me, he will go on
precisely as if I had never interfered. Meanwhile he will have
accomplished what I dread, and have frustrated my most cherished
schemes.

Machiavel. I wish I could contradict you.

Regent. His harshness and cruelty will again arouse the turbulent
spirit, which, with unspeakable patience, I have succeeded in quelling;
I shall see my work destroyed before my eyes, and have besides to bear
the blame of his wrongdoing.

Machiavel. Await it, your Highness.

Regent. I have sufficient self-command to remain quiet. Let him come; I
will make way for him with the best grace ere he pushes me aside.

Machiavel. So important a step thus suddenly? Regent. 'Tis harder than
you imagine. He who is accustomed to rule, to hold daily in his hand the
destiny of thousands, descends from the throne as into the grave. Better
thus, however, than linger a spectre among the living, and with hollow
aspect endeavour to maintain a place which another has inherited, and
already possesses and enjoys.



SCENE II.--Clara's dwelling

Clara and her Mother

Mother. Such a love as Brackenburg's I have never seen; I thought it was
to be found only in romance books.

Clara (walking up and down the room, humming a song). With love's
thrilling rapture What joy can compare!

Mother. He suspects thy attachment to Egmont; and yet, if thou wouldst
but treat him a little kindly, I do believe he would marry thee still,
if thou wouldst have him.

Clara (sings).

     Blissful
     And tearful,
     With thought-teeming brain;
     Hoping
     And fearing
     In passionate pain;
     Now shouting in triumph,
     Now sunk in despair;--
     With love's thrilling rapture
     What joy can compare!

Mother. Have done with such baby-nonsense!

Clara. Nay, do not abuse it; 'tis a song of marvellous virtue. Many a
time have I lulled a grown child to sleep with it.

Mother. Ay! Thou canst think of nothing but thy love. If it only did not
put everything else out of thy head. Thou shouldst have more regard for
Brackenburg, I tell thee. He may make thee happy yet some day.

Clara. He?

Mother. Oh, yes! A time will come! You children live only in the
present, and give no ear to our experience. Youth and happy love, all
has an end; and there comes a time when one thanks God if one has any
corner to creep into.

Clara (shudders, and after a pause stands up). Mother, let that time
come--like death. To think of it beforehand is horrible! And if it come!
If we must--then--we will bear ourselves as we may. Live without thee,
Egmont! (Weeping.) No! It is impossible.

[Enter Egmont (enveloped in a horseman's cloak, his hat drawn over his
face).

Egmont. Clara!

Clara (utters a cry and starts back). Egmont! (She hastens towards him.)
Egmont! (She embraces and leans upon him.) O thou good, kind, sweet
Egmont! Art thou come? Art thou here indeed!

Egmont. Good evening, Mother?

Mother. God save you, noble sir! My daughter has well-nigh pined to
death, because you have stayed away so long; she talks and sings about
you the live-long day.

Egmont. You will give me some supper?

Mother. You do us too much honour. If we only had anything--

Clara. Certainly! Be quiet, Mother; I have provided everything; there is
something prepared. Do not betray me, Mother.

Mother. There's little enough.

Clara. Never mind! And then I think when he is with me I am never
hungry; so he cannot, I should think, have any great appetite when I am
with him.

Egmont. Do you think so? (Clara stamps with her foot and turns pettishly
away.) What ails you?

Clara. How cold you are to-day! You have not yet offered me a kiss. Why
do you keep your arms enveloped in your mantle, like a new-born babe? It
becomes neither a soldier nor a lover to keep his arms muffled up.

Egmont. Sometimes, dearest, sometimes. When the soldier stands in ambush
and would delude the foe, he collects his thoughts, gathers his mantle
around him, and matures his plan and a lover--

Mother. Will you not take a seat, and make yourself comfortable? I must
to the kitchen, Clara thinks of nothing when you are here. You must put
up with what we have.

Egmont. Your good-will is the best seasoning.

[Exit Mother.

Clara. And what then is my love?

Egmont. Just what thou wilt.

Clara. Liken it to anything, if you have the heart.

Egmont. But first. (He flings aside his mantle, and appears arrayed in a
magnificent dress.)

Clara. Oh heavens!

Egmont. Now my arms are free! (Embraces her.)

Clara. Don't! You will spoil your dress. (She steps back.) How
magnificent! I dare not touch you.

Egmont. Art thou satisfied? I promised to come once arrayed in Spanish
fashion.

Clara. I had ceased to remind you of it; I thought you did not like
it--ah, and the Golden Fleece!

Egmont. Thou seest it now.

Clara. And did the emperor really hang it round thy neck!

Egmont. He did, my child! And this chain and Order invest the wearer
with the noblest privileges. On earth I acknowledge no judge over
my actions, except the grand master of the Order, with the assembled
chapter of knights.

Clara. Oh, thou mightest let the whole world sit in judgment over thee.
The velvet is too splendid! and the braiding! and the embroidery! One
knows not where to begin.

Egmont. There, look thy fill.

Clara. And the Golden Fleece! You told me its history, and said it is
the symbol of everything great and precious, of everything that can be
merited and won by diligence and toil. It is very precious--I may liken
it to thy love;--even so I wear it next my heart;--and then--

Egmont. What wilt thou say?

Clara. And then again it is not like.

Egmont. How so?

Clara. I have not won it by diligence and toil, I have not deserved it.

Egmont. It is otherwise in love. Thou dost deserve it because thou hast
not sought it--and, for the most part, those only obtain love who seek
it not.

Clara. Is it from thine own experience that thou hast learned this?
Didst thou make that proud remark in reference to thyself? Thou, whom
all the people love?

Egmont. Would that I had done something for them! That I could do
anything for them! It is their own good pleasure to love me.

Clara. Thou hast doubtless been with the Regent to-day?

Egmont. I have.

Clara. Art thou upon good terms with her?

Egmont So it would appear. We are kind and serviceable to each other.

Clara. And in thy heart?

Egmont. I like her. True, we have each our own views; but that is
nothing to the purpose. She is an excellent woman, knows with whom
she has to deal, and would be penetrating enough were she not quite
so suspicious. I give her plenty of employment, because she is always
suspecting some secret motive in my conduct when, in fact, I have none.

Clara. Really none?

Egmont. Well, with one little exception, perhaps. All wine deposits lees
in the cask in the course of time. Orange furnishes her still better
entertainment, and is a perpetual riddle. He has got the credit of
harbouring some secret design; and she studies his brow to discover his
thoughts, and his steps, to learn in what direction they are bent.

Clara. Does she dissemble?

Egmont. She is Regent--and do you ask?

Clara. Pardon me; I meant to say, is she false?

Egmont. Neither more nor less than everyone who has his own objects to
attain.

Clara. I should never feel at home in the world. But she has a
masculine spirit, and is another sort of woman from us housewives and
sempstresses. She is great, steadfast, resolute.

Egmont. Yes, when matters are not too much involved. For once, however,
she is a little disconcerted.

Clara. How so?

Egmont. She has a moustache, too, on her upper lip, and occasionally an
attack of the gout. A regular Amazon.

Clara. A majestic woman! I should dread to appear before her.

Egmont. Yet thou art not wont to be timid! It would not be fear, only
maidenly bashfulness.

(Clara casts down her eyes, takes his hand, and leans upon him.)

Egmont. I understand thee, dearest! Thou mayst raise thine eyes. (He
kisses her eyes.)

Clara. Let me be silent! Let me embrace thee! Let me look into thine
eyes, and find there everything--hope and comfort, joy and sorrow!
(She embraces and gazes on him.) Tell me! Oh, tell me! It seems so
strange--art thou indeed Egmont! Count Egmont! The great Egmont, who
makes so much noise in the world, who figures in the newspapers, who is
the support and stay of the provinces?

Egmont. No, Clara, I am not he.

Clara. How?

Egmont. Seest thou, Clara? Let me sit down! (He seats himself, she
kneels on a footstool before him, rests her arms on his knees and
looks up in his face.) That Egmont is a morose, cold, unbending Egmont,
obliged to be upon his guard, to assume now this appearance and now
that; harassed, misapprehended and perplexed, when the crowd esteem him
light-hearted and gay; beloved by a people who do not know their own
minds; honoured and extolled by the intractable multitude; surrounded
by friends in whom he dares not confide; observed by men who are on the
watch to supplant him; toiling and striving, often without an object,
generally without a reward. O let me conceal how it fares with him,
let me not speak of his feelings! But this Egmont, Clara, is calm,
unreserved, happy, beloved and known by the best of hearts, which is
also thoroughly known to him, and which he presses to his own with
unbounded confidence and love. (He embraces her.) This is thy Egmont.

Clara. So let me die! The world has no joy after this!




ACT IV


SCENE I.--A Street

Jetter, Carpenter

Jetter. Hist! neighbour,--a word!

Carpenter. Go your way and be quiet.

Jetter. Only one word. Is there nothing new?

Carpenter. Nothing, except that we are anew forbidden to speak.

Jetter. How?

Carpenter. Step here, close to this house. Take heed! Immediately on
his arrival, the Duke of Alva published a decree, by which two or three,
found conversing together in the streets, are without trial, declared
guilty of high treason.

Jetter. Alas!

Carpenter. To speak of state affairs is prohibited on pain of perpetual
imprisonment.

Jetter. Alas for our liberty!

Carpenter. And no one, on pain of death, shall censure the measures of
government.

Jetter. Alas, for our heads!

Carpenter. And fathers, Mothers, children, kindred, friends, and
servants, are invited, by the promise of large rewards, to disclose
what passes in the privacy of our homes, before an expressly appointed
tribunal.

Jetter. Let us go home.

Carpenter. And the obedient are promised that they shall suffer no
injury, either in person or estate.

Jetter. How gracious!---I felt ill at ease the moment the duke entered
the town. Since then, it has seemed to me, as though the heavens were
covered with black crape, which hangs so low, that one must stoop down
to avoid knocking one's head against it.

Carpenter. And how do you like his soldiers? They are a different sort
of crabs from those we have been used to.

Jetter. Faugh! It gives one the cramp at one's heart to see such a troop
march down the street. As straight as tapers, with fixed look, only one
step, however many there may be; and when they stand sentinel, and
you pass one of them, it seems as though he would look you through and
through; and he looks so stiff and morose, that you fancy you see a
task-master at every corner. They offend my sight. Our militia were
merry fellows; they took liberties, stood their legs astride, their
hats over their ears, they lived and let live; these fellows are like
machines with a devil inside them.

Carpenter. Were such an one to cry, "Halt!" and level his musket, think
you one would stand?

Jetter. I should fall dead upon the spot.

Carpenter. Let us go home!

Jetter No good can come of it. Farewell.

[Enter Soest.

Soest. Friends! Neighbours! Carpenter. Hush! Let us go.

Soest. Have you heard?

Jetter. Only too much!

Soest. The Regent is gone.

Jetter. Then Heaven help us.

Carpenter. She was some stay to us.

Soest. Her departure was sudden and secret. She could not agree with the
duke; she has sent word to the nobles that she intends to return. No one
believes it, however.

Carpenter. God pardon the nobles for letting this new yoke be laid upon
our necks. They might have prevented it. Our privileges are gone.

Jetter. For Heaven's sake not a word about privileges. I already scent
an execution; the sun will not come forth; the fogs are rank.

Soest. Orange, too, is gone.

Carpenter. Then are we quite deserted!

Soest, Count Egmont is still here.

Jetter. God be thanked! Strengthen him, all ye saints, to do his utmost;
he is the only one who can help us.

[Enter Vansen.

Vansen. Have I at length found a few brave citizens who have not crept
out of sight?

Jetter. Do us the favour to pass on.

Vansen. You are not civil.

Jetter. This is no time for compliments. Does your back itch again? are
your wounds already healed?

Vansen. Ask a soldier about his wounds? Had I cared for blows, nothing
good would have come of me.

Jetter. Matters may grow more serious.

Vansen. You feel from the gathering storm a pitiful weakness in your
limbs, it seems.

Carpenter. Your limbs will soon be in motion elsewhere, if you do not
keep quiet.

Vansen. Poor mice! The master of the house procures a new cat, and ye
are straight in despair! The difference is very trifling; we shall get
on as we did before, only be quiet.

Carpenter. You are an insolent knave.

Vansen. Gossip! Let the duke alone. The old cat looks as though he had
swallowed devils, instead of mice, and could not now digest them. Let
him alone, I say; he must eat, drink, and sleep, like other men. I am
not afraid if we only watch our opportunity, At first he makes quick
work Of it; by-and-by, however, he too will find that it is pleasanter
to live in the larder, among flitches of bacon, and to rest by night,
than to entrap a few solitary mice in the granary. Go to! I know the
stadtholders.

Carpenter. What such a fellow can say with impunity! Had I said such a
thing, I should not hold myself safe a moment.

Vansen. Do not make yourselves uneasy! God in heaven does not trouble
himself about you, poor worms, much less the Regent.

Jetter. Slanderer!

Vansen. I know some for whom it would be better if, instead of their own
high spirits, they had a little tailor's blood in their veins.

Carpenter. What mean you by that?

Vansen. Hum! I mean the count.

Jetter. Egmont! What has he to fear?

Vansen. I'm a poor devil, and could live a whole year round on what he
loses in a single night; yet he would do well to give me his revenue for
a twelvemonth, to have my head upon his shoulders for one quarter of an
hour.

Jetter. You think yourself very clever; yet there is more sense in the
hairs of Egmont's head, than in your brains.

Vansen. Perhaps so! Not more shrewdness, however. These gentry are
the most apt to deceive themselves. He should be more chary of his
confidence.

Jetter. How his tongue wags! Such a gentleman!

Vansen. Just because he is not a tailor.

Jetter. You audacious scoundrel!

Vansen. I only wish he had your courage in his limbs for an hour to make
him uneasy, and plague and torment him, till he were compelled to leave
the town.

Jetter. What nonsense you talk; why he's as safe as a star in heaven.

Vansen. Have you ever seen one snuff itself out? Off it went!

Carpenter. Who would dare to meddle with him?

Vansen. Will you interfere to prevent it? Will you stir up an
insurrection if he is arrested?

Jetter. Ah!

Vansen. Will you risk your ribs for his sake?

Soest. Eh!

Vansen (mimicking them). Eh! Oh! Ah! Run through the alphabet in your
wonderment. So it is, and so it will remain. Heaven help him!

Jetter. Confound your impudence. Can such a noble, upright man have
anything to fear?

Vansen. In this world the rogue has everywhere the advantage. At the
bar, he makes a fool of the judge; on the bench, he takes pleasure in
convicting the accused. I have had to copy out a protocol, where the
commissary was handsomely rewarded by the court, both with praise and
money, because through his cross-examination, an honest devil, against
whom they had a grudge, was made out to be a rogue.

Carpenter. Why, that again is a downright lie. What can they want to get
out of a man if he is innocent?

Vansen. Oh, you blockhead! When nothing can be worked out of a man by
cross-examination, they work it into him. Honesty is rash and withal
somewhat presumptuous; at first they question quietly enough, and the
prisoner, proud of his innocence, as they call it, comes out with
much that a sensible man would keep back! then, from these answers the
inquisitor proceeds to put new questions, and is on the watch for the
slightest contradiction; there he fastens his line; and, let the poor
devil lose his self-possession, say too much here, or too little there,
or, Heaven knows from what whim or other, let him withhold some trifling
circumstance, or at any moment give way to fear--then we're on the
right track, and, I assure you, no beggar-woman seeks for rags among the
rubbish with more care than such a fabricator of rogues, from trifling,
crooked, disjointed, misplaced, misprinted, and concealed facts and
information, acknowledged or denied, endeavours at length to patch up a
scarecrow, by means of which he may at least hang his victim in effigy;
and the poor devil may thank Heaven if he is in a condition to see
himself hanged.

Jetter. He has a ready tongue of his own.

Carpenter. This may serve well enough with flies. Wasps laugh at your
cunning web.

Vansen. According to the kind of spider. The tall duke, now, has just
the look of your garden spider; not the large-bellied kind, they are
less dangerous; but your long-footed, meagre-bodied gentleman, that does
not fatten on his diet, and whose threads are slender indeed, but not
the less tenacious.

Jetter. Egmont is knight of the Golden Fleece, who dare lay hands on
him? He can be tried only by his peers, by the assembled knights of his
order. Your own foul tongue and evil conscience betray you into this
nonsense.

Vansen. Think you that I wish him ill? I would you were in the right. He
is an excellent gentleman. He once let off, with a sound drubbing,
some good friends of mine, who would else have been hanged. Now take
yourselves off! begone, I advise you! Yonder I see the patrol again
commencing their round. They do not look as if they would be willing to
fraternize with us over a glass. We must wait, and bide our time. I
have a couple of nieces and a gossip of a tapster; if after enjoying
themselves in their company, they are not tamed, they are regular
wolves.



SCENE II.--The Palace of Eulenberg, Residence of the Duke of Alva

Silva and Gomez (meeting)

Silva. Have you executed the duke's commands?

Gomez. Punctually. All the day-patrols have received orders to assemble
at the appointed time, at the various points that I have indicated.
Meanwhile, they march as usual through the town to maintain order.
Each is ignorant respecting the movements of the rest, and imagines the
command to have reference to himself alone; thus in a moment the cordon
can be formed, and all the avenues to the palace occupied. Know you the
reason of this command?

Silva. I am accustomed blindly to obey; and to whom can one more easily
render obedience than to the duke, since the event always proves the
wisdom of his commands?

Gomez. Well! Well! I am not surprised that you are become as reserved
and monosyllabic as the duke, since you are obliged to be always about
his person; to me, however, who am accustomed to the lighter service of
Italy, it seems strange enough. In loyalty and obedience, I am the same
old soldier as ever; but I am wont to indulge in gossip and discussion;
here, you are all silent, and seem as though you knew not how to enjoy
yourselves. The duke, methinks, is like a brazen tower without gates,
the garrison of which must be furnished with wings. Not long ago I heard
him say at the table of a gay, jovial fellow that he was like a bad
spirit-shop, with a brandy sign displayed; to allure idlers, vagabonds,
and thieves.

Silva. And has he not brought us hither in silence?

Gomez. Nothing can be said against that. Of a truth, we, who witnessed
the address with which he led the troops hither out of Italy, have seen
something. How he advanced warily through friends and foes; through
the French, both royalists and heretics; through the Swiss and their
confederates; maintained the strictest discipline, and accomplished with
ease, and without the slightest hindrance, a march that was esteemed so
perilous!--We have seen and learned something.

Silva. Here too! Is not everything as still and quiet as though there
had been no disturbance?

Gomez. Why, as for that, it was tolerably quiet when we arrived.

Silva. The provinces have become much more tranquil; if there is any
movement now, it is only among those who wish to escape; and to them,
methinks, the duke will speedily close every outlet.

Gomez. This service cannot fail to win for him the favour of the king.

Silva. And nothing is more expedient for us than to retain his. Should
the king come hither, the duke doubtless and all whom he recommends will
not go without their reward.

Gomez. Do you really believe then that the king will come?

Silva. So many preparations are being made, that the report appears
highly probable.

Gomez. I am not convinced, however.

Silva. Keep your thoughts to yourself then. For if it should not be the
king's intention to come, it is at least, certain that he wishes the
rumour to be believed.

[Enter Ferdinand.

Ferdinand. Is my father not yet abroad?

Silva. We are waiting to receive his commands.

Ferdinand. The princes will soon be here.

Gomez. Are they expected to-day?

Ferdinand. Orange and Egmont.

Gomez (aside to Silva). A light breaks in upon me.

Silva. Well, then, say nothing about it.

Enter the Duke of Alva (as he advances the rest draw back)

Alva. Gomez.

Gomez (steps forward). My lord.

Alva. You have distributed the guards and given them their instructions?

Gomez. Most accurately. The day-patrols--

Alva. Enough. Attend in the gallery. Silva will announce to you the
moment when you are to draw them together, and to occupy the avenues
leading to the palace. The rest you know.

Gomez. I do, my lord.

Silva. Here my lord.

Alva. I shall require you to manifest to-day all the qualities which I
have hitherto prized in you: courage, resolve, unswerving execution.

Silva. I thank you for affording me an opportunity of showing that your
old servant is unchanged.

Alva. The moment the princes enter my cabinet, hasten to arrest Egmont's
private Secretary. You have made all needful preparations for securing
the others who are specified?

Silva. Rely upon us. Their doom, like a well-calculated eclipse, will
overtake them with terrible certainty.

Alva. Have you had them all narrowly watched?

Silva. All. Egmont especially. He is the only one whose demeanour, since
your arrival, remains unchanged. The live-long day he is now on one
horse and now on another; he invites guests as usual, is merry and
entertaining at table, plays at dice, shoots, and at night steals to
his mistress. The others, on the contrary, have made a manifest pause in
their mode of life; they remain at home, and, from the outward aspect of
their houses, you would imagine that there was a sick man within.

Alva. To work then, ere they recover in spite of us.

Silva. I shall bring them without fail. In obedience to your commands
we load them with officious honours; they are alarmed; cautiously, yet
anxiously, they tender us their thanks, feel that flight would be the
most prudent course, yet none venture to adopt it; they hesitate, are
unable to work together, while the bond which unites them prevents their
acting boldly as individuals. They are anxious to withdraw themselves
from suspicion, and thus only render themselves more obnoxious to it. I
already contemplate with joy the successful realization of your scheme.

Alva. I rejoice only over what is accomplished, and not lightly over
that; for there ever remains ground for serious and anxious thought.
Fortune is capricious; the common, the worthless, she oft-times
ennobles, while she dishonours with a contemptible issue the most
maturely considered schemes. Await the arrival of the princes, then
order Gomez to occupy the streets, and hasten yourself to arrest
Egmont's secretary, and the others who are specified. This done, return,
and announce to my son that he may bring me the tidings in the council.

Silva. I trust this evening I shall dare to appear in your presence.
(Alva approaches his son who has hitherto been standing in the gallery.)
I dare not whisper it even to myself; but my mind misgives me. The event
will, I fear, be different from what he anticipates. I see before me
spirits, who, still and thoughtful, weigh in ebon scales the doom of
princes and of many thousands. Slowly the beam moves up and down; deeply
the judges appear to ponder; at length one scale sinks, the other rises,
breathed on by the caprice of destiny, and all is decided.

[Exit.

Alva (advancing with his son). How did you find the town?

Ferdinand. All is again quiet. I rode as for pastime, from street to
street. Your well-distributed patrols hold Fear so tightly yoked, that
she does not venture even to whisper. The town resembles a plain when
the lightning's glare announces the impending storm: no bird, no beast
is to be seen, that is not stealing to a place of shelter.

Alva. Has nothing further occurred?

Ferdinand. Egmont, with a few companions, rode into the market-place;
we exchanged greetings; he was mounted on an unbroken charger, which
excited my admiration, "Let us hasten to break in our steeds," he
exclaimed; "we shall need them ere long!" He said that he should see me
again to-day; he is coming here, at your desire, to deliberate with you.

Alva. He will see you again.

Ferdinand. Among all the knights whom I know here, he pleases me the
best. I think we shall be friends.

Alva. You are always rash and inconsiderate. I recognize in you the
levity of your Mother, which threw her unconditionally into my arms.
Appearances have already allured you precipitately into many dangerous
connections.

Ferdinand. You will find me ever submissive.

Alva. I pardon this inconsiderate kindness, this heedless gaiety, in
consideration of your youthful blood. Only forget not on what mission I
am sent, and what part in it I would assign to you.

Ferdinand. Admonish me, and spare me not, when you deem it needful.

Alva (after a pause). My son!

Ferdinand. My father!

Alva. The princes will be here anon; Orange and Egmont. It is not
mistrust that has withheld me till now from disclosing to you what is
about to take place. They will not depart hence.

Ferdinand. What do you purpose?

Alva. It has been resolved to arrest them.--You are astonished!
Learn what you have to do; the reasons you shall know when all is
accomplished. Time fails now to unfold them. With you alone I wish to
deliberate on the weightiest, the most secret matters; a powerful bond
holds us linked together; you are dear and precious to me; on you
I would bestow everything. Not the habit of obedience alone would I
impress upon you; I desire also to implant within your mind the power
to realize, to command, to execute; to you I would bequeath a vast
inheritance, to the king a most useful servant; I would endow you with
the noblest of my possessions, that you may not be ashamed to appear
among your brethren.

Ferdinand. How deeply am I indebted to you for this love, which you
manifest for me alone, while a whole kingdom trembles before you!

Alva. Now hear what is to be done. As soon as the princes have entered,
every avenue to the palace will be guarded. This duty is confided to
Gomez. Silva will hasten to arrest Egmont's secretary, together with
those whom we hold most in suspicion. You, meanwhile, will take the
command of the guards stationed at the gates and in the courts. Before
all, take care to occupy the adjoining apartment with the trustiest
soldiers. Wait in the gallery till Silva returns, then bring me any
unimportant paper, as a signal that his commission is executed. Remain
in the ante-chamber till Orange retires, follow him; I will detain
Egmont here as though I had some further communication to make to him.
At the end of the gallery demand Orange's sword, summon the guards,
secure promptly the most dangerous man; I meanwhile will seize Egmont
here.

Ferdinand. I obey, my father--for the first time with a heavy and an
anxious heart.

Alva. I pardon you; this is the first great day of your life.

[Enter Silva.

Silva. A courier from Antwerp. Here is Orange's letter. He does not
come.

Alva. Says the messenger so?

Silva. No, my own heart tells me.

Alva. In thee speaks my evil genius. (After reading the letter, he makes
a sign to the two, and they retire to the gallery. Alva remains alone
in front of the stage.) He comes not! Till the last moment he delays
declaring himself. He ventures not to come! So then, the cautious man,
contrary to all expectations, is for once cautious enough to lay aside
his wonted caution. The hour moves on! Let the finger travel but a short
space over the dial, and a great work is done or lost--irrevocably lost;
for the opportunity can never be retrieved, nor can our intention remain
concealed. Long had I maturely weighed everything, foreseen even this
contingency, and firmly resolved in my own mind what, in that case, was
to be done; and now, when I am called upon to act, I can with difficulty
guard my mind from being again distracted by conflicting doubts. Is it
expedient to seize the others if he escape me? Shall I delay, and suffer
Egmont to elude my grasp, together with his friends, and so many others
who now, and perhaps for to-day only, are in my hands? How! Does destiny
control even thee--the uncontrollable? How long matured! How well
prepared! How great, how admirable the plan! How nearly had hope
attained the goal! And now, at the decisive moment, thou art placed
between two evils; as in a lottery, thou dost grasp in the dark future;
what thou hast drawn remains still unrolled, to thee unknown whether
it is a prize or a blank! (He becomes attentive, like one who hears a
noise, and steps to the window.) 'Tis he! Egmont! Did thy steed bear
thee hither so lightly, and started not at the scent of blood, at the
spirit with the naked sword who received thee at the gate? Dismount! Lo,
now thou hast one foot in the grave! And now both! Ay, caress him,
and for the last time stroke his neck for the gallant service he has
rendered thee. And for me no choice is left. The delusion, in which
Egmont ventures here to-day, cannot a second time deliver him into my
hands! Hark! (Ferdinand and Silva enter hastily.) Obey my orders! I
swerve not from my purpose. I shall detain Egmont here as best I may,
till you bring me tidings from Silva. Then remain at hand. Thee, too,
fate has robbed of the proud honour of arresting with thine own hand the
king's greatest enemy. (To Silva.) Be prompt! (To Ferdinand.) Advance to
meet him.

(Alva remains some moments alone, pacing the chamber in silence.)

[Enter Egmont.

Egmont. I come to learn the king's commands; to hear what service he
demands from our loyalty, which remains eternally devoted to him.

Alva. He desires, before all, to hear your counsel.

Egmont. Upon what subject? Does Orange come also? I thought to find him
here.

Alva. I regret that he fails us at this important crisis. The
king desires your counsel, your opinion as to the best means of
tranquillizing these states. He trusts indeed that you will zealously
co-operate with him in quelling these disturbances, and in securing to
these provinces the benefit of complete and permanent order.

Egmont. You, my lord, should know better than I, that tranquillity
is already sufficiently restored, and was still more so, till the
appearance of fresh troops again agitated the public mind, and filled it
anew with anxiety and alarm.

Alva. You seem to intimate that it would have been more advisable if the
king had not placed me in a position to interrogate you.

Egmont. Pardon me! It is not for me to determine whether the king acted
advisedly in sending the army hither, whether the might of his royal
presence alone would not have operated more powerfully. The army is
here, the king is not. But we should be most ungrateful were we to
forget what we owe to the Regent. Let it be acknowledged! By her
prudence and valour, by her judicious use of authority and force,
of persuasion and finesse, she pacified the insurgents, and, to the
astonishment of the world, succeeded, in the course of a few months, in
bringing a rebellious people back to their duty.

Alva. I deny it not. The insurrection is quelled; and the people appear
to be already forced back within the bounds of obedience. But does it
not depend upon their caprice alone to overstep these bounds? Who shall
prevent them from again breaking loose? Where is the power capable of
restraining them? Who will be answerable to us for their future loyalty
and submission? Their own goodwill is the sole pledge we have.

Egmont. And is not the good-will of a people the surest, the noblest
pledge? By heaven! when can a monarch hold himself more secure, ay, both
against foreign and domestic foes, than when all can stand for one, and
one for all?

Alva. You would not have us believe, however, that such is the case here
at present?

Egmont. Let the king proclaim a general pardon; he will thus
tranquillize the public mind; and it will be seen how speedily loyalty
and affection will return, when confidence is restored.

Alva. How! And suffer those who have insulted the majesty of the
king, who have violated the sanctuaries of our religion, to go abroad
unchallenged! living witnesses that enormous crimes may be perpetrated
with impunity!

Egmont. And ought not a crime of frenzy, of intoxication, to be excused,
rather than horribly chastised? Especially when there is the sure hope,
nay, more, where there is positive certainty that the evil will never
again recur? Would not sovereigns thus be more secure? Are not those
monarchs most extolled by the world and by posterity, who can pardon,
pity, despise an offence against their dignity? Are they not on that
account likened to God himself, who is far too exalted to be assailed by
every idle blasphemy?

Alva. And therefore, should the king contend for the honour of God and
of religion, we for the authority of the king. What the supreme power
disdains to avert, it is our duty to avenge. Were I to counsel, no
guilty person should live to rejoice in his impunity.

Egmont. Think you that you will be able to reach them all? Do we not
daily hear that fear is driving them to and fro, and forcing them out
of the land? The more wealthy will escape to other countries with their
property, their children, and their friends; while the poor will carry
their industrious hands to our neighbours.

Alva. They will, if they cannot be prevented. It is on this account that
the king desires counsel and aid from every prince, zealous co-operation
from every stadtholder; not merely a description of the present posture
of affairs, or conjectures as to what might take place were events
suffered to hold on their course without interruption. To contemplate a
mighty evil, to flatter oneself with hope, to trust to time, to strike
a blow, like the clown in a play, so as to make a noise and appear to do
something, when in fact one would fain do nothing; is not such conduct
calculated to awaken a suspicion that those who act thus contemplate
with satisfaction a rebellion, which they would not indeed excite, but
which they are by no means unwilling to encourage?

Egmont (about to break forth, restrains himself, and after a brief
pause, speaks with composure). Not every design is obvious, and many a
man's design is misconstrued. It is widely rumoured, however, that the
object which the king has in view is not so much to govern the provinces
according to uniform and dearly defined laws, to maintain the majesty of
religion, and to give his people universal peace, as unconditionally
to subjugate them, to rob them of their ancient rights, to appropriate
their possessions, to curtail the fair privileges of the nobles,
for whose sake alone they are ready to serve him with life and limb.
Religion, it is said, is merely a splendid device, behind which every
dangerous design may be contrived with the greater ease; the prostrate
crowds adore the sacred symbols pictured there, while behind lurks the
fowler ready to ensnare them.

Alva. This must I hear from you?

Egmont. I speak not my own sentiments! I but repeat what is loudly
rumoured, and uttered now here and now there by great and by humble, by
wise men and fools. The Netherlanders fear a double yoke, and who will
be surety to them for their liberty?

Alva. Liberty! A fair word when rightly understood. What liberty would
they have? What is the freedom of the most free? To do right! And in
that the monarch will not hinder them. No! No! They imagine themselves
enslaved, when they have not the power to injure themselves and others.
Would it not be better to abdicate at once, rather than rule such
a people? When the country is threatened by foreign invaders, the
burghers, occupied only with their immediate interests, bestow no
thought upon the advancing foe, and when the king requires their aid,
they quarrel among themselves, and thus, as it were, conspire with the
enemy. Far better is it to circumscribe their power, to control and
guide them for their good, as children are controlled and guided. Trust
me, a people grows neither old nor wise, a people remains always in its
infancy.

Egmont. How rarely does a king attain wisdom! And is it not fit that the
many should confide their interests to the many rather than to the one?
And not even to the one, but to the few servants of the one, men who
have grown old under the eyes of their master. To grow wise, it seems,
is the exclusive privilege of these favoured individuals.

Alva. Perhaps for the very reason that they are not left to themselves.

Egmont. And therefore they would fain leave no one else to his own
guidance. Let them do what they like, however; I have replied to your
questions, and I repeat, the measures you propose will never succeed!
They cannot succeed! I know my countrymen. They are men worthy to tread
God's earth; each complete in himself, a little king, steadfast, active,
capable, loyal, attached to ancient customs. It may be difficult to win
their confidence, but it is easy to retain it. Firm and unbending! They
may be crushed, but not subdued.

Alva (who during this speech has looked round several times). Would you
venture to repeat what you have uttered, in the king's presence?

Egmont. It were the worse, if in his presence I were restrained by
fear! The better for him and for his people, if he inspired me with
confidence, if he encouraged me to give yet freer utterance to my
thoughts.

Alva. What is profitable, I can listen to as well as he.

Egmont. I would say to him--'Tis easy for the shepherd to drive before
him a flock of sheep; the ox draws the plough without opposition; but
if you would ride the noble steed, you must study his thoughts, you must
require nothing unreasonable, nor unreasonably, from him. The burgher
desires to retain his ancient constitution; to be governed by his own
countrymen; and why? Because he knows in that case how he shall be
ruled, because he can rely upon their disinterestedness, upon their
sympathy with his fate.

Alva. And ought not the Regent to be empowered to alter these ancient
usages? Should not this constitute his fairest privilege? What is
permanent in this world? And shall the constitution of a state alone
remain unchanged? Must not every relation alter in the course of time,
and on that very account, an ancient constitution become the source of
a thousand evils, because not adapted to the present condition of the
people? These ancient rights afford, doubtless, convenient loopholes,
through which the crafty and the powerful may creep, and wherein
they may lie concealed, to the injury of the people and of the entire
community; and it is on this account, I fear, that they are held in such
high esteem.

Egmont. And these arbitrary changes, these unlimited encroachments of
the supreme power, are they not indications that one will permit himself
to do what is forbidden to thousands? The monarch would alone be free,
that he may have it in his power to gratify his every wish, to realize
his every thought. And though we should confide in him as a good and
virtuous sovereign, will he be answerable to us for his successor?
That none who come after him shall rule without consideration, without
forbearance! And who would deliver us from absolute caprice, should he
send hither his servants, his minions, who, without knowledge of the
country and its requirements, should govern according to their own good
pleasure, meet with no opposition, and know themselves exempt from all
responsibility?

Alva (who has meanwhile again looked round). There is nothing more
natural than that a king should choose to retain the power in his own
hands, and that he should select as the instruments of his authority,
those who best understand him, who desire to understand him, and who
will unconditionally execute his will.

Egmont. And just as natural is it, that the burgher should prefer being
governed by one born and reared in the same land, whose notions of right
and wrong are in harmony with his own, and whom he can regard as his
brother.

Alva. And yet the noble, methinks, has shared rather unequally with
these brethren of his.

Egmont. That took place centuries ago, and is now submitted to without
envy. But should new men, whose presence is not needed in the country,
be sent, to enrich themselves a second time, at the cost of the nation;
should the people see themselves exposed to their bold, unscrupulous
rapacity, it would excite a ferment that would not soon be quelled.

Alva. You utter words to which I ought not to listen;--I, too, am a
foreigner.

Egmont. That they are spoken in your presence is a sufficient proof that
they have no reference to you.

Alva. Be that as it may, I would rather not hear them from you. The king
sent me here in the hope that I should obtain the support of the
nobles. The king wills, and will have his will obeyed. After profound
deliberation, the king at length discerns what course will best promote
the welfare of the people; matters cannot be permitted to go on as
heretofore; it is the king's intention to limit their power for their
own good; if necessary, to force upon them their salvation: to sacrifice
the more dangerous burghers in order that the rest may find repose, and
enjoy in peace the blessing of a wise government, This is his resolve;
this I am commissioned to announce to the nobles; and in his name I
require from them advice, not as to the course to be pursued--on that
he is resolved--but as to the best means of carrying his purpose into
effect.

Egmont. Your words, alas, justify the fears of the people, the universal
fear! The king has then resolved as no sovereign ought to resolve. In
order to govern his subjects more easily, he would crush, subvert,
nay, ruthlessly destroy, their strength, their spirit, and their
self-respect! He would violate the inmost core of their individuality,
doubtless with the view of promoting their happiness. He would
annihilate them, that they may assume a new, a different form. Oh! if
his purpose be good, he is fatally misguided! It is not the king whom
we resist;--we but place ourselves in the way of the monarch, who,
unhappily, is about to take the first rash step in a wrong direction.

Alva. Such being your sentiments, it were a vain attempt for us to
endeavour to agree. You must indeed think poorly of the king, and
contemptibly of his counsellors, if you imagine that everything has not
already been thought of and maturely weighed. I have no commission a
second time to balance conflicting arguments. From the people I demand
submission;--and from you, their leaders and princes, I demand counsel
and support, as pledges of this unconditional duty.

Egmont. Demand our heads, and your object Is attained; to a noble soul
it must be indifferent whether he stoop his neck to such a yoke, or lay
it upon the block. I have spoken much to little purpose. I have agitated
the air, but accomplished nothing.

[Enter Ferdinand.

Ferdinand. Pardon my intrusion. Here is a letter, the bearer of which
urgently demands an answer.

Alva. Allow me to peruse its contents. (Steps aside.)

Ferdinand (to Egmont). 'Tis a noble steed that your people have brought,
to carry you away.

Egmont. I have seen worse. I have had him some time; I think of parting
with him. If he pleases you we shall probably soon agree as to the
price.

Ferdinand. We will think about it.

(Alva motions to his son, who retires to the back-ground.)

Egmont. Farewell! Allow me to retire; for, by heaven, I know not what
more I can say.

Alva. Fortunately for you, chance prevents you from making a fuller
disclosure of your sentiments. You incautiously lay bare the recesses of
your heart, and your own lips furnish evidence against you, more fatal
than could be produced by your bitterest adversary.

Egmont. This reproach disturbs me not. I know my own heart; I know with
what honest zeal I am devoted to the king; I know that my allegiance
is more true than that of many who, in his service, seek only to
serve themselves. I regret that our discussion should terminate so
unsatisfactorily, and trust that in spite of our opposing views, the
service of the king, our master, and the welfare of our country, may
speedily unite us; another conference, the presence of the princes
who to-day are absent, may, perchance, in a more propitious moment,
accomplish what at present appears impossible. In this hope I take my
leave.

Alva (who at the same time makes a sign to Ferdinand). Hold,
Egmont!--Your sword!-(The centre door opens and discloses the gallery,
which is occupied with guards, who remain motionless.)

Egmont (after a pause of astonishment). This was the intention? For this
thou hast summoned me? (Grasping his sword as if to defend himself.) Am
I then weaponless?

Alva. The king commands. Thou art my prisoner. (At the same time guards
enter from both sides.)

Egmont (after a pause). The king?--Orange! Orange! (after a pause,
resigning his sword). Take it! It has been employed far oftener in
defending the cause of my king than in protecting this breast.

(He retires by the centre door, followed by the guard and Alva's son.
Alva remains standing while the curtain falls.)




ACT V



SCENE I.--A Street. Twilight

Clara, Brackenburg, Burghers

Brackenburg. Dearest, for Heaven's sake, what wouldst thou do?

Clara. Come with me, Brackenburg! Thou canst not know the people, we
are certain to rescue him; for what can equal their love for him? Each
feels, I could swear it, the burning desire to deliver him, to avert
danger from a life so precious, and to restore freedom to the most free.
Come! A voice only is wanting to call them together. In their souls the
memory is still fresh of all they owe him, and well they know that his
mighty arm alone shields them from destruction. For his sake, for their
own sake, they must peril everything. And what do we peril? At most, our
lives, which if he perish, are not worth preserving.

Brackenburg. Unhappy girl! Thou seest not the power that holds us
fettered as with bands of iron.

Clara. To me it does not appear invincible. Let us not lose time in idle
words. Here comes some of our old, honest, valiant burghers! Hark ye,
friends! Neighbours! Hark!--Say, how fares it with Egmont?

Carpenter. What does the girl want? Tell her to hold her peace.

Clara. Step nearer, that we may speak low, till we are united and more
strong. Not a moment is to be lost! Audacious tyranny, that dared to
fetter him, already lifts the dagger against his life. Oh, my friends!
With the advancing twilight my anxiety grows more intense. I dread this
night. Come! Let us disperse; let us hasten from quarter to quarter, and
call out the burghers. Let every one grasp his ancient weapons. In the
market-place we meet again, and every one will be carried onward by our
gathering stream. The enemy will see themselves surrounded, overwhelmed,
and be compelled to yield. How can a handful of slaves resist us? And
he will return among us, he will see himself rescued, and can for once
thank us, us, who are already so deeply in his debt. He will behold,
perchance, ay doubtless, he will again behold the morn's red dawn in the
free heavens.

Carpenter. What ails thee, maiden?

Clara. Can ye misunderstand me? I speak of the Count! I speak of Egmont.

Jetter. Speak not the name! 'tis deadly.

Clara. Not speak his name? How? Not Egmont's name? Is it not on every
tongue? Where stands it not inscribed? Often have I read it emblazoned
with all its letters among these stars. Not utter it? What mean ye?
Friends! good, kind neighbours, ye are dreaming; collect yourselves.
Gaze not upon me with those fixed and anxious looks! Cast not such timid
glances on every side! I but give utterance to the wish of all. Is not
my voice the voice of your own hearts? Who, in this fearful night, ere
he seeks his restless couch, but on bended knee will, in earnest prayer,
seek to wrest his life as a cherished boon from heaven? Ask each other!
Let each ask his own heart! And who but exclaims with me,--"Egmont's
liberty, or death!"

Jetter. God help us! This is a sad business.

Clara. Stay! Stay! Shrink not away at the sound of his name, to meet
whom ye were wont to press forward so joyously!--When rumour announced
his approach, when the cry arose, "Egmont comes! He comes from
Ghent!"--then happy indeed were those citizens who dwelt in the streets
through which he was to pass. And when the neighing of his steed was
heard, did not every one throw aside his work, while a ray of hope and
joy, like a sunbeam from his countenance, stole over the toil-worn faces
that peered from every window. Then, as ye stood in the doorways, ye
would lift up your children in your arms, and pointing to him, exclaim:
"See, that is Egmont, he who towers above the rest! 'Tis from bird that
ye must look for better times than those your poor fathers have known."
Let not your children inquire at some future day, "Where is he? Where
are the better times ye promised us?"--Thus we waste the time in idle
words! do nothing,--betray him.

Soest. Shame on thee, Brackenburg! Let her not run on thus! Prevent the
mischief!

Brackenburg. Dear Clara! Let us go! What will your Mother say?
Perchance--

Clara. Thinkest thou I am a child, or frantic? What avails
perchance?--With no vain hope canst thou hide from me this dreadful
certainty... Ye shall hear me and ye will: for I see it, ye are
overwhelmed, ye cannot hearken to the voice of your own hearts. Through
the present peril cast but one glance into the past,--the recent past.
Send your thoughts forward into the future. Could ye live, would ye
live, were he to perish? With him expires the last breath of freedom.
What was he not to you? For whose sake did he expose himself to the
direst perils? His blood flowed, his wounds were healed for you alone.
The mighty spirit, that upheld you all, a dungeon now confines, while
the horrors of secret murder are hovering around. Perhaps he thinks of
you--perhaps he hopes in you,--he who has been accustomed only to grant
favours to others and to fulfil their prayers.

Carpenter. Come, gossip.

Clara. I have neither the arms, nor the vigour of a man; but I have
that which ye all lack--courage and contempt of danger. O that my breath
could kindle your souls! That, pressing you to this bosom, I could
arouse and animate you! Come! I will march in your midst!--As a waving
banner, though weaponless, leads on a gallant army of warriors, so shall
my spirit hover, like a flame, over your ranks, while love and courage
shall unite the dispersed and wavering multitude into a terrible host.

Jetter. Take her away; I pity her, poor thing!

[Exeunt Burgers.

Brackenburg. Clara! Seest thou not where we are?

Clara. Where? Under the dome of heaven, which has so often seemed to
arch itself more gloriously as the noble Egmont passed beneath it. From
these windows I have seen them look forth, four or five heads one above
the other; at these doors the cowards have stood, bowing and scraping,
if he but chanced to look down upon them! Oh, how dear they were to me,
when they honoured him. Had he been a tyrant they might have turned with
indifference from his fall! But they loved him! O ye hands, so prompt
to wave caps in his honour, can ye not grasp a sword? Brackenburg, and
we?--do we chide them? These arms that have so often embraced him, what
do they for him now? Stratagem has accomplished so much in the
world. Thou knowest the ancient castle, every passage, every secret
way.--Nothing is impossible,--suggest some plan--

Brackenburg. That we might go home!

Clara. Well.

Brackenburg. There at the corner I see Alva's guard; let the voice of
reason penetrate to thy heart! Dost thou deem me a coward? Dost thou
doubt that for thy sake I would peril my life? Here we are both mad,
I as well as thou. Dost thou not perceive that thy scheme is
impracticable? Oh, be calm! Thou art beside thyself.

Clara. Beside myself! Horrible. You, Brackenburg, are beside yourself.
When you hailed the hero with loud acclaim, called him your friend,
your hope, your refuge, shouted vivats as he passed;--then I stood in my
corner, half opened the window, concealed myself while I listened, and
my heart beat higher than yours who greeted him so loudly. Now it again
beats higher! In the hour of peril you conceal yourselves, deny him, and
feel not, that if he perish, you are lost.

Brackenburg. Come home.

Clara. Home?

Brackenburg. Recollect thyself! Look around thee! These are the streets
in which thou wert wont to appear only on the Sabbath-day, when thou
didst walk modestly to church; where, over-decorous perhaps, thou wert
displeased if I but joined thee with a kindly greeting. And now thou
dost stand, speak, and act before the eyes of the whole world. Recollect
thyself, love! How can this avail us?

Clara. Home! Yes, I remember. Come, Brackenburg, let us go home! Knowest
thou where my home lies?

[Exeunt.



SCENE II.--A Prison

Lighted by a lamp, a couch in the background

Egmont (alone). Old friend! Ever faithful sleep, dost thou too forsake
me, like my other friends? How wert thou wont of yore to descend
unsought upon my free brow, cooling my temples as with a myrtle wreath
of love! Amidst the din of battle, on the waves of life, I rested in
thine arms, breathing lightly as a growing boy. When tempests whistled
through the leaves and boughs, when the summits of the lofty trees swung
creaking in the blast, the inmost core of my heart remained unmoved.
What agitates thee now? What shakes thy firm and steadfast mind? I feel
it, 'tis the sound of the murderous axe, gnawing at thy root. Yet
I stand erect, but an inward shudder runs through my frame. Yes, it
prevails, this treacherous power; it undermines the firm, the lofty
stem, and ere the bark withers, thy verdant crown falls crashing to the
earth.

Yet wherefore now, thou who hast so often chased the weightiest cares
like bubbles from thy brow, wherefore canst thou not dissipate this dire
foreboding which incessantly haunts thee in a thousand different shapes?
Since when hast thou trembled at the approach of death, amid whose
varying forms, thou wert wont calmly to dwell, as with the other shapes
of this familiar earth. But 'tis not he, the sudden foe, to encounter
whom the sound bosom emulously pants;---'tis the dungeon, emblem of the
grave, revolting alike to the hero and the coward. How intolerable I
used to feel it, in the stately hall, girt round by gloomy walls, when,
seated on my cushioned chair, in the solemn assembly of the princes,
questions, which scarcely required deliberation, were overlaid with
endless discussions, while the rafters of the ceiling seemed to stifle
and oppress me. Then I would hurry forth as soon as possible, fling
myself upon my horse with deep-drawn breath, and away to the wide
champaign, man's natural element, where, exhaling from the earth,
nature's richest treasures are poured forth around us, while, from the
wide heavens, the stars shed down their blessings through the still
air; where, like earth-born giants, we spring aloft, invigorated by our
Mother's touch; where our entire humanity and our human desires throb in
every vein; where the desire to press forward, to vanquish, to snatch,
to use his clenched fist, to possess, to conquer, glows through the soul
of the young hunter; where the warrior, with rapid stride, assumes his
inborn right to dominion over the world; and, with terrible liberty,
sweeps like a desolating hailstorm over the field and grove, knowing no
boundaries traced by the hand of man.

Thou art but a shadow, a dream of the happiness I so long possessed;
where has treacherous fate conducted thee? Did she deny thee to meet the
rapid stroke of never-shunned death, in the open face of day, only
to prepare for thee a foretaste of the grave, in the midst of this
loathsome corruption? How revolting its rank odour exhales from these
damp stones! Life stagnates, and my foot shrinks from the couch as from
the grave. Oh care, care! Thou who dost begin prematurely the work of
murder,--forbear;--Since when has Egmont been alone, so utterly alone
in the world? 'Tis doubt renders thee insensible, not happiness. The
justice of the king, in which through life thou hast confided, the
friendship of the Regent, which, thou mayst confess it, was akin to
love,--have these suddenly vanished, like a meteor of the night, and
left thee alone upon thy gloomy path? Will not Orange, at the head of
thy friends, contrive some daring scheme? Will not the people assemble,
and with gathering might, attempt the rescue of their faithful friend?

Ye walls, which thus gird me round, separate me not from the
well-intentioned zeal of so many kindly souls. And may the courage with
which my glance was wont to inspire them, now return again from their
hearts to mine. Yes! they assemble in thousands! they come! they stand
beside me! their pious wish rises urgently to heaven, and implores a
miracle; and if no angel stoops for my deliverance, I see them grasp
eagerly their lance and sword. The gates are forced, the bolts are
riven, the walls fall beneath their conquering hands, and Egmont
advances joyously, to hail the freedom of the rising morn. How many
well-known faces receive me with loud acclaim! O Clara! wert thou a man,
I should see thee here the very first, and thank thee for that which it
is galling to owe even to a king--liberty.



SCENE III.--Clara's House

Clara (enters from her chamber with a lamp and a glass of water; she
places the glass upon the table and steps to the window).

Brackenburg, is it you? What noise was that? No one yet? No one! I will
set the lamp in the window, that he may see that I am still awake,
that I still watch for him. He promised me tidings. Tidings? horrible
certainty!--Egmont condemned!--what tribunal has the right to summon
him?--And they dare to condemn him!--Does the king condemn him, or the
duke? And the Regent withdraws herself! Orange hesitates, and all his
friends!--Is this the world, of whose fickleness and treachery I have
heard so much, and as yet experienced nothing? Is this the world?--Who
could be so base as to hear malice against one so dear? Could villainy
itself be audacious enough to overwhelm with sudden destruction the
object of a nation's homage? Yet so it is--it is-O Egmont, I held thee
safe before God and man, safe as in my arms! What was I to thee. Thou
hast called me thine, my whole being was devoted to thee. What am I
now? In vain I stretch out my hand to the toils that environ thee. Thou
helpless and I free!--Here is the key that unlocks my chamber door. My
going out and my coming in, depend upon my own caprice; yet, alas; to
aid thee I am powerless!--Oh, bind me that I may not despair; hurl
me into the deepest dungeon, that I may dash my head against the damp
walls, groan for freedom, and dream how I would rescue him if fetters
did not hold me bound.--Now I am free, and in freedom lies the anguish
of impotence.--Conscious of my own existence, yet unable to stir a limb
in his behalf, alas! even this insignificant portion of thy being, thy
Clara, is, like thee, a captive, and, separated from thee, consumes her
expiring energies in the agonies of death.--I hear a stealthy step,--a
cough--Brackenburg,--'tis he!--Kind, unhappy man, thy destiny remains
ever the same; thy love opens to thee the door at night, alas! to what a
doleful meeting.

(Enter Brackenburg.) Thou com'st so pale, so terrified! Brackenburg!
What is it?

Brackenburg. I have sought thee through perils and circuitous paths. The
principal streets are occupied with troops;--through lanes and by-ways
have I stolen to thee!

Clara. Tell me, how is it?

Brackenburg (seating himself). O Clara, let me weep. I loved him not. He
was the rich man who lured to better a pasture the poor man's solitary
lamb. I have never cursed him, God has created me with a true and tender
heart. My life was consumed in anguish, and each day I hoped would end
my misery.

Clara. Let that be forgotten, Brackenburg! Forget thyself. Speak to me
of him! Is it true? Is he condemned?

Brackenburg. He is! I know it.

Clara. And still lives?

Brackenburg. Yes, he still lives.

Clara. How canst thou be sure of that? Tyranny murders the hero in the
night! His blood flows concealed from every eye. The people stunned
and bewildered, lie buried in sleep, dream of deliverance, dream of the
fulfilment of their impotent wishes, while, indignant at our supineness,
his spirit abandons the world. He is no more! Deceive me not; deceive
not thyself!

Brackenburg. No,--he lives! and the Spaniards, alas, are preparing for
the people, on whom they are about to trample, a terrible spectacle, in
order to crush for ever, by a violent blow, each heart that yet pants
for freedom.

Clara. Proceed! Calmly pronounce my death-warrant also! Near and more
near I approach that blessed land, and already from those realms of
peace, I feel the breath of consolation say on.

Brackenburg. From casual words, dropped here and there by the guards,
I learned that secretly in the market-place they were preparing some
terrible spectacle. Through by-ways and familiar lanes I stole to
my cousin's house, and from a back window, looked out upon the
market-place. Torches waved to and fro, in the hands of a wide circle
of Spanish soldiers. I sharpened my unaccustomed sight, and out of the
darkness there arose before me a scaffold, black, spacious, and lofty!
The sight filled me with horror. Several persons were employed in
covering with black cloth such portions of the wood-work as yet remained
white and visible. The steps were covered last, also with black;--I
saw it all. They seemed preparing for the celebration of some horrible
sacrifice. A white crucifix, that shone like silver through the night,
was raised on one side. As I gazed the terrible conviction strengthened
in my mind. Scattered torches still gleamed here and there; gradually
they flickered and went out. Suddenly the hideous birth of night
returned into its Mother's womb.

Clara. Hush, Brackenburg! Be still! Let this veil rest upon my soul. The
spectres are vanished; and thou, gentle night, lend thy mantle to the
inwardly fermenting earth, she will no longer endure the loathsome
burden, shuddering, she rends open her yawning chasms, and with a crash
swallows the murderous scaffold. And that God, whom in their rage they
have insulted, sends down His angel from on high; at the hallowed touch
of the messenger bolts and bars fly back; he pours around our friend
a mild radiance, and leads him gently through the night to liberty. My
path leads also through the darkness to meet him.

Brackenburg (detaining her). My child, whither wouldst thou go? What
wouldst thou do?

Clara. Softly, my friend, lest some one should awake! Lest we should
awake ourselves! Know'st thou this phial, Brackenburg? I took it from
thee once in jest, when thou, as was thy wont, didst threaten, in thy
impatience, to end thy days.--And now my friend--

Brackenburg. In the name of all the saints!

Clara. Thou canst not hinder me. Death is my portion! Grudge me not
the quiet and easy death which thou hadst prepared for thyself. Give
me thine hand!--At the moment when I unclose that dismal portal through
which there is no return, I may tell thee, with this pressure of the
hand, how sincerely I have loved, how deeply I have pitied thee. My
brother died young; I chose thee to fill his place; thy heart rebelled,
thou didst torment thyself and me, demanding with ever increasing
fervour that which fate had not destined for thee. Forgive me and
farewell! Let me call thee brother! 'Tis a name that embraces many
names. Receive, with a true heart, the last fair token of the departing
spirit--take this kiss. Death unites all, Brackenburg--us too it will
unite!

Brackenburg. Let me then die with thee! Share it! oh, share it! There is
enough to extinguish two lives.

Clara. Hold! Thou must live, thou canst live.--Support my Mother, who,
without thee, would be a prey to want. Be to her what I can no longer
be, live together, and weep for me. Weep for our fatherland, and for him
who could alone have upheld it. The present generation must still endure
this bitter woe; vengeance itself could not obliterate it. Poor souls,
live on, through this gap in time, which is time no longer. To-day the
world suddenly stands still, its course is arrested, and my pulse will
beat but for a few minutes longer. Farewell.

Brackenburg. Oh, live with us, as we live only for thy sake! In taking
thine own life, thou wilt take ours also; still live and suffer. We
will stand by thee, nothing shall sever us from thy side, and love,
with ever-watchful solicitude, shall prepare for thee the sweetest
consolation in its loving arms. Be ours! Ours! I dare not say, mine.

Clara. Hush, Brackenburg! Thou feelest not what chord thou touchest.
Where hope appears to thee, I see only despair.

Brackenburg. Share hope with the living! Pause on the brink of the
precipice, cast one glance into the gulf below, and then look back on
us.

Clara. I have conquered; call me not back to the struggle.

Brackenburg. Thou art stunned; enveloped in night, thou seekest the
abyss. Every light is not yet extinguished, yet many days--!

Clara. Alas! Alas! Cruelly thou dost rend the veil from before mine
eyes. Yes, the day will dawn! Despite its misty shroud it needs must
dawn. Timidly the burgher razes from his window, night leaves behind an
ebon speck; he looks, and the scaffold looms fearfully in the morning
light. With re-awakened anguish the desecrated image of the Saviour
lifts to the Father its imploring eyes. The sun veils his beams, he will
not mark the hero's death-hour. Slowly the fingers go their round--one
hour strikes after another--hold! Now is the time. The thought of the
morning scares me into the grave.

(She goes to the window as if to look out, and drinks secretly.)

Brackenburg. Clara! Clara!

Clara (goes to the table, and drinks water). Here is the remainder. I
invite thee not to follow me. Do as thou wilt; farewell. Extinguish this
lamp silently and without delay; I am going to rest. Steal quietly
away, close the door after thee. Be still! Wake not my Mother! Go, save
thyself, if thou wouldst not be taken for my murderer. [Exit.

Brackenburg. She leaves me for the last time as she has ever done. What
human soul could conceive how cruelly she lacerates the heart that
loves her? She leaves me to myself, leaves me to choose between life and
death, and both are alike hateful to me. To die alone! Weep, ye tender
souls! Fate has no sadder doom than mine. She shares with me the
death-potion, yet sends me from her side! She draws me after her, yet
thrusts me back into life! Oh, Egmont, how enviable a lot falls to thee!
She goes before thee! The crown of victory from her hand is thine, she
brings all heaven to meet thee!--And shall I follow? Again to stand
aloof? To carry this inextinguishable jealousy even to yon distant
realms? Earth is no longer a tarrying place for me, and hell and heaven
offer equal torture. Now welcome to the wretched the dread hand of
annihilation!

[Exit. (The scene remains some time unchanged. Music sounds, indicating
Clara's death; the lamp, which Brackenburg had forgotten to extinguish,
flares up once or twice, and then suddenly expires. The scene changes
to.)



SCENE IV.--A Prison

Egmont is discovered sleeping on a couch. A rustling of keys is heard;
the door opens; servants enter with torches; Ferdinand and Silva follow,
accompanied by soldiers. Egmont starts from his sleep.

Egmont. Who are ye that thus rudely banish slumber from my eyes? What
mean these vague and insolent glances? Why this fearful procession? With
what dream of horror come ye to delude my half awakened soul?

Silva. The duke sends us to announce your sentence.

Egmont. Do ye also bring the headsman who is to execute it?

Silva. Listen, and you will know the doom that awaits you.

Egmont. It is in keeping with the rest of your infamous proceedings.
Hatched in night and in night achieved, so would this audacious act of
injustice shroud itself from observation!--Step boldly forth, thou who
dost bear the sword concealed beneath thy mantle; here is my head, the
freest ever severed by tyranny from the trunk.

Silva. You err! The righteous judges who have condemned you will not
conceal their sentence from the light of day.

Egmont. Then does their audacity exceed all imagination and belief.
Silva (takes the sentence from an attendant, unfolds it, and reads). "In
the King's name, and invested by his Majesty with authority to judge all
his subjects of whatever rank, not excepting the knights of the Golden
Fleece, we declare---"

Egmont. Can the king transfer that authority?

Silva. "We declare, after a strict and legal investigation, thee, Henry,
Count Egmont, Prince of Gaure, guilty of high treason, and pronounce
thy sentence:--That at early dawn thou be led from this prison to the
market-place, and that there, in sight of the people, and as a warning
to all traitors, thou with the sword be brought from life to death.
Given at Brussels." (Date and year so indistinctly read as to be
imperfectly heard by the audience.) "Ferdinand, Duke of Alva, President
of the Tribunal of Twelve." Thou knowest now thy doom. Brief time
remains for thee to prepare for the impending stroke, to arrange thy
affairs, and to take leave of thy friends.

[Exit Silva with followers. Ferdinand remains with two torch-bearers.
The stage is dimly lighted.

Egmont (stands for a time as if buried in thought, and allows Silva to
retire without looking round. He imagines himself alone, and, on raising
his eyes, beholds Alva's son).

Thou tarriest here? Wouldst thou by thy presence augment my amazement,
my horror? Wouldst thou carry to thy father the welcome tidings that
in unmanly fashion I despair? Go. Tell him that he deceives neither the
world nor me. At first it will be whispered cautiously behind his
back, then spoken more and more loudly, and when at some future day the
ambitious man descends from his proud eminence, a thousand voices will
proclaim--that 'twas not the welfare of the state, not the honour of the
king, not the tranquillity of the provinces, that brought him hither.
For his own selfish ends he, the warrior, has counselled war, that in
war the value of his services might be enhanced. He has excited this
monstrous insurrection that his presence might be deemed necessary
in order to quell it. And I fall a victim to his mean hatred, his
contemptible envy. Yes, I know it, dying and mortally wounded I may
utter it; long has the proud man envied me, long has he meditated and
planned my ruin.

Even then, when still young, we played at dice together, and the heaps
of gold, one after the other, passed rapidly from his side to mine;
he would look on with affected composure, while inwardly consumed with
rage, more at my success than at his own loss. Well do I remember the
fiery glance, the treacherous pallor that overspread his features when,
at a public festival, we shot for a wager before assembled thousands.
He challenged me, and both nations stood by; Spaniards and Netherlanders
wagered on either side; I was the victor; his ball missed, mine hit the
mark, and the air was rent by acclamations from my friends. His shot
now hits me. Tell him that I know this, that I know him, that the world
despises every trophy that a paltry spirit erects for itself by base and
surreptitious arts. And thou!

If it be possible for a son to swerve from the manners of his father,
practise shame betimes, while thou art compelled to feel shame for him
whom thou wouldst fain revere with thy whole heart.

Ferdinand. I listen without interrupting thee! Thy reproaches fall like
blows upon a helmet. I feel the shock, but I am armed. They strike, they
wound me not; I am sensible only to the anguish that lacerates my heart.
Alas! Alas! Have I lived to witness such a scene? Am I sent hither to
behold a spectacle like this?

Egmont. Dost thou break out into lamentations? What moves, what agitates
thee thus? Is it a late remorse at having lent thyself to this infamous
conspiracy? Thou art so young, thy exterior is so prepossessing? Thy
demeanour towards me was so friendly, so unreserved! So long as I beheld
thee, I was reconciled with thy father; and crafty, ay, more crafty than
he, thou hast lured me into the toils. Thou art the wretch! The
monster! Who so confides in him, does so at his own peril; but who could
apprehend danger in trusting thee? Go! Go! rob me not of the few moments
that are left me! Go, that I may collect my thoughts, the world forget,
and first of all thyself!

Ferdinand. What can I say? I stand and gaze on thee, yet see thee not;
I am scarcely conscious of my own existence. Shall I seek to excuse
myself? Shall I assure thee that it was not till the last moment that I
was made aware of my father's intentions? That I acted as a constrained,
a passive instrument of his will? What signifies now the opinion thou
mayst entertain of me? Thou art lost; and I, miserable wretch, stand
here only to assure thee of it, only to lament thy doom.

Egmont. What strange voice, what unexpected consolation comes thus to
cheer my passage to the grave? Thou, the son of my first, of almost
my only enemy, thou dost pity me, thou art not associated with my
murderers? Speak! In what light must I regard thee?

Ferdinand. Cruel father! Yes, I recognize thy nature in this command.
Thou didst know my heart, my disposition, which thou hast so often
censured as the inheritance of a tender-hearted Mother. To mould me
into thine own likeness thou hast sent me hither. Thou dost compel me
to behold this man on the verge of the yawning grave, in the grasp of
an arbitrary doom, that I may experience the profoundest anguish; that
thus, rendered callous to every fate, I may henceforth meet every event
with a heart unmoved.

Egmont. I am amazed! Be calm! Act, speak like a man.

Ferdinand. Oh, that I were a woman! That they might say--what moves,
what agitates thee? Tell me of a greater, a more monstrous crime, make
me the spectator of a more direful deed; I will thank thee, I will say:
this was nothing.

Egmont. Thou dost forget thyself. Consider where thou art!

Ferdinand. Let this passion rage, let me give vent to my anguish! I will
not seem composed when my whole inner being is convulsed. Thee must
I behold here? Thee? It is horrible! Thou understandest me not! How
shouldst thou understand me? Egmont! Egmont!

(Falling on his neck.)

Egmont. Explain this mystery.

Ferdinand. It is no mystery.

Egmont. How can the fate of a mere stranger thus deeply move thee?

Ferdinand. Not a stranger! Thou art no stranger to me. Thy name it was
that, even from my boyhood, shone before me like a star in heaven! How
often have I made inquiries concerning thee, and listened to the story
of thy deeds! The youth is the hope of the boy, the man of the youth.
Thus didst thou walk before me, ever before me; I saw thee without envy,
and followed after, step by step; at length I hoped to see thee--I saw
thee, and my heart flew to thy embrace. I had destined thee for myself,
and when I beheld thee, I made choice of thee anew. I hoped now to know
thee, to live with thee, to be thy friend,--thy--'tis over now and I see
thee here!

Egmont. My friend, if it can be any comfort to thee, be assured that the
very moment we met my heart was drawn towards thee. Now listen! Let
us exchange a few quiet words. Tell me: is it the stern, the settled
purpose of thy father to take my life?

Ferdinand. It is.

Egmont. This sentence is not a mere empty scarecrow, designed to terrify
me, to punish me through fear and intimidation, to humiliate me, that he
may then raise me again by the royal favour?

Ferdinand. Alas, no! At first I flattered myself with this delusive
hope; and even then my heart was filled with grief and anguish to behold
thee thus. Thy doom is real! Is certain! No, I cannot command myself.
Who will counsel, who will aid me, to meet the inevitable?

Egmont. Hearken then to me! If thy heart is impelled so powerfully in
my favour, if thou dost abhor the tyranny that holds me fettered,
then deliver me! The moments are precious. Thou art the son of the
all-powerful, and thou hast power thyself. Let us fly! I know the roads;
the means of effecting our escape cannot be unknown to thee. These
walls, a few short miles, alone separate me from my friends. Loose these
fetters, conduct me to them; be ours. The king, on some future day, will
doubtless thank my deliverer. Now he is taken by surprise, or perchance
he is ignorant of the whole proceeding. Thy father ventures on this
daring step, and majesty, though horror-struck at the deed, must needs
sanction the irrevocable. Thou dost deliberate? Oh, contrive for me the
way to freedom! Speak; nourish hope in a living soul.

Ferdinand. Cease! Oh, cease! Every word deepens my despair. There is
here no outlet, no counsel, no escape.--'Tis this thought that tortures
me, that seizes my heart, and rends it as with talons. I have myself
spread the net; I know its firm, inextricable knots; I know that every
avenue is barred alike to courage and to stratagem. I feel that I too,
like thyself, like all the rest, am fettered. Think'st thou that I
should give way to lamentation if any means of safety remained untried?
I have thrown myself at his feet, remonstrated, implored. He has sent me
hither, in order to blast in this fatal moment, every remnant of joy and
happiness that yet survived within my heart.

Egmont. And is there no deliverance?

Ferdinand. None!

Egmont (stamping his foot). No deliverance!-Sweet life! Sweet, pleasant
habitude of existence and of activity! from thee must I part! So calmly
part! Not in the tumult of battle, amid the din of arms, the excitement
of the fray, dost thou send me a hasty farewell; thine is no hurried
leave; thou dost not abridge the moment of separation. Once more let me
clasp thy hand, gaze once more into thine eyes, feel with keen emotion,
thy beauty and thy worth, then resolutely tear myself away, and
say;--depart!

Ferdinand. Must I stand by, and look passively on; unable to save thee,
or to give thee aid! What voice avails for lamentation! What heart but
must break under the pressure of such anguish?

Egmont. Be calm!

Ferdinand. Thou canst be calm, thou canst renounce, led on by necessity,
thou canst advance to the direful struggle, with the courage of a hero.
What can I do? What ought I to do? Thou dost conquer thyself and us;
thou art the victor; I survive both myself and thee. I have lost my
light at the banquet, my banner on the field. The future lies before me,
dark, desolate, perplexed.

Egmont. Young friend, whom by a strange fatality, at the same moment,
I both win and lose, who dost feel for me, who dost suffer for me the
agonies of death,--look on me;--thou wilt not lose me. If my life was
a mirror in which thou didst love to contemplate thyself, so be also
my death. Men are not together only when in each other's presence;--the
distant, the departed, also live for us. I shall live for thee, and for
myself I have lived long enough. I have enjoyed each day; each day,
I have performed, with prompt activity, the duties enjoined by my
conscience. Now my life ends, as it might have ended, long, long, ago,
on the sands of Gravelines. I shall cease to live; but I have lived. My
friend, follow in my steps, lead a cheerful and a joyous life, and dread
not the approach of death.

Ferdinand. Thou shouldst have saved thyself for us, thou couldst have
saved thyself. Thou art the cause of thine own destruction. Often have
I listened when able men discoursed concerning thee; foes and friends,
they would dispute long as to thy worth; but on one point they were
agreed, none ventured to deny, every one confessed, that thou wert
treading a dangerous path. How often have I longed to warn thee! Hadst
thou then no friends?

Egmont. I was warned.

Ferdinand. And when I found all these allegations, point for point, in
the indictment, together with thy answers, containing much that might
serve to palliate thy conduct, but no evidence weighty enough fully to
exculpate thee--

Egmont. No more of this. Man imagines that he directs his life, that
he governs his actions, when in fact his existence is irresistibly
controlled by his destiny. Let us not dwell upon this subject; these
reflections I can dismiss with ease--not so my apprehensions for these
provinces; yet they too will be cared for. Could my blood flow for many,
bring peace to my people, how freely should it flow! Alas! This may not
be. Yet it ill becomes a man idly to speculate, when the power to act
is no longer his. If thou canst restrain or guide the fatal power of thy
father; do so. Alas, who can?--Farewell!

Ferdinand. I cannot leave thee.

Egmont. Let me urgently recommend my followers to thy care! I have
worthy men in my service; let them not be dispersed, let them not become
destitute! How fares it with Richard, my secretary?

Ferdinand. He is gone before thee. They have beheaded him, as thy
accomplice in high treason.

Egmont. Poor soul!--Yet one word, and then farewell, I can no more.
However powerfully the spirit may be stirred, nature at length
irresistibly asserts her rights; and like a child, who, enveloped in
a serpent's folds, enjoys refreshing slumber, so the weary one lays
himself down to rest before the gates of death, and sleeps soundly, as
though a toilsome journey yet lay before him.--One word more,--I know
a maiden; thou wilt not despise her because she was mine. Since I can
recommend her to thy care, I shall die in peace. Thy soul is noble; in
such a man, a woman is sure to find a protector. Lives my old Adolphus?
Is he free?

Ferdinand. The active old man, who always attended thee on horseback?

Egmont. The same.

Ferdinand. He lives, he is free.

Egmont. He knows her dwelling; let him guide thy steps thither, and
reward him to his dying day, for having shown thee the way to this
jewel.--Farewell!

Ferdinand. I cannot leave thee.

Egmont (urging him towards the door). Farewell!

Ferdinand. Oh, let me linger yet a moment!

Egmont. No leave-taking, my friend.

(He accompanies Ferdinand to the door, and then tears himself away;
Ferdinand, overwhelmed with grief, hastily retires.)

Egmont (alone)

Egmont. Cruel man! Thou didst not think to render me this service
through thy son. He has been the means of relieving my mind from the
pressure of care and sorrow, from fear and every anxious feeling.
Gently, yet urgently, nature claims her final tribute. 'Tis past!--'Tis
resolved! And the reflections which, in the suspense of last night, kept
me wakeful on my couch, now with resistless certainty lull my senses to
repose.

(He seats himself upon the couch; music)

Sweet sleep! Like the purest happiness, thou comest most willingly,
uninvited, unsought. Thou dost loosen the knots of earnest thoughts,
dost mingle all images of joy and of sorrow, unimpeded the circle of
inner harmony flows on, and wrapped in fond delusion, we sink into
oblivion, and cease to be.

(He sleeps; music accompanies his slumber. Behind his couch the wall
appears to open and discovers a brilliant apparition. Freedom, in a
celestial garb, surrounded by a glory, reposes on a cloud. Her features
are those of Clara and she inclines towards the sleeping hero. Her
countenance betokens compassion, she seems to lament his fate. Quickly
she recovers herself and with an encouraging gesture exhibits the
symbols of freedom, the bundle of arrows, with the staff and cap. She
encourages him to be of good cheer, and while she signifies to him that
his death will secure the freedom of the provinces, she hails him as a
conqueror, and extends to him a laurel crown. As the wreath approaches
his head, Egmont moves like one asleep, and reclines with his face
towards her. She holds the wreath suspended over his head,--martial
music is heard in the distance, at the first sound the vision
disappears. The music grows louder and louder. Egmont awakes. The prison
is dimly illuminated by the dawn.--His first impulse is to lift his hand
to his head, he stands up, and gazes round, his hand still upraised.)

The crown is vanished! Beautiful vision, the light of day has frighted
thee! Yes, their revealed themselves to my sight uniting in one radiant
form the two sweetest joys of my heart. Divine Liberty borrowed the mien
of my beloved one; the lovely maiden arrayed herself in the celestial
garb of my friend. In a solemn moment they appeared united, with aspect
more earnest than tender. With bloodstained feet the vision approached,
the waving folds of her robe also were tinged with blood. It was my
blood, and the blood of many brave hearts. No! It shall not be shed in
vain! Forward! Brave people! The goddess of liberty leads you on! And as
the sea breaks through and destroys the barriers that would oppose its
fury, so do ye overwhelm the bulwark of tyranny, and with your impetuous
flood sweep it away from the land which it usurps. (Drums.)

Hark! Hark! How often has this sound summoned my joyous steps to the
field of battle and of victory! How bravely did I tread, with my gallant
comrades, the dangerous path of fame! And now, from this dungeon I shall
go forth, to meet a glorious death; I die for freedom, for whose cause
I have lived and fought, and for whom I now offer myself up at sorrowing
sacrifice.

(The background is occupied by Spanish soldiers with halberts.)

Yes, lead them on! Close your ranks, ye terrify me not. I am accustomed
to stand amid the serried ranks of war, and environed by the threatening
forms of death, to feel, with double zest, the energy of life. (Drums.)

The foe closes round on every side! Swords are flashing; courage,
friends! Behind are your parents, your wives, your children! (Pointing
to the guard.)

And these are impelled by the word of their leader, not by their own
free will. Protect your homes! And to save those who are most dear to
you, be ready to follow my example, and to fall with joy.

(Drums. As he advances through the guards towards the door in the
background, the curtain falls. The music joins in, and the scene closes
with a symphony of victory.)

========================================
