========================================

THE BOY CAPTIVES

An Incident of the Indian War of 1695

by John Greenleaf Whittier




BEGINNING


THE township of Haverhill, even as late as the close of the
seventeenth century, was a frontier settlement, occupying an
advanced position in the great wilderness, which, unbroken by the
clearing of a white man, extended from the Merrimac River to the
French villages on the St. Francois.  A tract of twelve miles on the
river and three or four northwardly was occupied by scattered
settlers, while in the centre of the town a compact village had
grown up.  In the immediate vicinity there were but few Indians,
and these generally peaceful and inoffensive.  On the breaking out
of the Narragansett War, [1] the inhabitants had erected
fortifications, and taken other measures for defence; but, with the
possible exception of one man who was found slain in the woods in
1676, none of the inhabitants were molested; and it was not until
about the year 1689 that the safety of the settlement was seriously
threatened.  Three persons were killed in that year.  In 1690 six
garrisons were established in different parts of the town, with a
small company of soldiers attached to each.  Two of these houses
are still standing.  They were built of brick, two stories high, with a
single outside door, so small and narrow that but one person could
enter at a time; the windows few, and only about two and a half feet
long by eighteen inches wide, with thick diamond glass secured
with lead, and crossed inside with bars of iron.  The basement had
but two rooms, and the chamber was entered by a ladder instead of
stairs; so that the inmates, if driven thither, could cut off
communication with the rooms below.  Many private houses were
strengthened and fortified.  We remember one familiar to our
boyhood,--a venerable old building of wood, with brick between
the weather-boards and ceiling, with a massive balustrade over the
door, constructed of oak timber and plank, with holes through the
latter for firing upon assailants.  The door opened upon a
stone-paved hall, or entry, leading into the huge single room of the
basement, which was lighted by two small windows, the ceiling black
with the smoke of a century and a half; a huge fireplace, calculated
for eight-feet wood, occupying one entire side; while, overhead,
suspended from the timbers, or on shelves fastened to them, were
household stores, farming utensils, fishing-rods, guns, bunches of
herbs gathered perhaps a century ago, strings of dried apples and
pumpkins, links of mottled sausages, spare-ribs, and flitches of
bacon; the fire-light of an evening dimly revealing the checked
woollen coverlet of the bed in one far-off corner, while in another--

                       "The pewter plates on the dresser
     Caught and reflected the flame as shields of armies the
     sunshine." [2]


Tradition has preserved many incidents of life in the garrisons.  In
times of unusual peril the settlers generally resorted at night to the
fortified houses, taking thither their flocks and herds and such
household valuables as were most likely to strike the fancy or
minister to the comfort or vanity of the heathen marauders.  False
alarms were frequent.  The smoke of a distant fire, the bark of a
dog in the deep woods, a stump or bush, taking in the uncertain
light of stars and moon the appearance of a man, were sufficient to
spread alarm through the entire settlement and to cause the armed
men of the garrison to pass whole nights in sleepless watching.  It is
said that at Haselton's garrison-house the sentinel on duty saw, as
he thought, an Indian inside of the paling which surrounded the
building, and apparently seeking to gain an entrance.  He promptly
raised his musket and fired at the intruder, alarming thereby the
entire garrison.  The women and children left their beds, and the
men seized their guns and commenced firing on the suspicious
object; but it seemed to bear a charmed life, and remained
unharmed.  As the morning dawned, however, the mystery was
solved by the discovery of a black quilted petticoat hanging on the
clothes-line completely riddled with balls.

As a matter of course, under circumstances of perpetual alarm
and frequent peril, the duty of cultivating their fields, and gathering
their harvests, and working at their mechanical avocations, was
dangerous and difficult to the settlers.  One instance will serve as an
illustration.  At the garrison-house of Thomas Dustin, the husband
of the far-famed Mary Dustin [who, while a captive of the Indians,
and maddened by the murder of her infant child, killed and scalped,
wit the assistance of a young boy, the entire band of her captors,
ten in number], the business of brick-making was carried on.  The
pits where the clay was found were only a few rods from the house;
yet no man ventured to bring the clay to the yard within the
inclosure, without the attendance of a file of soldiers.  An anecdote
relating to this garrison has been handed down to the present time.
Among its inmates were two young cousins, Joseph and Mary
Whittaker; the latter a merry, handsome girl, relieving the tedium of
garrison-duty with her light-hearted mirthfulness and--

       "Making a sunshine in that shady place." [3]

Joseph, in the intervals of his labors in the double capacity of
brick-maker and man-at-arms, was assiduous in his attentions to his
fair cousin, who was not inclined to encourage him.  Growing
desperate, he threatened one evening to throw himself into the
garrison well.  His threat only called forth the laughter of his
mistress; and, bidding her farewell, he proceeded to put it in
execution.  On reaching the well he stumbled over a log;
whereupon, animated by a happy idea, he dropped the wood into
the water instead of himself, and, hiding behind the curb, awaited
the result.  Mary, who had been listening at the door, and who had
not believed her lover capable of so rash an act, heard the sudden
plunge of the wooden Joseph.  She ran to the well, and, leaning
over the curb and peering down the dark opening, cried out, in
tones of anguish and remorse, "O Joseph, if you're in the land of the
living, I 'll have you!"  "I 'll take ye at your word," answered
Joseph, springing up from his hiding-place and avenging himself for
her coyness and coldness by a hearty embrace.

Our own paternal ancestor, owing to religious scruples in the
matter of taking arms even for defence of life and property, refused
to leave his undefended house and enter the garrison.  The Indians
frequently came to his house; and the family more than once in the
night heard them whispering under the windows, and saw them put
their copper faces to the glass to take a view of the apartments.
Strange as it may seem, they never offered any injury or insult to
the inmates.

In 1695 the township was many times molested by Indians, and
several persons were killed and wounded.  Early in the fall a small
party made their appearance in the northerly part of the town,
where, finding two boys at work in an open field, they managed to
surprise and capture them, and, without committing further
violence, retreated through the woods to their homes on the shore
of Lake Winnipiseogee.  Isaac Bradley, aged fifteen, was a small
but active and vigorous boy; his companion in captivity, Joseph
Whittaker, was only eleven, yet quite as large in size, and heavier in
his movements.  After a hard and painful journey they arrived at the
lake, and were placed in an Indian family, consisting of a man and
squaw and two or three children.  Here they soon acquired a
sufficient knowledge of the Indian tongue to enable them to learn
from the conversation carried on in their presence that it was
designed to take them to Canada in the spring.  This discovery was
a painful one.  Canada, the land of Papist priests and bloody
Indians, was the especial terror of the New England settlers, and
the anathema maranatha [4] of Puritan pulpits.  Thither the Indians
usually hurried their captives, where they compelled them to work
in their villages or sold them to the French planters.  Escape from
thence through a deep wilderness, and across lakes, and mountains,
and almost impassable rivers, without food or guide, is regarded as
an impossibility.  The poor boys, terrified by the prospect of being
carried still farther from their home and friends, began to dream of
escaping from their masters before they started for Canada.  It was
now winter; it would have been little short of madness to have
chosen for flight that season of bitter cold and deep snows.  Owing
to exposure and want of proper food and clothing, Isaac, the eldest
of the boys, was seized with a violent fever, from which he slowly
recovered in the course of the winter.  His Indian mistress was as
kind to him as her circumstances permitted,--procuring medicinal
herbs and roots for her patient, and tenderly watching over him in
the long winter nights.  Spring came at length; the snows melted;
and the ice was broken up on the lake.  The Indians began to make
preparations for journeying to Canada; and Isaac, who had during
his sickness devised a plan of escape, saw that the time of putting it
in execution had come.  On the evening before he was to make the
attempt he for the first time informed his younger companion of his
design, and told him, if he intended to accompany him, he must be
awake at the time appointed.  The boys lay down as usual in the
wigwam in the midst of the family.  Joseph soon fell asleep; but
Isaac, fully sensible of the danger and difficulty of the enterprise
before him, lay awake, watchful for his opportunity.  About
midnight he rose, cautiously stepping over the sleeping forms of the
family, and securing, as he went, his Indian master's flint, steel, and
tinder, and a small quantity of dry moose-meat and corn-bread.  He
then carefully awakened his companion, who, starting up, forgetful
of the cause of his disturbance, asked aloud, "What do you want?"
The savages began to stir; and Isaac, trembling with fear of
detection, lay down again and pretended to be asleep.  After
waiting a while he again rose, satisfied, from the heavy breathing of
the Indians, that they were all sleeping; and fearing to awaken
Joseph a second time, lest he should again hazard all by his
thoughtlessness, he crept softly out of the wigwam. He had
proceeded but a few rods when he heard footsteps behind him; and,
supposing himself pursued, he hurried into the woods, casting a
glance backward.  What was his joy to see his young companion
running after him!  They hastened on in a southerly direction as
nearly as they could determine, hoping to reach their distant home.
When daylight appeared they found a large hollow log, into which
they crept for concealment, wisely judging that they would be hotly
pursued by their Indian captors.

Their sagacity was by no means at fault.  The Indians, missing
their prisoners in the morning, started off in pursuit with their dogs.
As the young boys lay in the log they could hear the whistle of the
Indians and the barking of dogs upon their track.  It was a trying
moment; and even the stout heart of the elder boy sank within him
as the dogs came up to the log and set up a loud bark of discovery.
But his presence of mind saved him.  He spoke in a low tone to the
dogs, who, recognizing his familiar voice, wagged their tails with
delight, and ceased barking.  He then threw to them the morsel of
moose-meat he had taken from the wigwam.  While the dogs were thus
diverted, the Indians made their appearance.  The boys heard the
light, stealthy sound of their moccasins on the leaves.  They passed
close to the log; and the dogs, having devoured their moose-meat,
trotted after their masters.  Through a crevice in the log the boys
looked after them, and saw them disappear in the thick woods. They
remained in their covert until night, when they started again on their
long journey, taking a new route to avoid the Indians.  At daybreak
they again concealed themselves, but travelled the next night and day
without resting.  By this time they had consumed all the bread which
they had taken, and were fainting from hunger and weariness.  Just at
the close of the third day they were providentially enabled to kill a
pigeon and a small tortoise, a part of which they ate raw, not daring
to make a fire, which might attract the watchful eyes of savages.  On
the sixth day they struck upon an old Indian path, and, following it
until night, came suddenly upon a camp of the enemy.  Deep in the
heart of the forest, under the shelter of a ridge of land heavily
timbered, a great fire of logs and brushwood was burning; and around
it the Indians sat, eating their moose-meat and smoking their pipes.

The poor fugitives, starving, weary, and chilled by the cold spring
blasts, gazed down upon the ample fire, and the savory meats which
the squaws were cooking by it, but felt no temptation to purchase
warmth and food by surrendering themselves to captivity.  Death in
the forest seemed preferable.  They turned and fled back upon their
track, expecting every moment to hear the yells of pursuers.  The
morning found them seated on the bank of a small stream, their feet
torn and bleeding, and their bodies emaciated.  The elder, as a last
effort, made search for roots, and fortunately discovered a few
ground-nuts [*glycine apios*], which served to refresh in some
degree himself and his still weaker companion.  As they stood
together by the stream, hesitating and almost despairing, it occurred
to Isaac that the rivulet might lead to a larger stream of water, and
that to the sea and the white settlements near it; and he resolved to
follow it.  They again began their painful march; the day passed,
and the night once more overtook them.  When the eighth morning
dawned, the younger of the boys found himself unable to rise from
his bed of leaves.  Isaac endeavored to encourage him, dug roots,
and procured water for him; but the poor lad was utterly exhausted.
He had no longer heart or hope.  The elder boy laid him on leaves
and dry grass at the foot of a tree, and with a heavy heart bade him
farewell.  Alone he slowly and painfully proceeded down the
stream, now greatly increased in size by tributary rivulets.  On the
top of a hill he climbed with difficulty into a tree, and saw in the
distance what seemed to be a clearing and a newly-raised frame
building.  Hopeful and rejoicing, he turned back to his young
companion, told him what he had seen, and, after chafing his limbs
awhile, got him upon his feet.  Sometimes supporting him, and at
others carrying him on his back, the heroic boy staggered towards
the clearing.  On reaching it he found it deserted, and was obliged
to continue his journey.  Towards night signs of civilization began
to appear,--the heavy, continuous roar of water was heard; and,
presently emerging from the forest, he saw a great river dashing in
white foam down precipitous rocks, and on its bank the gray walls
of a huge stone building, with flankers, palisades, and moat, over
which the British flag was flying.  This was the famous Saco Fort,
built by Governor Phips, [5] two years before, just below the falls of
the Saco River.  The soldiers of the garrison gave the poor fellows
a kindly welcome.  Joseph, who was scarcely alive, lay for a long
time sick in the fort; but Isaac soon regained his strength, and set
out for his home in Haverhill, which he had the good fortune to
arrive at in safety.

Amidst the stirring excitements of the present day, when every
thrill of the electric wire conveys a new subject for thought or
action to a generation as eager as the ancient Athenians for some
new thing, simple legends of the past like that which we have
transcribed have undoubtedly lost in a great degree their interest.
The lore of the fireside is becoming obsolete, and with the
octogenarian few who still linger among us will perish the unwritten
history of border life in New England.





[Footnote 1: The "Narragansett War" was a name applied to that part of
King Philip's War which resulted from the defection of the powerful
tribe of Narragansetts, formerly allies of the English, to the standard
of the Indian chief.]

[Footnote 2: Longfellow's *Evangeline,* lines 205, 206.]

[Footnote 3:
                       "Her angel's face
   As the great eye of heaven shyned bright
   And made a sunshine in the shadie place;
   Did never mortal eye behold such heavenly grace."
  --Spenser: *The Faerie Queene,* bk. I. canto iii. st. 4.]

[Footnote 4: *Anathema maranatha* occurs at the close of St. Paul's first
epistle to the Corinthians, and in the English version is made to
appear as a composite phrase.  It has so passed into common use,
*maranatha* being taken as intensifying the curse contained in
*anathema*. The words are properly to be divided, *maranatha*
signifying "The Lord cometh."]


[Footnote 5: An interesting account of Sir William Phips will be found in
Parkman's *Frontenac and New France under Louis XIV.*
Hawthorne also tells his romantic story in *Fanshawe and Other
Pieces.*]

========================================
========================================

YANKEE GYPSIES

by John Greenleaf Whittier




     "Here's to budgets, packs, and wallets;
     Here's to all the wandering train."
     BURNS.(1)



I CONFESS it, I am keenly sensitive to "skyey influences." (2) I profess
no indifference to the movements of that capricious old gentleman
known as the clerk of the weather. I cannot conceal my interest in the
behavior of that patriarchal bird whose wooden similitude gyrates on the
church spire. Winter proper is well enough. Let the thermometer go
to zero if it will; so much the better, if thereby the very winds are
frozen and unable to flap their stiff wings. Sounds of bells in the keen
air, clear, musical, heart-inspiring; quick tripping of fair moccasined
feet on glittering ice pavements; bright eyes glancing above the
uplifted muff like a sultana's behind the folds of her _yashmak;_(3)
schoolboys coasting down street like mad Greenlanders; the cold
brilliance of oblique sunbeams flashing back from wide surfaces of
glittering snow, or blazing upon ice jewelry of tree and roof: there is
nothing in all this to complain of. A storm of summer has its redeeming
sublimities,--its slow, upheaving mountains of cloud glooming in the
western horizon like new-created volcanoes, veined with fire, shattered
by exploding thunders. Even the wild gales of the equinox have their
varieties,--sounds of wind-shaken woods and waters, creak and clatter
of sign and casement, hurricane puffs, and down-rushing rain-spouts. But
this dull, dark autumn day of thaw and rain, when the very clouds seem
too spiritless and languid to storm outright or take themselves out of
the way of fair weather; wet beneath and above, reminding one of
that rayless atmosphere of Dante's Third Circle, where the infernal
Priessnitz(4) administers his hydropathic torment,--

     "A heavy, cursed, and relentless drench,--
     The land it soaks is putrid;"

or rather, as everything animate and inanimate is seething in warm mist,
suggesting the idea that Nature, grown old and rheumatic, is trying the
efficacy of a Thomsonian steam-box(5) on a grand scale; no sounds
save the heavy plash of muddy feet on the pavements; the monotonous,
melancholy drip from trees and roofs; the distressful gurgling of
waterducts, swallowing the dirty amalgam of the gutters; a dim,
leaden-colored horizon of only a few yards in diameter, shutting down
about one, beyond which nothing is visible save in faint line or
dark projection; the ghost of a church spire or the eidolon of a
chimney-pot,--he who can extract pleasurable emotions from the
alembic of such a day has a trick of alchemy with which I am wholly
unacquainted.

     (1) From the closing air in _The Jolly Beggars,_ a cantata.
     (2)                             "A breath thou art
           Servile to all the skyey influences,
           That dost this habitation, where thou keep'st
           Hourly afflict."
               Shakespeare: _Measure for Measure,_ act III. scene 1.
     (3) "She turns and turns again, and carefully glances around
     her on all sides, to see that she is safe from the eyes of
     Mussulmans, and then suddenly withdrawing the yashmak she
     shines upon your heart and soul with all the pomp and might of
     her beauty." Kinglake's _Eothen,_ chap. iii.  In a note to
     _Yashmak_ Kinglake explains that it is not a mere
     semi-transparent veil, but thoroughly conceals all the features
     except the eyes: it is withdrawn by being pulled down.
     (4) Vincenz Priessnitz was the originator of the water-cure.
     After experimenting upon himself and his neighbors he took up
     the profession of hydropathy and established baths at his native
     place, Grafenberg in Silesia, in 1829.  He died in 1851.
     (5) Dr. Samuel Thomson, a New Hampshire physician,
     advocated the use of the steam bath as a restorer of system
     when diseased.  He died in 1843 and left behind an
     autobiography (_Life and Medical Discoveries_) which
     contains a record of the persecutions he underwent.

Hark! a rap at my door. Welcome anybody just now. One gains nothing by
attempting to shut out the sprites of the weather. They come in at the
keyhole; they peer through the dripping panes; they insinuate themselves
through the crevices of the casement, or plump down chimney astride of
the raindrops.

I rise and throw open the door. A tall, shambling, loose-jointed figure;
a pinched, shrewd face, sun-brown and wind-dried; small, quick-winking
black eyes,--there he stands, the water dripping from his pulpy hat and
ragged elbows.

I speak to him; but he returns no answer. With a dumb show of misery,
quite touching, he hands me a soiled piece of parchment, whereon I read
what purports to be a melancholy account of shipwreck and disaster, to
the particular detriment, loss, and damnification of one Pietro Frugoni,
who is, in consequence, sorely in want of the alms of all charitable
Christian persons, and who is, in short, the bearer of this veracious
document, duly certified and indorsed by an Italian consul in one of
our Atlantic cities, of a high-sounding, but to Yankee organs
unpronounceable, name.

Here commences a struggle. Every man, the Mahometans tell us, has two
attendant angels,--the good one on his right shoulder, the bad on his
left. "Give," says Benevolence, as with some difficulty I fish up a
small coin from the depths of my pocket. "Not a cent," says selfish
Prudence; and I drop it from my fingers. "Think," says the good angel,
"of the poor stranger in a strange land, just escaped from the terrors
of the sea-storm, in which his little property has perished, thrown
half-naked and helpless on our shores, ignorant of our language, and
unable to find employment suited to his capacity." "A vile impostor!"
replies the left-hand sentinel; "his paper purchased from one of those
ready-writers in New York who manufacture beggar-credentials at the low
price of one dollar per copy, with earthquakes, fires, or shipwrecks, to
suit customers."

Amidst this confusion of tongues I take another survey of my visitant.
Ha! a light dawns upon me. That shrewd, old face, with its sharp,
winking eyes, is no stranger to me. Pietro Frugoni, I have seen thee
before. _Si, signor,_ that face of thine has looked at me over a dirty
white neckcloth, with the corners of that cunning mouth drawn downwards,
and those small eyes turned up in sanctimonious gravity, while thou wast
offering to a crowd of half-grown boys an extemporaneous exhortation in
the capacity of a travelling preacher. Have I not seen it peering out
from under a blanket, as that of a poor Penobscot Indian, who had lost
the use of his hands while trapping on the Madawaska? Is it not the face
of the forlorn father of six small children, whom the "marcury doctors"
had "pisened" and crippled? Did it not belong to that down-east
unfortunate who had been out to the "Genesee country"(1) and got the
"fevernnager," and whose hand shook so pitifully when held out to
receive my poor gift? The same, under all disguises,--Stephen Leathers,
of Barrington,--him, and none other! Let me conjure him into his own
likeness:--

(1) The _Genesee country_ is the name by which the western part of New
York, bordering on Lakes Ontario and Erie, was known, when, at the
close of the last and beginning of this century, it was to people on
the Atlantic coast the Great West. In 1792 communication was opened by
a road with the Pennsylvania settlements, but the early settlers were
almost all from New England.

"Well, Stephen, what news from old Barrington?"

"Oh, well, I thought I knew ye," he answers, not the least disconcerted.
"How do you do? and how's your folks? All well, I hope. I took this
'ere paper, you see, to help a poor furriner, who could n't make himself
understood any more than a wild goose. I though I'd just start him
for'ard a little. It seemed a marcy to do it."

Well and shiftily answered, thou ragged Proteus. One cannot be angry
with such a fellow. I will just inquire into the present state of his
Gospel mission and about the condition of his tribe on the Penobscot;
and it may be not amiss to congratulate him on the success of the
steam-doctors in sweating the "pisen" of the regular faculty out of him.
But he evidently has no wish to enter into idle conversation. Intent
upon his benevolent errand he is already clattering down stairs.
Involuntarily I glance out of the window just in season to catch a
single glimpse of him ere he is swallowed up in the mist.

He has gone; and, knave as he is, I can hardly help exclaiming, "Luck
go with him!" He has broken in upon the sombre train of my thoughts
and called up before me pleasant and grateful recollections. The old
farm-house nestling in its valley; hills stretching off to the south and
green meadows to the east; the small stream which came noisily down its
ravine, washing the old garden-wall and softly lapping on fallen stones
and mossy roots of beeches and hemlocks; the tall sentinel poplars at
the gateway; the oak-forest, sweeping unbroken to the northern horizon;
the grass-grown carriage-path, with its rude and crazy bridge,--the
dear old landscape of my boyhood lies outstretched before me like a
daguerreotype from that picture within, which I have borne with me in
all my wanderings. I am a boy again, once more conscious of the feeling,
half terror, half exultation, with which I used to announce the approach
of this very vagabond and his "kindred after the flesh."

The advent of wandering beggars, or "old stragglers," as we were wont
to call them, was an event of no ordinary interest in the generally
monotonous quietude of our farm-life. Many of them were well known; they
had their periodical revolutions and transits; we would calculate them
like eclipses or new moons. Some were sturdy knaves, fat and saucy; and,
whenever they ascertained that the "men folks" were absent, would order
provisions and cider like men who expected to pay for them, seating
themselves at the hearth or table with the air of Falstaff,--"Shall
I not take mine ease in mine inn?" Others, poor, pale, patient, like
Sterne's monk,(1) came creeping up to the door, hat in hand, standing
there in their gray wretchedness with a look of heartbreak and
forlornness which was never without its effect on our juvenile
sensibilities. At times, however, we experienced a slight revulsion of
feeling when even these humblest children of sorrow somewhat petulantly
rejected our proffered bread and cheese, and demanded instead a glass of
cider. Whatever the temperance society might in such cases have done,
it was not in our hearts to refuse the poor creatures a draught of
their favorite beverage; and was n't it a satisfaction to see their sad,
melancholy faces light up as we handed them the full pitcher, and, on
receiving it back empty from their brown, wrinkled hands, to hear them,
half breathless from their long, delicious draught, thanking us for the
favor, as "dear, good children"! Not unfrequently these wandering tests
of our benevolence made their appearance in interesting groups of man,
woman, and child, picturesque in their squalidness, and manifesting
a maudlin affection which would have done honor to the revellers at
Poosie-Nansie's, immortal in the cantata of Burns. (2) I remember some
who were evidently the victims of monomania,--haunted and hunted by some
dark thought,--possessed by a fixed idea. One, a black-eyed, wild-haired
woman, with a whole tragedy of sin, shame, and suffering written in her
countenance, used often to visit us, warm herself by our winter fire,
and supply herself with a stock of cakes and cold meat; but was never
known to answer a question or to ask one. She never smiled; the cold,
stony look of her eye never changed; a silent, impassive face, frozen
rigid by some great wrong or sin. We used to look with awe upon the
"still woman," and think of the demoniac of Scripture who had a "dumb
spirit."

     (1) Whom he met at Calais, as described in his _Sentimental
     Journey._
     (2) The _cantata_ is _The Jolly Beggars,_ from which the
     motto heading this sketch was taken.  _Poosie-Nansie_ was the
     keeper of a tavern in Mauchline, which was the favorite resort
     of the lame sailors, maimed soldiers, travelling ballad-singers,
     and all such loose companions as hang about the skirts of
     society.  The cantata has for its theme the rivalry of a "pigmy
     scraper with his fiddle" and a strolling tinker for a beggar
     woman: hence the _maudlin affection._

One--I think I see him now, grim, gaunt, and ghastly, working his slow
way up to our door--used to gather herbs by the wayside and called
himself doctor. He was bearded like a he-goat, and used to counterfeit
lameness; yet, when he supposed himself alone, would travel on lustily,
as if walking for a wager. At length, as if in punishment of his deceit,
he met with an accident in his rambles and became lame in earnest,
hobbling ever after with difficulty on his gnarled crutches. Another
used to go stooping, like Bunyan's pilgrim, under a pack made of an old
bed-sacking, stuffed out into most plethoric dimensions, tottering on
a pair of small, meagre legs, and peering out with his wild, hairy face
from under his burden like a big-bodied spider. That "man with the pack"
always inspired me with awe and reverence. Huge, almost sublime, in its
tense rotundity, the father of all packs, never laid aside and never
opened, what might there not be within it? With what flesh-creeping
curiosity I used to walk round about it at a safe distance, half
expecting to see its striped covering stirred by the motions of a
mysterious life, or that some evil monsters would leap out of it, like
robbers from Ali Baba's jars or armed men from the Trojan horse!

There was another class of peripatetic philosophers--half pedler, half
mendicant--who were in the habit of visiting us. One we recollect, a
lame, unshaven, sinister-eyed, unwholesome fellow, with his basket of
old newspapers and pamphlets, and his tattered blue umbrella, serving
rather as a walking-staff than as a protection from the rain. He told
us on one occasion, in answer to our inquiring into the cause of his
lameness, that when a young man he was employed on the farm of the chief
magistrate of a neighboring State; where, as his ill luck would have it,
the governor's handsome daughter fell in love with him. He was caught
one day in the young lady's room by her father; whereupon the irascible
old gentleman pitched him unceremoniously out of the window, laming
him for life, on a brick pavement below, like Vulcan on the rocks of
Lemnos.(1) As for the lady, he assured us "she took on dreadfully about
it." "Did she die?" we inquired, anxiously. There was a cunning twinkle
in the old rogue's eye as he responded, "Well, no she did n't. She got
married."

     (1) It was upon the Isle of Lemnos that Vulcan was flung by
     Jupiter, according to the myth, for attempting to aid his mother
     Juno.

Twice a year, usually in the spring and autumn, we were honored with a
call from Jonathan Plummer, maker of verses, pedler and poet, physician
and parson,--a Yankee troubadour,--first and last minstrel of the valley
of the Merrimac, encircled, to my wondering young eyes, with the very
nimbus of immortality. He brought with him pins, needles, tape, and
cotton-thread for my mother; jack-knives, razors, and soap for
my father; and verses of his own composing, coarsely printed and
illustrated with rude wood-cuts, for the delectation of the younger
branches of the family. No love-sick youth could drown himself, no
deserted maiden bewail the moon, no rogue mount the gallows, without
fitting memorial in Plummer's verses. Earthquakes, fires, fevers, and
shipwrecks he regarded as personal favors from Providence, furnishing
the raw material of song and ballad. Welcome to us in our country
seclusion, as Autolycus to the clown in "Winter's Tale,"(1) we listened
with infinite satisfaction to his reading of his own verses, or to his
ready improvisation upon some domestic incident or topic suggested by
his auditors. When once fairly over the difficulties at the outset of a
new subject his rhymes flowed freely, "as if he had eaten ballads, and
all men's ears grew to his tunes." His productions answered, as
nearly as I can remember, to Shakespeare's description of a proper
ballad,--"doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant theme
sung lamentably." He was scrupulously conscientious, devout, inclined
to theological disquisitions, and withal mighty in Scripture. He was
thoroughly independent; flattered nobody, cared for nobody, trusted
nobody. When invited to sit down at our dinner-table he invariably took
the precaution to place his basket of valuables between his legs for
safe keeping. "Never mind they basket, Jonathan," said my father;
"we shan't steal thy verses." "I 'm not sure of that," returned the
suspicious guest. "It is written, 'Trust ye not in any brother.'"

     (1) "He could never come better," says the clown in
     Shakespeare's _The Winter's Tale,_ when Autolycus, the
     pedler, is announced; "he shall come in.  I love a ballad but
     even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very
     pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably."  Act IV. scene 4.

Thou, too, O Parson B.,--with thy pale student's brow and rubicund
nose, with thy rusty and tattered black coat overswept by white, flowing
locks, with thy professional white neckcloth scrupulously preserved
when even a shirt to thy back was problematical,--art by no means to
be overlooked in the muster-roll of vagrant gentlemen possessing the
_entree_ of our farmhouse. Well do we remember with what grave and
dignified courtesy he used to step over its threshold, saluting its
inmates with the same air of gracious condescension and patronage with
which in better days he had delighted the hearts of his parishioners.
Poor old man! He had once been the admired and almost worshipped
minister of the largest church in the town where he afterwards found
support in the winter season, as a pauper. He had early fallen into
intemperate habits; and at the age of three-score and ten, when I
remember him, he was only sober when he lacked the means of being
otherwise. Drunk or sober, however, he never altogether forgot the
proprieties of his profession; he was always grave, decorous, and
gentlemanly; he held fast the form of sound words, and the weakness of
the flesh abated nothing of the rigor of his stringent theology. He had
been a favorite pupil of the learned and astute Emmons,(1) and was to
the last a sturdy defender of the peculiar dogmas of his school.
The last time we saw him he was holding a meeting in our district
school-house, with a vagabond pedler for deacon and travelling
companion. The tie which united the ill-assorted couple was doubtless
the same which endeared Tam O'Shanter to the souter:(2)--

   "They had been fou for weeks thegither."

He took for his text the first seven verses of the concluding chapter of
Ecclesiastes, furnishing in himself its fitting illustration. The evil
days had come; the keepers of the house trembled; the windows of life
were darkened. A few months later the silver cord was loosed, the golden
bowl was broken, and between the poor old man and the temptations which
beset him fell the thick curtains of the grave.


     (1) Nathaniel Emmons was a New England theologian of
     marked character and power, who for seventy years was
     connected with a church in that part of Wrentham, Mass., now
     called Franklin.  He exercised considerable influence over the
     religious thought of New England, and is still read by
     theologians.  He died in 1840, in his ninety-sixth year.
     (2) Souter (or cobbler) Johnny, in Burns's poetic tale of _Tam
     O'Shanter,_ had been _fou_ or _full_ of drink with Tam for
     weeks together.

One day we had a call from a "pawky auld carle"(1) of a wandering
Scotchman. To him I owe my first introduction to the songs of Burns.
After eating his bread and cheese and drinking his mug of cider he gave
us Bonny Doon, Highland Mary, and Auld Lang Syne. He had a rich, full
voice, and entered heartily into the spirit of his lyrics. I have since
listened to the same melodies from the lips of Dempster(2) (than whom
the Scottish bard has had no sweeter or truer interpreter), but
the skilful performance of the artist lacked the novel charm of the
gaberlunzie's singing in the old farmhouse kitchen. Another wanderer
made us acquainted with the humorous old ballad of "Our gude man cam
hame at e'en." He applied for supper and lodging, and the next morning
was set at work splitting stones in the pasture. While thus engaged
the village doctor came riding along the highway on his fine, spirited
horse, and stopped to talk with my father. The fellow eyed the animal
attentively, as if familiar with all his good points, and hummed over a
stanza of the old poem:--

  "Our gude man cam hame at e'en,
     And hame cam he;
  And there he saw a saddle horse
     Where nae horse should be.
  'How cam this horse here?
     How can it be?
  How cam this horse here
     Without the leave of me?'
  'A horse?' quo she.
  'Ay, a horse,' quo he.
  'Ye auld fool, ye blind fool,--
  And blinder might ye be,--
  'T is naething but a milking cow
     My mamma sent to me.'
  'A milch cow?' quo he.
  'Ay, a milch cow,' quo she.
  'Weel, far hae I ridden,
     And muckle hae I seen;
  But milking cows wi' saddles on
     Saw I never nane.'"(3)

     (1) From the first line of _The Gaberlunzie Man,_ attributed
     to King James V. of Scotland,--

         "The pawky auld carle came o'er the lee."

     The original like Whittier's was a sly old fellow, as an English
     phrase would translate the Scottish.  _The Gaberlunzie Man_ is
     given in Percy's _Reliques of Ancient Poetry_ and in Child's
     _English and Scottish Ballads,_ viii. 98.
     (2) William R. Dempster, a Scottish vocalist who had
     recently sung in America, and whose music to Burns's song "A
     man 's a man for a' that" was very popular.
     (3) The whole of this song may be found in Herd's _Ancient
     and Modern Scottish Songs,_ ii. 172.

That very night the rascal decamped, taking with him the doctor's horse,
and was never after heard of.

Often, in the gray of the morning, we used to see one or more
"gaberlunzie men," pack on shoulder and staff in hand, emerging from the
barn or other outbuildings where they had passed the night. I was once
sent to the barn to fodder the cattle late in the evening, and, climbing
into the mow to pitch down hay for that purpose, I was startled by the
sudden apparition of a man rising up before me, just discernible in the
dim moonlight streaming through the seams of the boards. I made a rapid
retreat down the ladder; and was only reassured by hearing the object
of my terror calling after me, and recognizing his voice as that of a
harmless old pilgrim whom I had known before. Our farmhouse was situated
in a lonely valley, half surrounded with woods, with no neighbors in
sight. One dark, cloudy night, when our parents chanced to be absent,
we were sitting with our aged grandmother in the fading light of the
kitchen fire, working ourselves into a very satisfactory state of
excitement and terror by recounting to each other all the dismal stories
we could remember of ghosts, witches, haunted houses, and robbers, when
we were suddenly startled by a loud rap at the door. A strippling of
fourteen, I was very naturally regarded as the head of the household;
so, with many misgivings, I advanced to the door, which I slowly opened,
holding the candle tremulously above my head and peering out into the
darkness. The feeble glimmer played upon the apparition of a
gigantic horseman, mounted on a steed of a size worthy of such a
rider,--colossal, motionless, like images cut out of the solid night.
The strange visitant gruffly saluted me; and, after making several
ineffectual efforts to urge his horse in at the door, dismounted and
followed me into the room, evidently enjoying the terror which his huge
presence excited. Announcing himself as the great Indian doctor, he
drew himself up before the fire, stretched his arms, clinched his fists,
struck his broad chest, and invited our attention to what he called
his "mortal frame." He demanded in succession all kinds of intoxicating
liquors; and on being assured that we had none to give him, he grew
angry, threatened to swallow my younger brother alive, and, seizing me
by the hair of my head as the angel did the prophet at Babylon,(1) led
me about from room to room. After an ineffectual search, in the course
of which he mistook a jug of oil for one of brandy, and, contrary to my
explanations and remonstrances, insisted upon swallowing a portion of
its contents, he released me, fell to crying and sobbing, and confessed
that he was so drunk already that his horse was ashamed of him. After
bemoaning and pitying himself to his satisfaction he wiped his eyes, and
sat down by the side of my grandmother, giving her to understand that he
was very much pleased with her appearance; adding that, if agreeable to
her, he should like the privilege of paying his addresses to her. While
vainly endeavoring to make the excellent old lady comprehend his very
flattering proposition, he was interrupted by the return of my father,
who, at once understanding the matter, turned him out of doors without
ceremony.

     (1) See Ezekiel viii. 3.

On one occasion, a few years ago, on my return from the field at
evening, I was told that a foreigner had asked for lodgings during the
night, but that, influenced by his dark, repulsive appearance, my
mother had very reluctantly refused his request. I found her by no means
satisfied with her decision. "What if a son of mine was in a strange
land?" she inquired, self-reproachfully. Greatly to her relief, I
volunteered to go in pursuit of the wanderer, and, taking a cross-path
over the fields, soon overtook him. He had just been rejected at the
house of our nearest neighbor, and was standing in a state of dubious
perplexity in the street. He was an olive-complexioned, black-bearded
Italian, with an eye like a live coal, such a face as perchance looks
out on the traveller in the passes of the Abruzzi,(1)--one of those
bandit visages which Salvator(2) has painted. With some difficulty I
gave him to understand my errand, when he overwhelmed me with thanks,
and joyfully followed me back. He took his seat with us at the
supper-table; and, when we were all gathered around the hearth that cold
autumnal evening, he told us, partly by words and partly by gestures,
the story of his life and misfortunes, amused us with descriptions of
the grape-gatherings and festivals of his sunny clime, edified my mother
with a recipe for making bread of chestnuts; and in the morning, when,
after breakfast, his dark sullen face lighted up and his fierce eye
moistened with grateful emotion as in his own silvery Tuscan accent he
poured out his thanks, we marvelled at the fears which had so nearly
closed our door against him; and, as he departed, we all felt that he
had left with us the blessing of the poor.

     (1) Provinces into which the old Kingdom of Naples was
     divided.
     (2) Salvator Rosa was a Neapolitan by birth, and was said to
     have been himself a bandit in his youth; his landscapes often
     contain figures drawn from the wild life of the region.

It was not often that, as in the above instance, my mother's prudence
got the better of her charity. The regular "old stragglers" regarded her
as an unfailing friend; and the sight of her plain cap was to them an
assurance of forthcoming creature-comforts. There was indeed a tribe
of lazy strollers, having their place of rendezvous in the town of
Barrington, New Hampshire, whose low vices had placed them beyond even
the pale of her benevolence. They were not unconscious of their evil
reputation; and experience had taught them the necessity of concealing,
under well-contrived disguises, their true character. They came to us
in all shapes and with all appearances save the true one, with most
miserable stories of mishap and sickness and all "the ills which flesh
is heir to." It was particularly vexatious to discover, when too late,
that our sympathies and charities had been expended upon such graceless
vagabonds as the "Barrington beggars." An old withered hag, known by the
appellation of Hopping Pat,--the wise woman of her tribe,--was in the
habit of visiting us, with her hopeful grandson, who had "a gift for
preaching" as well as for many other things not exactly compatible
with holy orders. He sometimes brought with him a tame crow, a shrewd,
knavish-looking bird, who, when in the humor for it, could talk like
Barnaby Rudge's raven. He used to say he could "do nothin' at exhortin'
without a white handkercher on his neck and money in his pocket,"--a
fact going far to confirm the opinions of the Bishop of Exeter and the
Puseyites generally, that there can be no priest without tithes and
surplice.

These people have for several generations lived distinct from the great
mass of the community, like the gypsies of Europe, whom in many respects
they closely resemble. They have the same settled aversion to labor and
the same disposition to avail themselves of the fruits of the industry
of others. They love a wild, out-of-door life, sing songs, tell
fortunes, and have an instinctive hatred of "missionaries and cold
water." It has been said--I know not upon what grounds--that their
ancestors were indeed a veritable importation of English gypsyhood; but
if so, they have undoubtedly lost a good deal of the picturesque charm
of its unhoused and free condition. I very much fear that my friend
Mary Russell Mitford,--sweetest of England's rural painters,--who has a
poet's eye for the fine points in gypsy character, would scarcely
allow their claims to fraternity with her own vagrant friends, whose
camp-fires welcomed her to her new home at Swallowfield.(1)

     (1) See in Miss Mitford's _Our Village._

"The proper study of mankind is man;" and, according to my view, no
phase of our common humanity is altogether unworthy of investigation.
Acting upon this belief two or three summers ago, when making, in
company with my sister, a little excursion into the hill-country of New
Hampshire, I turned my horse's head towards Barrington for the purpose
of seeing these semi-civilized strollers in their own home, and
returning, once for all, their numerous visits. Taking leave of our
hospitable cousins in old Lee with about as much solemnity as we may
suppose Major Laing(1) parted with his friends when he set out in search
of desert-girdled Timbuctoo, we drove several miles over a rough road,
passed the Devil's Den unmolested, crossed a fretful little streamlet
noisily working its way into a valley, where it turned a lonely,
half-ruinous mill, and, climbing a steep hill beyond, saw before us a
wide, sandy level, skirted on the west and north by low, scraggy hills,
and dotted here and there with dwarf pitch-pines. In the centre of this
desolate region were some twenty or thirty small dwellings, grouped
together as irregularly as a Hottentot kraal. Unfenced, unguarded, open
to all comers and goers, stood that city of the beggars,--no wall
or paling between the ragged cabins to remind one of the jealous
distinctions of property. The great idea of its founders seemed visible
in its unappropriated freedom. Was not the whole round world their own?
and should they haggle about boundaries and title-deeds? For them, on
distant plains, ripened golden harvests; for them, in far-off workshops,
busy hands were toiling; for them, if they had but the grace to note it,
the broad earth put on her garniture of beauty, and over them hung the
silent mystery of heaven and its stars. That comfortable philosophy
which modern transcendentalism has but dimly shadowed forth--that poetic
agrarianism, which gives all to each and each to all--is the real life
of this city of unwork. To each of its dingy dwellers might be not
unaptly applied the language of one who, I trust, will pardon me for
quoting her beautiful poem in this connection:--

  "Other hands may grasp the field and forest,
  Proud proprietors in pomp may shine,
 .    .    .    .    .     .     .
  Thou art wealthier,--all the world is thine."(2)

     (1) Alexander Gordon Laing was a major in the British army,
     who served on the west coast of Africa and made journeys into
     the interior in the attempt to establish commercial relations
     with the natives, and especially to discover the sources of the
     Niger.  He was treacherously murdered in 1826 by the guard
     that was attending him on his return from Timbuctoo to the
     coast.  His travels excited great interest in their day in England
     and America.
     (2) From a poem, _Why Thus Longing?_ by Mrs. Harriet
     Winslow Sewall, preserved in Whittier's _Songs of Three
     Centuries._

But look! the clouds are breaking. "Fair weather cometh out of the
north." The wind has blown away the mists; on the gilded spire of John
Street glimmers a beam of sunshine; and there is the sky again, hard,
blue, and cold in its eternal purity, not a whit the worse for the
storm. In the beautiful present the past is no longer needed. Reverently
and gratefully let its volume be laid aside; and when again the shadows
of the outward world fall upon the spirit may I not lack a good angel to
remind me of its solace, even if he comes in the shape of a Barrington
beggar.

========================================
