========================================

THE WOMAN-HATERS


By Joseph C. Lincoln




FOREWORD

(By Way of Explanation)

A story of mine called, like this, "The Woman-Haters," appeared
recently in one of the magazines. That story was not this one, except in
part--the part dealing with "John Brown" and Miss Ruth Graham. Readers
of the former tale who perhaps imagine they know all about Seth Atkins
and Mrs. Emeline Bascom will be surprised to find they really know so
little. The truth is that, when I began to revise and rearrange the
magazine story for publication as a book, new ideas came, grew, and
developed. I discovered that I had been misinformed concerning the
lightkeeper's past and present relations with the housekeeper at the
bungalow. And there was "Bennie D." whom I had overlooked, had not
mentioned at all; and that rejuvenated craft, the Daisy M.; and the
high tide which is, or should be, talked about in Eastboro even yet; all
these I had omitted for the very good reason that I never knew of them.
I have tried to be more careful this time. During the revising process
"The Woman-Haters" has more than doubled in length and, let us hope, in
accuracy. Even now it is, of course, not a novel, but merely a summer
farce-comedy, a "yarn." And this, by the way, is all that it pretends to
be.

JOSEPH C. LINCOLN.

May, 1911.



CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I.--   MR. SETH ATKINS

II.--  MR. JOHN BROWN

III.-- MR. BROWN PUTS IN AN APPLICATION

IV.--  THE COMING OF JOB

V.--   THE GOING OF JOSHUA

VI.--  THE PICNIC

VII.-- OUT OF THE BAG

VIII.--NEIGHBORS AND WASPS

IX.--  THE BUNGALOW GIRL

X.--   THE BUNGALOW WOMAN

XI.--  BEHIND THE SAND DUNE

XII.-- THE LETTER AND THE 'PHONE

XIII.--"JOHN BROWN" CHANGES HIS NAME

XIV.-- "BENNIE D."

XV.--  THE VOYAGE OF THE Daisy M.

XVI.-- THE EBB TIDE

XVII.--WOMAN-HATERS




THE WOMAN-HATERS




CHAPTER I

MR. SETH ATKINS


The stars, like incandescent lights fed by a fast weakening dynamo, grew
pale, faded, and, one by one, went out. The slate-colored sea, with its
tumbling waves, changed color, becoming a light gray, then a faint blue,
and, as the red sun rolled up over the edge of the eastern horizon, a
brilliant sapphire, trimmed with a silver white on the shoals and along
the beach at the foot of the bluff.

Seth Atkins, keeper of the Eastboro Twin-Lights, yawned, stretched,
and glanced through the seaward windows of the octagon-shaped,
glass-enclosed room at the top of the north tower, where he had spent
the night just passed. Then he rose from his chair and extinguished the
blaze in the great lantern beside him. Morning had come, the mists had
rolled away, and the dots scattered along the horizon--schooners,
tugs, and coal barges, for the most part--no longer needed the glare
of Eastboro Twin-Lights to warn them against close proximity to
the dangerous, shoal-bordered coast. Incidentally, it was no longer
necessary for Mr. Atkins to remain on watch. He drew the curtains over
the polished glass and brass of the lantern, yawned again, and descended
the winding iron stairs to the door at the foot of the tower, opened it
and emerged into the sandy yard.

Crossing this yard, before the small white house which the government
provided as a dwelling place for its lightkeepers, he opened the door of
the south tower, mounted the stairs there and repeated the extinguishing
process with the other lantern. Before again descending to earth,
however, he stepped out on the iron balcony surrounding the light
chamber and looked about him.

The view, such as it was, was extensive. To the east the open sea,
the wide Atlantic, rolling lazily in the morning light, a faint breeze
rippling the surfaces of the ground-swell. A few sails in sight, far
out. Not a sound except the hiss and splash of the surf, which, because
of a week of calms and light winds, was low even for that time of
year--early June.

To the north stretched the shores of the back of the Cape. High clay
bluffs, rain-washed and wrinkled, sloping sharply to the white sand
of the beach a hundred feet below. Only one building, except
those connected with the lighthouses, near at hand, this a small,
gray-shingled bungalow about two hundred yards away, separated from the
lights by the narrow stream called Clam Creek--Seth always spoke of it
as the "Crick"--which, turning in behind the long surf-beaten sandspit
known, for some forgotten reason, as "Black Man's Point," continued to
the salt-water pond which was named "The Cove." A path led down from the
lighthouses to a bend in the "Crick," and there, on a small wharf, was a
shanty where Seth kept his spare lobster and eel-pots, dory sails, nets,
and the like. The dory itself, with the oars in her, was moored in the
cove.

A mile off, to the south, the line of bluffs was broken by another
inlet, the entrance to Pounddug Slough. This poetically named channel
twisted and wound tortuously inland through salt marshes and between
mudbanks, widening at last to become Eastboro Back Harbor, a good-sized
body of water, with the village of Eastboro at its upper end. In the
old days, when Eastboro amounted to something as a fishing port, the
mackerel fleet unloaded its catch at the wharves in the Back Harbor.
Then Pounddug Slough was kept thoroughly dredged and buoyed. Now it was
weed-grown and neglected. Only an occasional lobsterman's dory traversed
its winding ways, which the storms and tides of each succeeding winter
rendered more difficult to navigate. The abandoned fish houses along its
shores were falling to pieces, and at intervals the stranded hulk of
a fishing sloop or a little schooner, rotting in the sun, was a dismal
reminder that Eastboro's ambitious young men no longer got their living
alongshore. The town itself had gone to sleep, awakening only in the
summer, when the few cottagers came and the Bay Side Hotel was opened
for its short season.

Behind the lighthouse buildings, to the west--and in the direction
of the village--were five miles of nothing in particular. A desolate
wilderness of rolling sand-dunes, beach grass, huckleberry and bayberry
bushes, cedar swamps, and small clumps of pitch-pines. Through this
desert the three or four rutted, crooked sand roads, leading to and
from the lights, turned and twisted. Along their borders dwelt no human
being; but life was there, life in abundance. Ezra Payne, late assistant
keeper at the Twin-Lights, was ready at all times to furnish evidence
concerning the existence of this life.

"My godfreys domino!" Ezra had exclaimed, after returning from a drive
to Eastboro village, "I give you my word, Seth, they dummed nigh et
me alive. They covered the horse all up, so that he looked for all the
world like a sheep, woolly. I don't mind moskeeters in moderation, but
when they roost on my eyelids and make 'em so heavy I can't open 'em,
then I'm ready to swear. But I couldn't get even that relief, because
every time I unbattened my mouth a million or so flew in and choked me.
That's what I said--a million. Some moskeeters are fat, but these don't
get a square meal often enough to be anything but hide-racks filled with
cussedness. Moskeeters! My godfreys domino!"

Ezra was no longer assistant lightkeeper. He and his superior had
quarreled two days before. The quarrel was the culmination, on Ezra's
part, of a gradually developing "grouch" brought on by the loneliness of
his surroundings. After a night of duty he had marched into the house,
packed his belongings in a battered canvas extension case, and announced
his intention of resigning from the service.

"To the everlastin' brimstone with the job!" he snarled, addressing Mr.
Atkins, who, partially dressed, emerged from the bedroom in bewilderment
and sleepy astonishment. "To thunder with it, I say! I've had all the
gov'ment jobs I want. Life-savin' service was bad enough, trampin' the
condemned beach in a howlin' no'theaster, with the sand cuttin'
furrers in your face, and the icicles on your mustache so heavy you
got round-shouldered luggin' 'em. But when your tramp was over, you had
somebody to talk to. Here, by godfreys! there ain't nothin' nor nobody.
I'm goin' fishin' again, where I can be sociable."

"Humph!" commented Seth, "you must be lonesome all to once. Ain't my
company good enough for you?"

"Company! A heap of company you are! When I'm awake you're asleep and
snorin' and--"

"I never snored in my life," was the indignant interruption

"What? YOU'LL snore when you're dead, and wake up the whole graveyard.
Lonesome!" he continued, without giving his companion a chance to
retort, "lonesome ain't no name for this place. No company but green
flies and them moskeeters, and nothin' to look at but salt water and
sand and--and--dummed if I can think of anything else. Five miles from
town and the only house in sight shut tight. When I come here you told
me that bungalow was opened up every year--"

"So it has been till this season."

"And that picnics come here every once in a while."

"Don't expect picnickers to be such crazy loons as to come here in
winter time, do you?"

"I don't know. If they're fools enough to come here ANY time, I wouldn't
be responsible for 'em. There ain't so many moskeeters in winter. But
just LOOK at this hole. Just put on your specs and LOOK at it! Not a
man--but you--not a woman, not a child, not a girl--"

"Ah ha! ah ha! NOW we're gettin' at it! Not a girl! That's what's the
matter with you. You want to be up in the village, where you can go
courtin'. You're too fur from Elsie Peters, that's where the shoe
pinches. I've heard how you used to set out in her dad's backyard, with
your arm round her waist, lookin' at each other, mushy as a couple of
sassers of hasty-puddin'. Bah! I'll take care my next assistant ain't
girl-struck."

"Girl-struck! I'd enough sight ruther be girl-struck than always ravin'
and rippin' against females. And all because some woman way back in
Methusalem's time had sense enough to heave you over. At least, that's
what everybody cal'lates must be the reason. You pretend to be a
woman-hater. All round this part of the Cape you've took pains to get up
that kind of reputation; but--"

"There ain't no pretendin' about it. I've got brains enough to keep
clear of petticoats. And when you get to be as old as I be and know as
much as I do--though that ain't no ways likely, even if you live to be
nine hundred and odd, like Noah in Scripture--you'll feel the same way."

"Aw, come off! Woman-hater! You hate women same as the boy at the
poorhouse hated ice cream--'cause there ain't none around. Why, I
wouldn't trust you as fur as I could see you!"

This was the end of the dialogue, because Mr. Payne was obliged to break
off his harangue and dodge the stove-lifter flung at him by the outraged
lightkeeper. As the lifter was about to be followed by the teakettle,
Ezra took to his heels, bolted from the house and began his long tramp
to the village. When he reached the first clumps of bayberry bushes
bordering the deeply rutted road, a joyful cloud of mosquitoes rose and
settled about him like a fog.

So Seth Atkins was left alone to do double duty at Eastboro Twin-Lights,
pending the appointment of another assistant. The two days and nights
following Ezra's departure had been strenuous and provoking. Doing
all the housework, preparation of meals included, tending both lights,
rubbing brass work, sweeping and scouring, sleeping when he could and
keeping awake when he must, nobody to talk to, nobody to help--the
forty-eight hours of solitude had already convinced Mr. Atkins that the
sooner a helper was provided the better. At times he even wished the
disrespectful Payne back again, wished that he had soothed instead of
irritated the departed one. Then he remembered certain fragments of
their last conversation and wished the stove-lifter had been flung with
better aim.

Now, standing on the gallery of the south tower, he was conscious of
a desire for breakfast. Preparing that meal had been a part of his
assistant's duties. Now he must prepare it himself, and he was hungry
and sleepy. He mentally vowed that he would no longer delay notifying
the authorities of the desertion, and would urge them to hurry in
sending some one to fill the vacant place.

Grumbling aloud to himself, he moved around the circle of the gallery
toward the door. His hand was on the latch, when, turning, he cast
another glance over the rail, this time directly downward toward the
beach below. And there he saw something which caused him to forget
hunger and grievances of all kinds; something which, after one horrified
look to make sure, led him to dart into the light chamber, spring at a
reckless gait down the winding stair, out of the tower, rush to the edge
of the bluff, and plunge headlong down the zigzag path worn in the clay.

On the sand, at the foot of the bluff below the lights, just beyond
reach of the wash of the surf, lay a man, or the dead body of a man,
stretched at full length.




CHAPTER II

MR. JOHN BROWN


Once before, during his years of service as keeper of Eastboro
Twin-Lights, had Seth seen such a sight as that which now caused him to
make his dash for the shore. Once before, after the terrible storm of
1905, when the great steamer Bay Queen went down with all on board, the
exact spot of her sinking unknown even to this day. Then the whole ocean
side of the Cape, from Race Point to Orham, was strewn with ghastly
relics. But the Bay Queen met her fate in the winter season, amid a gale
such as even the oldest residents could not remember. Now it was early
summer; the night before had been a flat calm. There had been no wreck,
or the lifesavers would have told him of it. There would be no excuse
for a wreck, anyway.

All this, in disjointed fragments, passed through the lightkeeper's
mind as he descended the path in frantic bounds and plowed through
the ankle-deep white sand of the beach. As he approached the recumbent
figure he yelled a panted "Hi, there!" He did not expect the hail to be
answered or even noticed. Therefore, he was pleasantly disappointed when
the figure rolled over, raised itself on one elbow, looked at him in a
dazed sort of way and replied cheerfully but faintly, "Hello!"

Seth stopped short, put a hand to the breast of his blue flannel shirt,
and breathed a mighty sigh of relief.

"Gosh!" he exclaimed with fervor. Then, changing his labored gallop
for a walk, he continued his progress toward the man, who, as if his
momentary curiosity was satisfied, lay down again. He did not rise when
the lightkeeper reached his side, but remained quiet, looking up from a
pair of gray eyes and smiling slightly with lips that were blue. He was
a stranger to Atkins, a young fellow, rather good looking, dressed in
blue serge trousers, negligee shirt, blue socks, and without shoes
or hat. His garments were soaked, and the salt water dripped from his
shoulders to the sand. The lightkeeper stared at him, and he returned
the stare.

"Gosh!" repeated Seth, after an instant of silence. "Jiminy crimps! I
feel better."

The stranger's smile broadened. "Glad to hear it, I'm sure," he said,
slowly. "So do I, though there's still room for improvement. What was
your particular ailment? Mine seems to have been water on the brain."

He sat up and shakily ran a hand through his wet hair as he spoke.
Atkins, his surprise doubled by this extraordinary behavior, could think
of nothing to say.

"Good morning," continued the young man, as if the meeting had been the
most casual and ordinary possible; "I think you said a moment ago that
you were feeling better. No relapse, I trust."

"Relapse? What in the world? Are you crazy? I ain't sick."

"That's good. I must have misunderstood you. Pleasant morning, isn't it?

"Pleasant morn--Why, say! I--I--what in time are you doin', layin' there
all soaked through? You scared me pretty nigh to death. I thought you
was drowned, sure and sartin."

"Did you? Well, to be honest, so did I, for a while. In fact, I'm not
absolutely sure that I'm not, even yet. You'll excuse me if I lie down
again, won't you? I never tried a seaweed pillow before, but it isn't so
bad."

He again stretched himself on the sand. Seth shook his head.

"Well, if this don't beat me!" he exclaimed. "You're the coolest critter
that ever I--I--"

"I am cool," admitted the young man, with a slight shiver. "This
stretch of ocean here isn't exactly a Turkish bath. I've been swimming
since--well, an hour or two ago, and I am just a little chilled."

He shivered again.

"Swimmin'! An hour or two? Where on earth did you come from?"

"Oh, I fell overboard from a steamer off here somewhere. I--"

Another and emphatic shiver caused him to pause. The lightkeeper awoke
to the realities of the situation.

"Good land of love!" he exclaimed. "What am I thinkin' of? Seein' you
this way, and you talkin' so kind of every-day and funny drove my senses
clean out, I guess. Get right up off that wet place this minute. Come up
to the house, quick! Can you walk?"

"Don't know. I am willing to try. Would you mind giving me a lift?"

Seth didn't mind, which was fortunate, as his new acquaintance couldn't
have risen unaided. His knees shook under him when he stood erect, and
he leaned heavily on the lightkeeper's arm.

"Steady now," counselled Atkins; "no hurry. Take it easy. If you've
navigated water all alone for hours, I cal'late between us we can manage
to make a five-minute cruise on dry land. . . . Even if the course we
steer would make an eel lame tryin' to follow it," he added, as the
castaway staggered and reeled up the beach. "Now don't try to talk. Let
your tongue rest and give your feet a chance."

The climbing of the steep bluff was a struggle, but they accomplished
it, and at length the stranger was seated in a chair in the kitchen.

"Now, the fust thing," observed Seth, "is to get them wet clothes
off you. Usually I'd have a good fire here, but that miserable Ezry
has--that is, my assistant's left me, and I have to go it alone, as
you might say. So we'll get you to bed and . . . No, you can't undress
yourself, neither. Set still, and I'll have you peeled in a jiffy."

His guest was making feeble efforts to remove his socks. Atkins pushed
him back into the chair and stripped the blue and dripping rags from
feet which were almost as blue from cold. The castaway attempted a weak
resistance, but gave it up and said, with a whimsical smile:

"I'm mightily obliged to you. I never realized before that a valet was
such a blessing. Most of mine have been confounded nuisances."

"Hey?" queried Seth, looking up.

"Nothing. Pardon me for comparing you with a valet."

"Land sakes! I don't care what you call me. I was out of my head once
myself--typhoid fever 'twas--and they say the things I called the doctor
was somethin' scandalous. You ain't responsible. You're beat out, and
your brain's weak, like the rest of you. Now hold on till I get you a
nightgown."

He started for the bedroom. The young man seemed a bit troubled.

"Just a minute," he observed. "Don't you think I had better move to
a less conspicuous apartment? The door is open, and if any of your
neighbors should happen by--any ladies, for instance, I--"

"Ladies!" Mr. Atkins regarded him frowningly. "In the fust place, there
ain't a neighbor nigher'n four miles; and, in the next, I'd have you
understand no women come to this house. If you knew me better, young
feller, you'd know that. Set where you be."

The nightshirt was one of the lightkeeper's own, and, although Seth was
a good-sized man, it fitted the castaway almost too tightly for comfort.
However, it was dry and warm and, by leaving a button or two unfastened
at the neck, answered the purpose well enough. The stranger was piloted
to the bedroom, assisted into the depths of a feather bed, and covered
with several layers of blankets and patchwork quilts.

"There!" observed Seth, contentedly, "now you go to sleep. If you get to
sweatin', so much the better. 'Twill get some of that cold water out of
you. So long!"

He departed, closing the door after him. Then he built a fire in the
range, got breakfast, ate it, washed the dishes and continued his
forenoon's work. Not a sound from the bedroom. Evidently the strange
arrival had taken the advice concerning going to sleep. But all the time
he was washing dishes, rubbing brass work or sweeping, Mr. Atkins's
mind was busy with the puzzle which fate had handed him. Occasionally he
chuckled, and often he shook his head. He could make nothing out of
it. One thing only was certain--he had never before met a human being
exactly like this specimen.

It was half past twelve before there were signs of life in the bedroom.
Seth was setting the table for dinner, when the door of the room opened
a little way, and a voice said:

"I say, are you there?"

"I be. What do you want?"

"Would you mind telling me what you've done with my clothes?"

"Not a bit. I've got 'em out on the line, and they ain't dry yet. If
you'll look on the chair by the sou'west window you'll find a rig-out of
mine. I'm afraid 'twill fit you too quick--you're such an elephant--but
I'll risk it if you will."

Apparently the stranger was willing to risk it, for in a few moments
he appeared, dressed in the Atkins Sunday suit of blue cloth, and with
Seth's pet carpet slippers on his feet.

"Hello!" was the lightkeeper's greeting. "How you feelin'?--better?"

"Tip top, thank you. Where do you wash, when it's necessary?"

"Basin right there in the sink. Soap in the becket over top of it.
Roller towel on the closet door. Ain't you had water enough for a
spell?"

"Not fresh water, thank you. I'm caked with salt from head to foot."

"Does make a feller feel like a split herrin', if he ain't used to it.
Think you can eat anything?"

"Can I?" The response was enthusiastic. "You watch me! My last meal was
yesterday noon."

"Yesterday NOON! Didn't you eat no supper?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"Well, I--well, to be frank, because I hadn't the price. It took my last
cent to pay my fare on that blessed steamer."

"Great land of love! What time was it when you fell overboard?"

"Oh, I don't know. Two o'clock, perhaps."

"Two o'clock! What was you doin' up at two o'clock? Why wasn't you in
your stateroom asleep?"

"I hadn't any stateroom. Staterooms cost money."

"My soul! And you swum three hours on an empty stomach?"

"Not altogether. Part of it on my back. But, if you'll excuse
familiarity on short acquaintance, those things you're cooking smell
good to me."

"Them's clam fritters, and, if YOU'LL excuse my sayin' so that
shouldn't, they ARE good. Set down and fill up."

The visitor ate nine of the fritters, a slice of dried-apple pie, and
drank two cups of coffee. Seth, between intervals of frying and eating,
watched him with tremendous curiosity and as much patience as he could
muster. When the pie was finished he asked the first of the questions
with which he had been bursting all the forenoon.

"Tell me," he said, "how'd you come to fall overboard?"

"I'm not very certain just how it happened. I remember leaning over the
rail and watching the waves. Then I was very dizzy all at once. The next
thing I knew I was in the water."

"Dizzy, hey? Seasick, may be."

"I guess not. I'm a pretty good sailor. I'm inclined to think the cause
was that empty stomach you mentioned."

"Um-hm. You didn't have no supper. Still, you ate the noon afore."

"Not much. Only a sandwich."

"A sandwich! What did you have for breakfast?"

"Well, the fact is, I overslept and decided to omit the breakfast."

"Gosh! no wonder you got dizzy. If I went without meals for a whole
day I cal'late I'd be worse than dizzy. What did you do when you found
yourself in the water?"

"Yelled at first, but no one heard me. Then I saw some lights off in
this direction and started to swim for them. I made the shore finally,
but I was so used up that I don't remember anything after the landing.
Think I took a nap."

"I presume likely. Wonder 'twasn't your everlastin' nap! Tut! tut! tut!
Think of it!"

"I don't want to, thank you. It isn't pleasant enough to think of. I'm
here and--by the way, where IS here?"

"This is Eastboro township--Eastboro, Cape Cod. Them lights out there
are Eastboro Twin-Lights. I'm the keeper of 'em. My name's Atkins, Seth
Atkins."

"Delighted to meet you, Mr. Atkins. And tremendously obliged to you,
besides."

"You needn't be. I ain't done nothin'. Let me see, you said your name
was--"

"Did I?" The young man seemed startled, almost alarmed. "When?"

Seth was embarrassed, but not much. "Well," he admitted, "I don't know's
you did say it, come to think of it. What IS your name?"

"My name?"

"Yes."

"Oh, why--my name is Brown--er--John Brown. Not the gentleman who was
hanged, of course; distant relative, that's all."

"Hum! John Brown, hey? What steamer did you fall off of?"

"Why--why--I can't seem to remember. That's odd, isn't it?"

"Yes, I should say 'twas. Where was she bound?"

"Bound? Oh, you mean where was she going?"

"Sartin."

"I think--I think she was going to--to. . . . Humph! how strange this
is!"

"What?"

"Why, that I should forget all these things."

The lightkeeper regarded his guest with suspicion.

"Yaas," he drawled slowly, "when you call it strange you ain't
exaggeratin' none wuth mentionin'. I s'pose," he added, after a moment,
during which he stared intently at Mr. Brown, who smiled in polite
acknowledgment of the stare; "I s'pose likely you couldn't possibly
remember what port you hailed from?"

"I suppose not," was the calm reply.

Seth rose from the table.

"Well," he observed, "I've been up all night, too, and it's past my
bedtime. As I told you, my assistant's left all of a sudden and I'm
alone in charge of gov'ment property. I ought to turn in, but--" he
hesitated.

John Brown also rose.

"Mr. Atkins," he said, "my memory seems to be pretty bad, but I haven't
forgotten everything. For instance," his smile disappeared, and his tone
became earnest, "I can remember perfectly well that I'm not a crook,
that I haven't done anything to be ashamed of--as I see it--that I'm
very grateful to you, and that I don't steal. If you care to believe
that and, also, that, being neither a sneak or a thief, I sha'n't clear
out with the spoons while you're asleep, you might--well, you might risk
turning in."

The lightkeeper did not answer immediately. The pair looked each other
straight in the eye.

Then Seth yawned and turned toward the bedroom.

"I'll risk it," he said, curtly. "If I ain't awake by six o'clock I
wish you'd call me. You'll find some spare clay pipes and tobacco on the
mantelpiece by the clock. So long."

He entered the bedroom and closed the door. Mr. Brown stepped over to
the mantel and helped himself to a pipe.




CHAPTER III

MR. BROWN PUTS IN AN APPLICATION


At half past five the lightkeeper opened the bedroom door and peeped
out. The kitchen was empty. There was no sign of Mr. Brown. It took Seth
just four minutes to climb into the garments he had discarded and reach
the open air. His guest was seated on the bench beside the house, one of
the clay pipes in his hand. He was looking out to sea. He spoke first:

"Hello!" he said. "You're up ahead of time, aren't you? It isn't six
yet."

Atkins grinned. "No," he answered, "'tain't! not quite. But sence Ezry
cleared out I've been a kind of human alarm clock, as you might say.
Feelin' all right, are you?"

"Yes, thank you. I say," holding up the pipe and regarding it
respectfully, "is this tobacco of yours furnished by the government?"

"No. Some I bought myself last time I was over to the Center. Why,
what's the matter with it? Ain't it good?"

"Perhaps so."

"Then what made you ask? Ain't it strong enough?"

"Strong enough! You're disposed to be sarcastic. It's stronger than I
am. What do they flavor it with--tar?"

"Say, let's see that plug. THAT ain't smokin' tobacco."

"What is it, then--asphalt?"

"Why, haw! haw! That's a piece of Ezry's chewin'. Some he left when he
went away. It's 'Honest Friend.' 'TIS flavored up consider'ble. And you
tried to smoke it! Ho! ho!"

The young man joined in the laugh.

"That explains why it bubbled so," he said. "I used twenty-two matches,
by actual count, and then gave it up. Bah!" he smacked his lips
disgustedly and made a face: "'Honest Friend'--is that the name of it?
Meaning that it'll stick to you through life, I presume. Water has no
effect on the taste; I've tried it."

"Maybe some supper might help. I'll wash the dinner dishes and start
gettin' it. All there seems to be to this job of mine just now is
washin' dishes. And how I hate it!"

He reentered the kitchen. Then he uttered an exclamation:

"Why, what's become of the dishes?" he demanded. "I left 'em here on the
table."

Brown arose from the bench and sauntered to the door.

"I washed them," he said. "I judged that you would have to if I didn't,
and it seemed the least I could do, everything considered."

"Sho! You washed the dishes, hey? Where'd you put 'em?"

"In the closet there. That's where they belong, isn't it?"

Seth went to the closet, took a plate from the pile and inspected it.

"Um!" he grunted, turning the plate over, "that ain't such a bad job.
Not so all-fired bad, for a green hand. What did you wash 'em with?"

"A cloth I found hanging by the sink."

"I see. Yes, yes. And you wiped 'em on--what?"

"Well, to tell you the truth, I didn't see any towels in sight, except
that one on the door; and, for various reasons, I judged that wasn't a
dish towel."

"Good judgment. 'Tisn't. Go on."

"So I hunted around, and in the closet in the parlor, or living room, or
whatever you call it, I found a whole stack of things that looked like
towels; so I used one of those."

"Is this it?" Seth picked up a damp and bedraggled cloth from the table.

"That's it. I should have hung it up somewhere, I suppose. I'll lose my
job if I don't look out."

"Um! Well, I'm much obliged to you, only--"

"Only?"

"Only you washed them dishes with the sink cloth and wiped 'em with a
piller case."

The volunteer dishwasher's mouth opened.

"NO!" he gasped.

"Ya-as."

"A pillow case! Well, by George!"

"Um-hm. I jedge you ain't washed many dishes in your lifetime."

"Not so very many. No."

They looked at each other and burst into a roar of laughter. Brown was
the first to recover.

"Well," he observed, "I guess it's up to me. If you'll kindly put me
next to a genuine cloth, or sponge, or whatever is the proper caper for
dish-washing, I'll undertake to do them over again. And, for heaven's
sake, lock up the pillow cases."

Seth protested, declaring that the dishes need not be rewashed that very
minute, and that when he got a chance he would do them himself. But the
young man was firm, and, at last, the lightkeeper yielded.

"It's real kind of you," he declared, "and bein' as I've consider'ble
to do, I don't know but I'll let you. Here's a couple of dishcloths, and
there's the towels. I'm goin' out to see to the lights, and I'll be back
pretty soon and get supper."

Later in the evening, after supper, the housework done, they sat again
on the bench beside the door, each with a pipe, filled, this time,
with genuine smoking tobacco. Before and below them was the quiet sea,
rolling lazily under the stars. Overhead the big lanterns in the towers
thrust their parallel lances of light afar into the darkness. The
only sounds were the low wash of the surf and the hum of the eager
mosquitoes. Brown was silent, alternately puffing at the pipe and
slapping at the insects, which latter, apparently finding his skin
easier to puncture than that of the tanned and leathery Atkins, were
making the most of their opportunity.

Seth, whose curiosity had been checked but not smothered by his
companion's evident desire to say nothing concerning himself, was busy
thinking of various guileful schemes with which to entrap the castaway
into the disclosure of his identity. Having prepared his bait, he
proceeded to get over a line.

"Mr. Brown," he said, "I ain't mentioned it to you afore, 'count of your
needin' rest and grub and all after your fallin' overboard last night.
But tomorrer you'll be feelin' fustrate again, and I cal'late you'll be
wantin' to get word to your folks. Now we can telephone to the Eastboro
depot, where there's a telegraph, and the depot master'll send a
dispatch to your people, lettin' 'em know you're all safe and sound. If
you'll just give me the address and what you want to say, I'll 'tend
to it myself. The depot master's a good friend of mine, and he'll risk
sending the dispatch 'collect' if I tell him to."

"Thank you," replied Brown, shortly.

"Oh, don't mention it. Now who'll I send it to?"

"You needn't send it. I couldn't think of putting you to further
trouble."

"Trouble! 'Tain't no trouble to telephone. Land sakes, I do it four or
five times a day. Now who'll I send it to?"

"You needn't send it."

"Oh, well, of course, if you'd ruther send it yourself--"

"I sha'n't send it. It really isn't worth while 'phoning or telegraphing
either. I didn't drown, and I'm very comfortable, thank you--or should
be if it weren't for these mosquitoes."

"Comf'table! Yes, you're comf'table, but how about your folks? Won't
they learn, soon's that steamer gets into--into Portland--or--or--New
York or Boston--or . . . Hey?"

"I didn't speak."

Seth swallowed hard and continued. "Well, wherever she was bound," he
snapped. "Won't they learn that you sot sail in her and never got there?
Then they'll know that you MUST have fell overboard."

John Brown drew a mouthful of smoke through the stem of the pipe and
blew it spitefully among the mosquitoes.

"I don't see how they'll learn it," he replied.

"Why, the steamer folks'll wire em right off."

"They'll have to find them first."

"That'll be easy enough. There'll be your name, 'John Brown,' of such
and such a place, written right on the purser's book, won't it."

"No," drawled Mr. Brown, "it won't."

The lightkeeper felt very much as if this particular road to the truth
had ended suddenly in a blind alley. He pulled viciously at his chin
whiskers. His companion shifted his position on the bench. Silence fell
again, as much silence as the mosquitoes would permit.

Suddenly Brown seemed to reach a determination.

"Atkins," he said briskly, and with considerable bitterness in his tone,
"don't you worry about my people. They don't know where I am, and--well,
some of them, at least, don't care. Maybe I'm a rolling stone--at any
rate, I haven't gathered any moss, any financial moss. I'm broke. I
haven't any friends, any that I wish to remember; I haven't any job.
I am what you might call down and out. If I had drowned when I fell
overboard last night, it might have been a good thing--or it might not.
We won't argue the question, because just now I'm ready to take either
side. But let's talk about yourself. You're lightkeeper here?"

"I be, yes."

"And these particular lights seem to be a good way from everywhere and
everybody."

"Five mile from Eastboro Center, sixteen from Denboro, and two from the
nighest life savin' station. Why?"

"Oh, just for instance. No neighbors, you said?"

"Nary one."

"I noticed a bungalow just across the brook here. It seems to be shut
up. Who owns it?"

"Bunga--which? Oh, that cottage over on t'other side the crick? That
b'longs to a couple of paintin' fellers from up Boston way. Not house
painters, you understand, but fellers that put in their time paintin'
pictures of the water and the beach and the like of that. Seems a pretty
silly job for grown-up men, but they're real pleasant and folksy. Don't
put on no airs nor nothin.' They're most gen'rally here every June and
July and August, but I understand they ain't comin' this year, so the
cottage'll be shut up. I'll miss 'em, kind of. One of 'em's name is
Graham and t'other's Hamilton."

"I see. Many visitors to the lights?"

"Not many. Once in a while a picnic comes over in a livery four-seater,
but not often. The same gang never comes twice. Road's too bad, and they
complain like fury about the moskeeters."

"Do they? How peevish! Atkins, you're not married?"

It was an innocent question, but it had an astonishing effect. The
lightkeeper bounced on the bench as if someone had kicked it violently
from beneath.

"What?" he quavered shrilly. "Wha--what's that?"

Brown was surprised. "I asked if you were married, that's all," he said.
"I can't see--"

"Stop!" Seth's voice shook, and he bent down to glare through the
darkness at his companion's face. "Stop!" he ordered. "You asked me if I
was--married?"

"Yes. Why shouldn't I?"

"Why shouldn't you? See here, young feller, you--you--what made you ask
that?"

"What made me?"

"Stop sayin' my words after me. Are you a man or a poll-parrot? Can't
you understand plain United States language? What made you? Or WHO made
you? Who told you to ask me that question?"

He pounded the bench with his fist. The pair stared at each other for a
moment; then Brown leaned back and began to whistle. Seth seized him by
the shoulders.

"Quit that foolishness, d'you hear?" he snarled. "Quit it, and answer
me!"

The answer was prefaced by a pitying shake of the head.

"It's the mosquitoes," observed the young man, musingly. "They get
through and puncture the brain after a time, I presume. I'm not
surprised exactly, but," with a sigh, "I'm very sorry."

"What are you talkin' about," demanded Atkins. "Be you crazy?"

"No-o. I'M not."

"YOU'RE not! Do you mean that I am?"

"Well," slowly, "I'm not an expert in such cases, but when a perfectly
simple, commonplace question sets a chap to pounding and screaming and
offering violence, then--well, it's either insanity or an attempt at
insult, one or the other. I've given you the benefit of the doubt."

He scratched a match on his heel and relit his pipe. The lightkeeper
still stared, suspicious and puzzled. Then he drew a long breath.

"I--I didn't mean to insult you," he stammered.

"Glad to hear it, I'm sure. If I were you, however, I should see a
doctor for the other trouble."

"And I ain't crazy, neither. I beg your pardon for hollerin' and
grabbin' hold of you."

"Granted."

"Thank ye. Now," hesitatingly, "would you mind tellin' me why you asked
me if I was married?"

"Not in the least. I asked merely because it occurred to me that you
might be. Of course, I had seen nothing of your wife, but it was
barely possible that she was away on a visit, or somewhere. There is no
regulation forbidding lightkeepers marrying--at least, I never heard of
any--and so I asked; that's all."

Seth nodded. "I see," he said, slowly; "yes, yes, I see. So you didn't
have no special reason."

"I did not. Of course, if I had realized that you were subject
to--er--fits, I should have been more careful."

"Hum! . . . Well, I--I beg your pardon again. I--I am kind of touchy on
some p'ints. Didn't I tell you no women came here? Married! A wife! Do I
look like a dum fool?"

"Not now."

"Well, then! And I've apologized for bein' one a few minutes ago, ain't
I."

"Yes, you have. No grudge on my part, I assure you. Let's forget it and
talk of something else."

They did, but the dialogue was rather jerky. Brown was thinking, and
Atkins seemed moody and disinclined to talk. After a time he announced
that it was getting late and he cal'lated he would go up to the light
room. "You'd better turn in," he added, rising.

"Just a minute," said the young man. "Wait just a minute. Atkins,
suppose I asked you another question--would you become violent at once?
or merely by degrees?"

Seth frowned. The suspicious look returned to his face.

"Humph!" he grunted. "Depended on what you asked me, maybe."

"Yes. Well, this one is harmless--at least, I hope it is. I thought the
other was, also, but I . . . There! there! be calm. Sit down again and
listen. This question is nothing like that. It's about that assistant of
yours, the chap who left a day or two before I drifted in. What were his
duties? What did he have to do when he was here?"

"Wa-al," drawled Seth with sarcasm, resuming his seat on the bench; "he
was SUPPOSED to do consider'ble many things. Stand watch and watch
with me, and scrub brass and clean up around, and sweep and wash dishes
and--and--well, make himself gen'rally useful. Them was the duties he
was supposed to have. What he done was diff'rent. Pesky loafer! Why?"

"That's what I'm going to tell you. Have they appointed his successor
yet? Have you got any one to take his place?"

"No. Fact is, I'd ought to have telegraphed right off to the Board, but
I ain't. I was so glad to see the last of him that I kept puttin' it
off. I'll do it tomorrer."

"Perhaps you won't need to."

"Course I'll need to! Why not? Got to have somebody to help. That's
rules and regulations; and, besides, I can't keep awake day and night,
too. What makes you think I won't need to?"

The young man knocked the ashes from his pipe. Rising, he laid a hand on
his companion's shoulder.

"Because you've got an assistant right here on the premises," he said.
"Delivered by the Atlantic express right at your door. Far be it from
me to toot my horn, Mr. Atkins, or to proclaim my merits from the
housetops. But, speaking as one discerning person to another, when it
comes to an A1, first chop lightkeeper's assistant, I ask: 'What's the
matter with yours truly, John Brown?'"

Seth's reply was not in words. The hand holding his pipe fell limp upon
his lap, and he stared at the speaker. The latter, entirely unabashed,
waved an airy gesture, and continued.

"I repeat," he said, "'What's the matter with John Brown?' And echo
answers, 'He's all right!' I am a candidate for the position of
assistant keeper at Eastboro Twin-Lights."

"YOU?"

"Me."

"But--but--aw, go on! You're foolin'."

"Not a fool. I mean it. I am here. I'm green, but in the sunshine of
your experience I agree to ripen rapidly. I can wash dishes--you've seen
me. I believe I could scrub brass and sweep."

"You wantin' to be assistant at a place like this! YOU! an edicated,
able young chap, that's been used to valets and servants and--"

"Why do you say that? How do you know I've been used to those things?"

"'Cause, as I hinted to you a spell ago, I ain't altogether a dum fool.
I can put two and two together and make four, without having the example
done for me on a blackboard. You're a rich man's son; you've been used
to sassiety and city ways and good clothes. YOU wantin' to put in your
days and nights in a forsaken hole like this! Nonsense! Get out!"

But Mr. Brown refused to get out.

"No nonsense about it," he declared. "It is the hand of Fate. With the
whole broadside of Cape Cod to land upon, why was I washed ashore just
at this particular spot? Answer:--Because at this spot, at this time,
Eastboro Twin-Lights needed an assistant keeper. I like the spot. It
is beautiful. 'Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife.' With your
permission, I'll stay here. The leopard may or may not change his
spots, but I sha'n't. I like this one and here I stay. Yes, I mean it. I
stay--as your assistant. Come, what do you say? Is it a go?"

The lightkeeper rose once more. "I'm goin' on watch," he said with
decision. "You turn in. You'll feel better in the mornin'."

He started towards the tower. But John Brown sprang from the bench and
followed him.

"Not until you've answered my question," he declared. "AM I to be your
assistant?"

"No, course you ain't. It's dum foolishness. Besides, I ain't got the
say; the government hires its own keepers."

"But you can square the government. That will be easy. Why," with a
modest gesture, "look what the government is getting. It will jump at
the chance. Atkins, you must say yes."

"I sha'n't, neither. Let go of my arm. It's blame foolishness, I tell
you. Why," impatiently, "course it's foolishness! I don't know the first
thing about you."

"What of it? I don't know anything about you, either."

Again the lightkeeper seemed unaccountably agitated. He stopped in his
stride and whirled to face his companion.

"What do you mean by that?" he demanded fiercely. Before the young man
could reply, he turned again, strode to the door of the light, flung
it open, and disappeared within. The door closed behind him with a
thunderous bang.

John Brown gazed after him in bewilderment. Then he shrugged his
shoulders and returned to the bench.

The surf at the foot of the bluff grumbled and chuckled wickedly, as if
it knew all of poor humanity's secrets and found a cynic's enjoyment in
the knowledge.




CHAPTER IV

THE COMING OF JOB


The next morning Seth was gloomy and uncommunicative. At the breakfast
table, when Brown glanced up from his plate, he several times caught
the lightkeeper looking intently at him with the distrustful,
half-suspicious gaze of the night before. Though quite aware of this
scrutiny, he made no comment upon it until the meal was nearly over;
then he observed suddenly:

"It's all right; you needn't."

"Needn't what?" demanded Atkins, in astonishment.

"Look at me as if you expected me to explode at any minute. I sha'n't.
I'm not loaded."

Seth colored, under his coat of sunburn, and seemed embarrassed.

"I don't know what you're talkin' about," he stammered. "Have the
moskeeters affected YOUR brains?"

"No. My brains, such as they are, are all right, and I want to keep them
so. That's why I request you not to look at me in that way."

"How was I lookin' at you? I don't know what you mean."

"Yes, you do. You are wondering how much I know. I don't know anything
and I'm not curious. That's the truth. Now why not let it go at that?"

"See here, young feller, I--"

"No; you see here. I'm not an Old Sleuth; I haven't any ambitions that
way. I don't know anything about you--what you've been, what you've
done--"

"Done!" Seth leaned across the table so suddenly that he upset his
chair. "Done?" he cried; "what do you mean by that? Who said I'd done
anything? It's a lie."

"What is a lie?"

"Why--why--er--whatever they said!"

"Who said?"

"Why, the ones that--that said what you said they said."

"I didn't say anyone had said anything."

"Then what do you mean by--by hintin'? Hey? What do you mean by it?"

He brandished a clenched fist over the breakfast dishes. Brown leaned
back in his chair and closed his eyes.

"Call me when the patient recovers his senses," he drawled wearily.
"This delirium is painful to a sensitive nature."

Atkins's fist wavered in mid-air, opened, and was drawn across its
owner's forehead.

"Well, by jiminy!" exclaimed the lightkeeper with emphasis, "this
is--is-- . . . I guess I BE crazy. If I ain't, you are. Would you mind
tellin' me what in time you mean by THAT?"

"It is not the mosquitoes," continued his companion, in apparent
soliloquy; "there are no mosquitoes at present. It must be the other
thing, of course. But so early in the morning, and so violent. Alcohol
is--"

"SHUT UP!" It was not a request, but an order. Brown opened his eyes.

"You were addressing me?" he asked, blandly. "Yes?"

"Addressin' you! For thunder sakes, who else would I be ad-- . . .
There! there! Now I cal'late you're hintin' that I'm drunk. I ain't."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, indeed. And I ain't out of my head--not yet; though keepin'
company with a Bedlamite may have some effect, I shouldn't wonder. Mr.
John Brown--if that's your name, which I doubt--you listen to me."

"Very well, Mr. Seth Atkins--if that is your name, which I neither doubt
nor believe, not being particularly interested--I'm listening. Proceed."

"You told me last night that you wanted the job of assistant keeper here
at these lights. Course you didn't mean it."

"I did."

"You DID! . . . Well, YOU must be drunk or loony."

"I'm neither. And I meant it. I want the job."

Seth looked at him, and he looked at Seth. At length the lightkeeper
spoke again.

"Well," he said, slowly, "I don't understand it at all, but never mind.
Whatever happens, we've got to understand each other. Mind I don't say
the job's yours, even if we do; but we can't even think of it unless we
understand each other plain. To begin with, I want to tell you that I
ain't done nothin' that's crooked, nor wicked, nor nothin' but what I
think is right and what I'd do over again. Do you believe that?"

"Certainly. As I told you, I'm not interested, but I'll believe it with
pleasure if you wish me to."

"I don't wish nothin'. You've GOT to believe it. And whether you stay
here ten minutes or ten years you've got to mind your own business. I
won't have any hints or questions about me--from you nor nobody else.
'Mind your own business,' that's the motto of Eastboro Twin-Lights,
while I'm boss of 'em. If you don't like it--well, the village is only
five mile off, and I'll p'int out the road to you."

He delivered this ultimatum with extraordinary energy. Then he reached
for his overturned chair, set it on its legs, and threw himself into it.
"Well," he demanded, after a moment; "what do you say to that?"

"Hurrah!" replied Mr. Brown cheerfully.

"Hurrah? For the land sakes! . . . Say, CAN'T you talk sensible, if you
try real hard and set your mind to it? What is there to hurrah about?"

"Everything. The whole situation. Atkins," Brown leaned forward now and
spoke with earnestness, "I like your motto. It suits me. 'Mind your own
business' suits me down to the ground. It proves that you and I were
made to work together in a place just like this."

"Does, hey? I want to know!"

"You do know. Why, just think: each of us has pleaded 'not guilty.'
We've done nothing--we're entirely innocent--and we want to forget it.
I agree not to ask you how old you are, nor why you wear your brand of
whiskers, nor how you like them, nor--nor anything. I agree not to ask
questions at all."

"Humph! but you asked some last night."

"Purely by accident. You didn't answer them. You asked me some, also,
if you will remember, and I didn't answer them, either. Good! We forget
everything and agree not to do it again."

"Ugh! I tell you I ain't done nothin'."

"I know. Neither have I. Let the dead past be its own undertaker, so
far as we are concerned. I'm honest, Atkins, and tolerably straight. I
believe you are; I really do. But we don't care to talk about ourselves,
that's all. And, fortunately, kind Providence has brought us together in
a place where there's no one else TO talk. I like you, I credit you with
good taste; therefore, you must like me."

"Hey? Ho, ho!" Seth laughed, in spite of himself. "Young man," he
observed, "you ain't cultivated your modesty under glass, have you?"

Brown smiled. "Joking aside," he said, "I don't see why I shouldn't, in
time, make an ideal assistant lightkeeper. Give me a trial, at any rate.
I need an employer; you need a helper. Here we both are. Come; it is a
bargain, isn't it? Any brass to be scrubbed--boss?"


Of course, had Eastboro Twin-Lights been an important station, the
possibility of John Brown's remaining there would have been nonexistent.
If it had been winter, or even early spring or fall, a regular assistant
would have been appointed at once, and the castaway given his walking
papers. If Seth Atkins had not been Seth Atkins, particular friend of
the district superintendent, matters might have been different. But the
Eastboro lights were unimportant, merely a half-way mark between Orham
on the one hand and the powerful Seaboard Heights beacon on the other.
It was the beginning of summer, when wrecks almost never occurred. And
the superintendent liked Seth, and Seth liked him. So, although Mr.
Atkins still scoffed at his guest's becoming a permanent fixture at the
lights, and merely consented, after more parley, to see if he couldn't
arrange for him to "hang around and help a spell until somebody else was
sent," the conversation with the superintendent over the long distance
'phone resulted more favorably for Brown than that nonchalant young
gentleman had a reasonable right to expect.

"The Lord knows who I can send you now, Atkins!" said the
superintendent. "I can't think of a man anywhere that can be spared. If
you can get on for a day or two longer, I'll try to get a helper down!
but where he's coming from I don't see."

Then Seth sprung the news that he had a "sort of helper" already. "He's
a likely young chap enough," admitted the lightkeeper, whispering the
words into the transmitter, in order that the "likely young chap" might
not hear; "but he's purty green yet. He wants the reg'lar job and, give
me time enough, I cal'late I can break him in. Yes, I'm pretty sure
I can. And it's the off season, so there really ain't no danger. In a
month he'd be doin' fust-rate."

"Who is he? Where did he come from?" asked the superintendent.

"Name's Brown. He come from--from off here a ways," was the strictly
truthful answer. "He used to be on a steamboat."

"All right. If you'll take a share of the responsibility, I'll take the
rest. And, as soon as I can, I'll send you a regular man."

"I can't pay you no steady wages," Seth explained to his new helper.
"Salaries come from the gov'ment, and, until they say so, I ain't got
no right to do it. And I can't let you monkey with the lights, except
to clean up around and such. If you want to stay a spell, until an
assistant's app'inted, I'll undertake to be responsible for your keep.
And if you need some new shoes or stockin's or a cap, or the like of
that, I'll see you get 'em. Further'n that I can't go yet. It's a pretty
poor job for a fellow like you, and if I was you I wouldn't take it."

"Oh, yes, you would," replied Brown, with conviction. "If you were I,
you would take it with bells on. Others may yearn for the strenuous
life, but not your humble servant. As for me, I stay here and 'clean up
around.'"

And stay he did, performing the cleaning up and other duties with
unexpected success and zeal. Atkins, for the first day or two, watched
him intently, being still a trifle suspicious and fearful of his
"substitute assistant." But as time passed and the latter asked no more
questions, seemed not in the least curious concerning his superior, and
remained the same cool, easy-going, cheerful individual whom Seth had
found asleep on the beach, the lightkeeper's suspicions were ended. It
was true that Brown was as mysterious and secretive as ever concerning
his own past, but that had been a part of their bargain. Atkins, who
prided himself on being a judge of human nature, decided that his helper
was a young gentleman in trouble, but that the trouble, whatever
it might be, involved nothing criminal or dishonest. That he was a
gentleman, he was sure--his bearing and manner proved that; but he was
a gentleman who did not "put on airs." Not that there was any reason why
he should put on airs, but, so far as that was concerned, there was no
apparent reason for the monumental conceit and condescension of some
of the inflated city boarders in the village. Brown was not like those
people at all.

Seth had taken a fancy to him at their first meeting. Now his liking
steadily increased. Companionship in a lonely spot like Eastboro
Twin-Lights is a test of a man's temper. Brown stood the test well. If
he made mistakes in the work--and he did make some ridiculous ones--he
cheerfully undid them when they were pointed out to him. He was, for the
most part, good-natured and willing to talk, though there were periods
when he seemed depressed and wandered off by himself along the beach or
sat by the edge of the bluff, staring out to sea. The lightkeeper made
no comment on this trait in his character. It helped to confirm his own
judgment concerning the young fellow's trouble. People in trouble were
subject to fits of the "blues," and during these fits they liked to be
alone. Seth knew this from his own experience. There were times when he,
too, sought solitude.

He trusted his helper more and more. He did not, of course, permit
him to take the night watch in the lights, but he did trust him to the
extent of leaving him alone for a whole afternoon while he drove the old
horse, attached to the antique "open wagon"--both steed and vehicle a
part of the government property--over to Eastboro to purchase tobacco
and newspapers at the store. On his return he found everything as it
should be, and this test led him to make others, each of which was
successful in proving John Brown faithful over a few things and,
therefore, in time, to be intrusted with many and more important ones.

Brown, on his part, liked Seth. He had professed to like him during the
conversation at the breakfast table which resulted in his remaining at
the lights, but then he was not entirely serious. He was, of course,
grateful for the kindness shown him by the odd longshoreman and enjoyed
the latter's society and droll remarks as he would have enjoyed anything
out of the ordinary and quaintly amusing. But now he really liked
the man. Seth Atkins was a countryman, and a marked contrast to any
individual Brown had ever met, but he was far from being a fool. He
possessed a fund of dry common sense, and his comments on people and
happenings in the world--a knowledge of which he derived from the
newspapers and magazines obtained on his trips to Eastboro--were a
constant delight. And, more than all, he respected his companion's
desire to remain a mystery. Brown decided that Atkins was, as he had
jokingly called him, a man with a past. What that past might be, he did
not know or try to learn. "Mind your own business," Seth had declared to
be the motto of Eastboro Twin-Lights, and that motto suited both parties
to the agreement.

The lightkeeper stood watch in the tower at night. During most of the
day he slept; but, after the first week was over, and his trust in his
helper became more firm, he developed the habit of rising at two in the
afternoon, eating a breakfast--or dinner, or whatever the meal might be
called--and wandering off along the crooked road leading south and in
the direction of Pounddug Slough. The road, little used and grass grown,
twisted and turned amid the dunes until it disappeared in a distant
grove of scrub oaks and pitch pines. Each afternoon--except on Sundays
and on the occasions of his excursions to the village--Atkins would rise
from the table, saunter to the door to look at the weather, and then,
without excuse or explanation, start slowly down the road. For the first
hundred yards he sauntered, then the saunter became a brisk walk, and
when he reached the edge of the grove he was hurrying almost at a dog
trot. Sometimes he carried a burden with him, a brown paper parcel
brought from Eastboro, a hammer, a saw, or a coil of rope. Once he
descended to the boathouse at the foot of the bluff by the inlet and
emerged bearing a big bundle of canvas, apparently an old sail; this
he arranged, with some difficulty, on his shoulder and stumbled up the
slope, past the corner of the house and away toward the grove. Brown
watched him wonderingly. Where was he going, and why? What was the
mysterious destination of all these tools and old junk? Where did
Seth spend his afternoons and why, when he returned, did his hands and
clothes smell of tar? The substitute assistant was puzzled, but he asked
no questions. And Seth volunteered no solution of the puzzle.

Yet the solution came, and in an unexpected way. Seth drove to the
village one afternoon and returned with literature, smoking materials
and an announcement. The latter he made during supper.

"I tried to buy that fly paper we wanted today," he observed, as a
preliminary. "Couldn't get none. All out."

"But will have some in very shortly, I presume," suggested the
assistant, who knew the idiosyncrasies of country stores.

"Oh, yes, sartin! Expectin' it every minute. That store's got a
consider'ble sight more expectations in it than it has anything else.
They're always six months ahead of the season or behind it in that
store. When it's so cold that the snow birds get chilblains they'll have
the shelves chuck full of fly paper. Now, when it's hotter than a kittle
of pepper tea, the bulk of their stock is ice picks and mittens. Bah!
However, they're goin' to send the fly paper over when it comes, along
with the dog."

"The dog?" repeated Brown in amazement.

"Yup. That's what I was goin' to tell you--about the dog. I ordered a
dog today. Didn't pay nothin' for him, you understand. Henry G., the
storekeeper, gave him to me. The boy'll fetch him down when he fetches
the fly paper."

"A dog? We're--you're going to keep a dog--here?"

"Sure thing. Why not? Got room enough to keep a whole zoological
menagerie if we wanted to, ain't we? Besides, a dog'll be handy to have
around. Bill Foster, the life saver, told me that somebody busted into
the station henhouse one night a week ago and got away with four of
their likeliest pullets. He cal'lates 'twas tramps or boys. We don't
keep hens, but there's some stuff in that boathouse I wouldn't want
stole, and, bein' as there's no lock on the door, a dog would be a sort
of protection, as you might say."

"But thieves would never come way down here."

"Why not? 'Tain't any further away from the rest of creation than the
life savin' station, is it? Anyhow, Henry G. give the dog to me free for
nothin', and that's a miracle of itself. You'd say so, too, if you
knew Henry. I was so surprised that I said I'd take it right off; felt
'twould be flyin' in the face of Providence not to. A miracle--jumpin'
Judas! I never knew Henry to give anybody anything afore--unless 'twas
the smallpox, and then 'twan't a genuine case, nothin' but varioloid."

"But what kind of a dog is it?"

"I don't know. Henry used to own the mother of it, and she was one
quarter mastiff and the rest assorted varieties. This one he's givin'
me ain't a whole dog, you see; just a half-grown pup. The varioloid
all over again--hey? Ho, ho! I didn't really take him for sartin, you
understand; just on trial. If we like him, we'll keep him, that's all."

The third afternoon following this announcement, Brown was alone in
the kitchen, and busy. Seth had departed on one of his mysterious
excursions, carrying a coil of rope, a pulley and a gallon can of paint.
Before leaving the house he had given his helper some instructions
concerning supper.

"Might's well have a lobster tonight," he said. "Ever cook a lobster,
did you?"

No, Mr. Brown had never cooked a lobster.

"Well, it's simple enough. All you've got to do is bile him. Bile him in
hot water till he's done."

"I see." The substitute assistant was not enthusiastic. Cooking he did
not love.

"Humph!" he grunted. "I imagined if he was boiled at all, it was be in
hot water, not cold."

Atkins chuckled. "I mean you want to have the water bilin' hot when you
put him in," he explained. "Wait till she biles up good and then souse
him; see?"

"I guess so. How do you know when he's done?"

"Oh--er--I can't tell you. You'll have to trust to your instinct, I
cal'late. When he looks done, he IS done, most gen'rally speakin'."

"Dear me! how clear you make it. Would you mind hintin' as to how he
looks when he's done?"

"Why--why, DONE, of course."

"Yes, of course. How stupid of me! He is done when he looks done, and
when he looks done he is done. Any child could follow those directions.
HOW is he done--brown?"

"No. Brown! the idea! Red, of course. He's green when you put him in
the kittle, and when you take him out, he's red. That's one way you can
tell."

"Yes, that will help some. All right, I'll boil him till he's red, you
needn't worry about that."

"Oh, I sha'n't worry. So long. I'll be back about six or so. Put him in
when the water's good and hot, and you'll come out all right."

"Thank you. I hope HE will, but I have my doubts. Where is he?"

"Who? the lobster? There's dozens down in the car by the wharf. Lift the
cover and fish one out with the dip net. Pick out the biggest one you
can find, 'cause I'm likely to be hungry when I get back, and your
appetite ain't a hummin' bird's. There! I've got to go if I want to get
anything done afore-- . . . Humph! never mind. So long."

He hurried away, as if conscious that he had said more than he intended.
At the corner of the house he turned to call:

"I say! Brown! be kind of careful when you dip him out. None of 'em are
plugged."

"What?"

"I say none of them lobsters' claws are plugged. I didn't have time to
plug the last lot I got from my pots, so you want to handle 'em careful
like, else they'll nip you. Tote the one you pick out up to the house in
the dip-net; then you'll be all right."

Evidently considering this warning sufficient to prevent any possible
trouble, he departed. John Brown seated himself in the armchair by the
door and gazed at the sea. He gazed and thought until he could bear to
think no longer; then he rose and entered the kitchen, where he kindled
a fire in the range and filled a kettle with water. Having thus made
ready the sacrificial altar, he took the long-handled dip-net from its
nail and descended the bluff to the wharf.

The lobster car, a good-sized affair of laths with a hinged cover
closing the opening in its upper surface, was floating under the wharf,
to which it was attached by a rope. Brown knelt on the string-piece
and peered down at it. It floated deep in the water, the tide rippling
strongly through it, between the laths. The cover was fastened with a
wooden button.

The substitute assistant, after a deal of futile and exasperating poking
with the handle of the net, managed to turn the button and throw back
the leather-hinged cover. Through the square opening the water beneath
looked darkly green. There was much seaweed in the car, and occasionally
this weed was stirred by living things which moved sluggishly.

John Brown reversed the net, and, lying flat on the wharf, gingerly
thrust the business end of the contrivance through the opening and into
the dark, weed-streaked water. Then he began feeling for his prey.

He could feel it. Apparently the car was alive with lobsters. As he
moved the net through the water there was always one just before it or
behind it; but at least ten minutes elapsed before he managed to get
one in it. At length, when his arms were weary and his patience almost
exhausted, the submerged net became heavy, and the handle shook in his
grasp. He shortened his hold and began to pull in hand over hand. He had
a lobster, a big lobster.

He could see a pair of claws opening and shutting wickedly. He raised
the creature through the opening, balanced the net on its edge, rose on
one knee, tried to stand erect, stumbled, lost his hold on the handle
and shot the lobster neatly out of the meshes, over the edge of the car,
and into the free waters of the channel. Then he expressed his feelings
aloud and with emphasis.

Five minutes later he got another, but it was too small to be of use. In
twenty minutes he netted three more, two of which got away. The third,
however, he dragged pantingly to the wharf and sat beside it, gloating.
It was his for keeps, and it was a big one, the great-grandaddy of
lobsters. Its claws clashed and snapped at the twine of the net like a
pair of giant nut crackers.

Carrying it as far from his body as its weight at the end of the handle
would permit, he bore it in triumph to the kitchen. To boil a lobster
alive had seemed a mean trick, and cruel, when Seth Atkins first ordered
him to do it. Now he didn't mind; it would serve the thing right for
being so hard to catch. Entering the kitchen, he balanced the net across
a chair and stepped to the range to see if the water was boiling. It was
not, and for a very good reason--the fire had gone out. Again Mr. Brown
expressed his feelings.

The fire, newly kindled, had burned to the last ash. If he had been
there to add more coal in season, it would have survived; but he had
been otherwise engaged. There was nothing to be done except rake out the
ashes and begin anew. This he did. When he removed the kettle he decided
at once that it was much too small for the purpose required of it. To
boil a lobster of that size in a kettle of that size would necessitate
boiling one end at a time, and that, both for the victim and himself,
would be troublesome and agonizing. He hunted about for a larger kettle
and, finding none, seized in desperation upon the wash boiler, filled
it, and lifted it to the top of the stove above the flickering new fire.

The fire burned slowly, and he sat down to rest and wait. As he sank
into the chair--not that across which the netted lobster was balanced,
but another--he became aware of curious sounds from without. Distant
sounds they were, far off and faint, but growing steadily louder; wails
and long-drawn howls, mournful and despairing.

"A-a-oo-ow! Aa-ow-ooo!"

"What in the world?" muttered Brown, and ran out of the kitchen and
around the corner of the house.

There was nothing in sight, nothing strange or unusual, that is. Joshua,
Seth's old horse, picketted to a post in the back yard and grazing, or
trying to graze, on the stubby beach grass, was the only living exhibit.
But the sounds continued and grew louder.

"Aa-ow-ooo! Ow-oo-ow-ooo!"

Over the rise of a dune, a hundred yards off, where the road to Eastboro
village dipped towards a swampy hollow, appeared a horse's head and
the top of a covered wagon. A moment later the driver became visible,
a freckled faced boy grinning like a pumpkin lantern. The horse trotted
through the sand up to the lights. Joshua whinnied as if he enjoyed the
prospect of company. From the back of the wagon, somewhere beneath the
shade of the cover, arose a heartrending wail, reeking of sorrow and
agony.

"Aa-ow-OOO! Ooo-aa-OW!"

"For heaven's sake," exclaimed the lightkeeper's helper, running to meet
the vehicle, "what is the matter?"

The boy grinned more expansively than ever. "Whoa!" he shouted, to the
horse he was driving. The animal stopped in his tracks, evidently glad
of the opportunity. Another howl burst from the covered depths of the
wagon.

"I've got him," said the boy, with a triumphant nod and a jerk of his
thumb over his shoulder. "He's in there."

"He? Who? What?"

"Job. He's in there. Hear him? He's been goin' on like that ever since
he finished his bone, and that was over two mile back. Say," admiringly,
"he's some singer, ain't he! Hear that, will ye?"

Another wail arose from the wagon. Brown hastened to the rear of the
vehicle, on the canvas side of which were painted the words "Henry G.
Goodspeed, Groceries, Dry and Fancy Goods and Notions, Eastboro," and
peered in over the tailboard. The interior of the wagon was well nigh
filled by a big box with strips of board nailed across its top. From
between these strips a tawny nose was uplifted. As the helper stared
wonderingly at the box and the nose, the boy sprang from his seat and
joined him.

"That's him," declared the boy. "Hi, there, Job, tune up now! What's the
matter with ye?"

His answer was an unearthly howl from the box, accompanied by a mighty
scratching. The boy laughed delightedly.

"Ain't he a wonder?" he demanded. "Ought to be in church choir, hadn't
he."

Brown stepped on the hub of a rear wheel, and, clinging to the post of
the wagon cover, looked down into the box. The creature inside was about
the size of a month old calf.

"It's a--it's a dog," he exclaimed. "A dog, isn't it?"

"Sure, it's a dog. Or he'll be a dog when he grows up. Nothin' but a pup
now, he ain't. Where's Seth?"

"Seth? Oh, Mr. Atkins; he's not here."

"Ain't he? Where's he gone?"

"I don't know."

"Don't ye? When's he comin' back? HUSH UP!" This last was a command to
the prisoner in the box, who paid absolutely no attention to it.

"I don't know when he'll be back. Do you want to see him personally?
Won't I do? I'm in charge here till he returns."

"Be ye? Oh, you're the new assistant from Boston. You'll do. All I want
to do is unload him--Job, I mean--and leave a couple bundles of fly
paper Seth ordered. Here!" lowering the tailboard and climbing into the
wagon, "you catch aholt of t'other end of the box, and I'll shove on this
one. Hush up, Job! Nobody's goin' to eat ye--'less it's the moskeeters.
Now, then, mister, here he comes."

He began pushing the box toward the open end of the wagon. The dog's
whines and screams and scratchings furnished an accompaniment almost
deafening.

"Wait! Stop! For heaven's sake, wait!" shouted Brown. "What are you
putting that brute off here for? I don't want him."

"Yes, you do. Seth does, anyhow. Henry G. made him a present of Job last
time Seth was over to the store. Didn't he tell ye?"

Then the substitute assistant remembered. This was the "half-grown pup"
Atkins had said was to be brought over by the grocery boy. This was the
creature they were to accept "on trial."

"Well, by George!" he exclaimed in disgust.

"Didn't Seth tell ye?" asked the boy again.

"Yes. . . . Yes, I believe he did. But--"

"Then stand by while I unload him. Here he comes now. H'ist him down
easy as you can."

That was not too easy, for the end of the box slid from the tail-board
to the ground with a thump that shook the breath from the prisoner
within. But the breath came back again and furnished motive power for
more and worse howls and whines. Joshua pricked up his ears and trotted
to the further end of his halter.

"There!" said Henry G.'s boy, jumping to the ground beside the box,
"that's off my hands, thank the mercy! Here's your fly paper. Five dozen
sheets. You must have pretty nigh as many flies down here as you have
moskeeters. Well, so long. I got to be goin'."

"Wait a minute," pleaded Brown. "What shall I do with this--er--blessed
dog? Is he savage? Why did you bring him in a crate--like a piano?"

"'Cause 'twas the easiest way. You couldn't tie him up, not in a cart no
bigger'n this. Might's well tie up an elephant. Besides, he won't stay
tied up nowheres. Busted more clotheslines than I've got fingers and
toes, that pup has. He needs a chain cable to keep him to his moorin's.
Don't ye, Job, you old earthquake? Hey?"

He pounded on the box, and the earthquake obliged with a renewed series
of shocks and shakings.

The lightkeeper's assistant smiled in spite of himself.

"Who named him Job?" he asked.

"Henry G.'s cousin from Boston. He said he seemed to be always sufferin'
and fillin' the land with roarin's, like Job in the Bible. So, bein' as
he hadn't no name except cuss words, that one stuck. I cal'late Henry
G.'s glad enough to get rid of him. Ho! ho!"

"Did Mr. Atkins see his--this--did he see his present before he accepted
it?"

"No. That's the best part of the joke. Well," clambering to his seat
and picking up the reins, "I've got five mile of sand and moskeeters to
navigate, so I've got to be joggin'. Oh, say! goin' to leave him in the
box there, be ye?"

"I guess so, for the present."

"Well, I wouldn't leave him too long. He's stronger'n Samson and the
Philippines rolled together, and he's humped up his back so much on the
way acrost that he's started most of the nails in them slats over top of
him. I tell ye what you do: Give him a bone or a chunk of tough meat to
chaw on. Then he'll rest easy for a spell. Goodbye. I wish I could
stay and see Seth when he looks at his present, but I can't. Gid-dap,
January."

The grocery wagon rolled out of the yard. The forsaken Job sent a
roar of regret after him. Also, he "humped us his back," and the nails
holding the slats in place started and gave alarmingly. John Brown
hastened to the house in quest of a bone.




CHAPTER V

THE GOING OF JOSHUA


He found one, after a time, the relic of a ham, with a good deal of meat
on it. Atkins, economical soul, would have protested in horror against
the sinful waste, but his helper would cheerfully have sacrificed a
whole hog to quiet the wails from the box in the yard. He pushed the
ham bone between the slats, and Job received it greedily. The howls
and whines ceased and were succeeded by gnawings and crunchings. Brown
returned to the kitchen to inspect his neglected fire.

This time the fire was not out, but it burned slowly. The water in the
wash boiler was only lukewarm. The big lobster in the net balanced
on the chair clashed his claws wickedly as the substitute assistant
approached. The door had been left open, and the room hummed with flies.
Brown shut the door and, while waiting for the water to heat, separated
a dozen sheets of the sticky fly paper and placed them in conspicuous
places. He wondered as he did so what some of his former acquaintances
would say if they could see him. He--HE--a cook, and a roustabout, a
dishwasher and a scrubber of brass at Eastboro Twin-Lights! How long
must he stay there? For months at least. He should be thankful that he
was there; thankful that there was such a place, where no one came and
where he could remain until he was forgotten. He was thankful, of course
he was. But what a life to live!

He wondered what Atkins thought of him; how much the lightkeeper guessed
concerning his identity and his story. He could not guess within miles
of the truth, but he must indulge in some curious speculations. Then he
fell to wondering about Seth himself. What was it that the light-keeper
was hiding from the world? Odd that two people, each possessing a
secret, should come together at that lonely spot. Where was it that Seth
went almost every afternoon? Had these daily absences any connection
with the great mystery?

He distributed the sheets of fly paper about the room, in places where
he judged them likely to do the most good, and had the satisfaction of
seeing a number of the tormenting insects caught immediately. Then
he tested the water in the boiler. It was warmer, even hot, but not
boiling.

He had almost forgotten the dog, but now was reminded by the animal
itself, who, having apparently swallowed the bone whole, began once more
to howl lugubriously. Brown decided to let him howl for the present,
and, going into the living-room, picked up an old magazine and began
listlessly to read.

The howls from the yard continued, swelled to a crescendo of shrieks
and then suddenly ceased. A moment later there was a thump and a mighty
scratching at the kitchen door. The substitute assistant dropped the
magazine and sprang from his chair.

"Good Lord!" he exclaimed; "I believe--"

He did not finish the sentence. There was no need. If he had any doubts
as to the cause of the racket at the door they were dispelled by a howl
like a fog whistle. "Job" had escaped from durance vile and was seeking
companionship.

Brown muttered an exclamation of impatience and, opening the door a very
little way, peeped through the crack. The pup--he looked like a scrawny
young lion--hailed his appearance with a series of wild yelps. His
mouth opened like a Mammoth Cave in miniature, and a foot of red tongue
flapped like a danger signal.

"Get out, you brute!" ordered Brown.

Job did not get out. Instead he yelped again and capered with the grace
of a cow. His feet and legs seemed to have grown out of proportion to
the rest of him; they were enormous. Down the length of his yellow back
were three raw furrows which the nails of the box cover had scraped as
he climbed from under them.

"Nice dog!" coaxed the lightkeeper's helper. "Nice doggie! Good old
boy!"

The good old boy pranced joyfully and made a charge at the door. Brown
slammed it shut just in time.

"Clear out!" he yelled, from behind it. "Go away! Go and lie down!"

The answer was a mighty howl of disappointment and an assault on the
door which threatened to shatter the panels. Job's paws were armed with
claws proportionate to their size.

This would never do. The paint on that door had been furnished by the
government, and Atkins was very careful of it. Brown, within, pounded
a protest and again commanded the dog to go and lie down. Job, without,
thumped and scratched and howled louder than ever. He had decidedly the
best of the duet, and the door was suffering every second. Brown picked
up the fire shovel and threw the door wide open.

"Get out!" he roared. "Get out or I'll kill you!"

He brandished the shovel, expecting an assault. But none came. It was
evident that Job knew a shovel when he saw it, had encountered other
shovels in the course of his brief young life. His ears and tail
drooped, and he backed away.

"Clear out!" repeated Brown, advancing threateningly. With each step of
the advance, Job retreated a corresponding distance. When the assistant
stopped, he stopped. Brown lowered the shovel and looked at him. The dog
grovelled in the sand and whined dolefully.

"Humph!" grunted the young man; "I guess you're not as dangerous as you
look. Stay where you are and keep still."

He turned to enter the kitchen, turning again just in time to find the
pup at his heels. He lifted the shovel, and Job jumped frantically out
of reach, sat down in a clump of beach grass, lifted his nose to the sky
and expressed his feelings in a howl of utter misery.

"Good--heavens!" observed John Brown fervently, and, shifting the shovel
to his left hand, rubbed his forehead with his right. Job howled once
more and gazed at him with sorrowful appeal. The situation was so
ridiculous that the young man began to laugh. This merriment appeared to
encourage the pup, who stopped howling and began to caper, throwing the
loose sand from beneath his paws in showers.

"What's the matter, old boy?" inquired Brown. "Lonesome, are you?"

Job was making himself the center of a small-sized sand spout.

"Humph! Well . . . well, all right. I'm not going to hurt you. Stay
where you are, and I won't shut the door."

But this compromise was not satisfactory, because the moment the young
man started to cross the threshold the dog started to follow. When Brown
halted, he followed suit--and howled. Then the substitute assistant
surrendered unconditionally.

"All right," he said. "Come in, then, if you want to. Come in! but for
goodness sake keep still when you are in."

He strode into the kitchen, leaving the door open. Job slunk after him,
and crouched with his muzzle across the sill, evidently not yet certain
that his victory was complete. He did not howl, however, and his late
adversary was thankful for the omission.

Brown bethought himself of the water in the wash boiler and, removing
the cover, tested it with his finger. It was steadily heating, but not
yet at the boiling point. He pushed the boiler aside, lifted a lid of
the range and inspected the fire. From behind him came a yelp, another,
a thump, and then a series of thumps and yelps. He turned and saw Job in
the center of the floor apparently having a fit.

The moment his back was turned, the pup had sneaked into the kitchen.
It was not a large kitchen, and Job was distinctly a large dog. Also,
he was suspicious of further assaults with the fire shovel and had
endeavored to find a hiding place under the table. In crawling beneath
this article of furniture he had knocked off a sheet of the fly paper.
This had fallen "butter side down" upon his back, and stuck fast. He
reached aft to pull it loose with his teeth and had encountered a
second sheet laid on a chair. This had stuck to his neck. Job was an
apprehensive animal by nature and as the result of experience, and his
nerves were easily unstrung. He forgot the shovel, forgot the human whom
he had been fearfully trying to propitiate, forgot everything except the
dreadful objects which clung to him and pulled his hair. He rolled from
beneath the table, a shrieking, kicking, snapping cyclone. And that
kitchen was no place for a cyclone.

He rolled and whirled for an instant, then scrambled to his feet and
began running in widening circles. Brown tried to seize him as he
passed, but he might as well have seized a railroad train. Another
chair, also loaded with fly paper, upset, and Job added a third sheet to
his collection. This one plastered itself across his nose and eyes. He
ceased running forward and began to leap high in the air and backwards.
The net containing the big lobster fell to the floor. Then John Brown
fled to the open air, leaned against the side of the building and
screamed with laughter.

Inside the kitchen the uproar was terrific. Howls, shrill yelps, thumps
and crashes. Then came a crash louder than any preceding it, a splash of
water across the sill, and from the doorway leaped, or flew, an object
steaming and dripping, fluttering with fly paper, and with a giant
lobster clamped firmly to its tail. The lobster was knocked off against
the door post, but the rest of the exhibit kept on around the corner of
the house, shrieking as it flew. Brown collapsed in the sand and laughed
until his sides ached and he was too weak to laugh longer.

At last he got up and staggered after it. He was still laughing when
he reached the back yard, but there he stopped laughing and uttered an
exclamation of impatience and some alarm.

Of Job there was no sign, though from somewhere amid the dunes sounded
yelps, screams and the breaking of twigs as the persecuted one fled
blindly through the bayberry and beachplum bushes. But Brown was not
anxious about the dog. What caused him to shout and then break into a
run was the sight of Joshua, the old horse, galloping at top speed along
the road to the south. Even his sedate and ancient calm had not been
proof against the apparition which burst from the kitchen. In his fright
he had broken his halter rope and managed--a miracle, considering his
age--to leap the pasture fence and run.

That horse was the apple of Seth Atkins's eye. The lightkeeper believed
him to be a wonder of strength and endurance, and never left the lights
without cautioning his helper to keep an eye on Joshua, "'cause if
anything happened to him I'd have to hunt a mighty long spell to find
another that could tech him." Brown accepted this trust with composure,
feeling morally certain that the only thing likely to happen to
Joshua was death from overeating or old age. And now something had
happened--Joshua was running away.

There was but one course to take; Brown must leave the government's
property in its own care and capture that horse. He had laughed until
running seemed an impossibility, but run he must, and did, after a
fashion. But Joshua was running, too, and he was frightened. He galloped
like a colt, and the assistant lightkeeper gained upon him very slowly.

The road was crooked and hilly, and the sand in its ruts was deep. Brown
would not have gained at all, but for the fact that the horse, from long
habit, kept to the roadway and never tried short cuts. His pursuer did,
and, therefore, just as Joshua entered the grove on the bluff above
Pounddug Slough, Brown caught up with him and made a grab at the end of
the trailing halter. He missed it, and the horse took a fresh start.

The road through the grove was overgrown with young trees and bushes,
and amid these the animal had a distinct advantage. Not until the outer
edge of the grove was reached did the panting assistant get another
opportunity at the rope. This time he seized it and held on.

"Whoa!" he shouted. "Whoa!"

But Joshua did not "whoa" at once. He kept on along the edge of the
high, sandy slope. Brown, from the tail of his eye, caught a glimpse
of the winding channel of the Slough beneath him, of a small schooner
heeled over on the mud flat at its margin, and of the figure of a man at
work beside it.

"Whoa!" he ordered once more. "Whoa, Josh! stand still!"

Perhaps the horse would have stood still--he seemed about to do so--but
from the distance, somewhere on the road he had just traversed, came
a howl, long-drawn and terrifyingly familiar. Joshua heard it, jumped
sidewise, jerked at the halter and, as if playing "snap the whip,"
sent his would-be captor heels over head over the edge of the bank and
rolling down the sandy slope. The halter flew from Brown's hands, he
rolled and bumped and clutched at clumps of grass and bushes. Then he
struck the beach and stopped, spread-eagled on the wet sand.

A voice said: "Well--by--TIME!"

Brown looked up. Seth Atkins, a paint pail in one hand and a dripping
brush in the other, was standing beside him, blank astonishment written
on his features.

"Well--by time!" said Seth again, and with even stronger emphasis.

The substitute assistant raised himself to his knees, rubbed his back
with one hand, and then, turning, sat in the sand and returned his
superior's astonished gaze with one of equal bewilderment.

"Hello!" he gasped. "Well, by George! it's you, isn't it! What are you
doing here?"

The lightkeeper put down the pail of paint.

"What am I doin'?" he repeated. "What am I doin'--? Say!" His
astonishment changed to suspicion and wrath. "Never you mind what I'm
doin'," he went on. "That's my affairs. What are YOU doin' here? That's
what I want to know."

Brown rubbed the sand out of his hair.

"I don't know exactly what I am doing--yet," he panted.

"You don't, hey? Well, you'd better find out. Maybe I can help you to
remember. Sneakin' after me, wa'n't you? Spyin', to find out what I was
up to, hey?"

He shook the wet paint brush angrily at his helper. Brown looked at him
for an instant; then he rose to his feet.

"Spyin' on me, was you?" repeated Seth.

"Didn't I tell you that mindin' your own business was part of our dicker
if you was goin' to stay at Eastboro lighthouse? Didn't I tell you
that?"

The young man answered with a contemptuous shrug. Turning on his heel,
he started to walk away. Atkins sprang after him.

"Answer me," he ordered. "Didn't I say you'd got to mind your own
business?"

"You did," coldly.

"You bet I did! And was you mindin' it?"

"No. I was minding yours--like a fool. Now you may mind it yourself."

"Hold on there! Where you goin'?"

"Back to the lights. And you may go to the devil, or anywhere else that
suits your convenience, and take your confounded menagerie with you."

"My menag--What on earth? Say, hold on! Mercy on us, what's that?"

From the top of the bluff came a crashing and a series of yelps. Through
the thicket of beachplum bushes was thrust a yellow head, fringed with
torn fragments of fly paper.

"What's that?" demanded the astonished lightkeeper.

Brown looked at the whining apparition in the bushes and smiled
maliciously.

"That," he observed, "is Job."

"JOB?"

"Yes." From somewhere in the grove came a thrashing of branches and a
frightened neigh. "And that," he continued, "is Joshua, I presume. If
there are more Old Testament patriarchs in the vicinity, I don't know
where they are, and I don't care. You may hunt for them yourself. I'm
going to follow your advice and mind my own business. Good by."

He strode off up the beach. Job, at the top of the bank, started to
follow, but a well-aimed pebble caused him to dodge back.

"Hold on!" roared the lightkeeper. "Maybe I made a mistake. Perhaps you
wa'n't spyin' on me. Don't go off mad. I . . . Wait!"

But John Brown did not wait. He strode rapidly away up the beach. Seth
stared after him. From the grove, where his halter had caught firmly in
the fork of a young pine, Joshua thrashed and neighed.

"Aa-oo-ow!" howled Job, from the bushes.


An hour later Atkins, leading the weary and homesick Joshua by the
bridle, trudged in at the lighthouse yard. Job, still ornamented with
remnants of the fly paper, slunk at his heels. Seth stabled the horse
and, after some manoeuvering, managed to decoy the dog down the slope to
the boathouse, where he closed the door upon him and his whines. Then he
climbed back to the kitchen.

The table was set for one, and in the wash boiler on the range the giant
lobster was cooking. Of the substitute assistant keeper there was no
sign, but, after searching, Seth found him in his room.

"Well?" observed Atkins, gruffly, "we might 's well have supper, hadn't
we?"

Brown did not seem interested. "Your supper is ready, I think," he
answered. "I tried not to forget anything."

"I guess 'tis; seems to be. Come on, and we'll eat."

"I have eaten, thank you."

"You have? Alone?"

"Yes. That, too," with emphasis, "is a part of my business."

The lightkeeper stared, grunted, and then went out of the room. He ate a
lonely meal, not of the lobster--he kept that for another occasion--but
one made up of cold scraps from the pantry. He wandered uneasily about
the premises, quieted Job's wails for the time by a gift of eatable odds
and ends tossed into the boathouse, smoked, tried to read, and, when it
grew dusk, lit the lamps in the towers. At last he walked to the closed
door of his helper's room and rapped.

"Well?" was the ungracious response.

"It's me, Atkins," he announced, hesitatingly. "I'd like to speak to
you, if you don't mind."

"On business?"

"Well, no--not exactly. Say, Brown, I guess likely I'd ought to beg your
pardon again. I cal'late I've made another mistake. I jedge you wa'n't
spyin' on me when you dove down that bankin'."

"Your judgment is good this time. I was not."

"No, I'm sartin you wa'n't. I apologize and take it all back. Now can I
come in?"

The door was thrown open. Seth entered, looking sheepish, and sat down
in the little cane-seated rocker.

"Say," he began, after a moment of uncomfortable silence, "would you
mind--now that I've begged your pardon and all--tellin' me what did
happen while I was away. I imagine, judgin' by the looks of things in
the kitchen, that there was--er--well, consider'ble doin', as the boys
say."

He grinned. Brown tried to be serious, but was obliged to smile in
return.

"I'll tell you," he said. "Of course you know where that--er--remarkable
dog came from?"

"I can guess," drily. "Henry G.'s present, ain't he? Humph! Well, I'd
ought to have known that anything Henry would GIVE away was likely to
be remarkable in all sorts of ways. All right! that's one Henry's got on
me. Tomorrow afternoon me and Job take a trip back to Eastboro, and one
of us stays there. It may be me, but I have my doubts. I agreed to take
a DOG on trial, not a yeller-jaundiced cow with a church organ inside of
it. Hear the critter whoopin' down there in the boathouse! And he's eat
everything that's chewable on the reservation already. He's a famine on
legs, that pup. But never mind him. He's been tried--and found guilty.
Tell me what happened."

Brown began the tale of the afternoon's performances, beginning with his
experience as a lobster catcher. Seth smiled, then chuckled, and finally
burst into roars of laughter, in which the narrator joined.

"Jiminy crimps!" exclaimed Seth, when the story was finished. "Oh, by
jiminy crimps! that beats the Dutch, and everybody's been told what the
Dutch beat. Ha, ha! ho, ho! Brown, I apologize all over again. I don't
wonder you was put out when I accused you of spyin'. Wonder you hadn't
riz up off that sand and butchered me where I stood. Cal'late that's
what I'd have done in your place. Well, I hope there's no hard feelin's
now."

"No. Your apology, is accepted."

"That's good. Er--er--say, you--you must have been sort of surprised to
see me paintin' the Daisy M."

"The which?"

"The Daisy M. That's the name of that old schooner I was to work on."

"Indeed. . . . How is the weather tonight, clear?"

"Yes, it's fair now, but looks sort of thick to the east'ard. I say
you must have been surprised to see me paintin' the Daisy M. I've been
tinkerin' on that old boat, off and on, ever since last fall. Bought her
for eight dollars of the feller that owned her, and she was a hulk for
sartin then. I've caulked her up and rigged her, after a fashion. Now
she might float, if she had a chance. Every afternoon, pretty nigh, I've
been at her. Don't know exactly why I do it, neither. And yet I do,
too. Prob'ly you've wondered where I was takin' all that old canvas and
stuff. I--"

"Excuse me, Atkins. I mind my own business, you know. I ask no
questions, and you are under no obligation to tell me anything."

"I know, I know." The lightkeeper nodded solemnly. He clasped his knee
with his hands and rocked back and forth in his chair. "I know," he went
on, an absent, wistful look in his eye; "but you must have wondered,
just the same. I bought that craft because--well, because she reminded
me of old times, I cal'late. I used to command a schooner like her once;
bigger and lots more able, of course, but a fishin' schooner, same
as she used to be. And I was a good skipper, if I do say it. My crews
jumped when I said the word, now I tell you. That's where I belong--on
the deck of a vessel. I'm a man there--a man."

He paused. Brown made no comment. Seth continued to rock and to talk; he
seemed to be thinking aloud.

"Yes, sir," he declared, with a sigh; "when I was afloat I was a man,
and folks respected me. I just do love salt water and sailin' craft.
That's why I bought the Daisy M. I've been riggin' her and caulkin' her
just for the fun of doin' it. She'll never float again. It would take
a tide like a flood to get her off them flats. But when I'm aboard or
putterin' around her, I'm happy--happier, I mean. It makes me forget
I'm a good-for-nothin' derelict, stranded in an old woman's job of
lightkeepin'. Ah, hum-a-day, young feller, you don't know what it is
to have been somebody, and then, because you was a fool and did a fool
thing, to be nothin'--nothin'! You don't know what that is."

John Brown caught his breath. His fist descended upon the window ledge
beside him.

"Don't I!" he groaned. "By George, don't I! Do you suppose--"

He stopped short. Atkins started and came out of his dream.

"Why--why, yes," he said, hastily; "I s'pose likely you do. . . . Well,
good night. I've got to go on watch. See you in the mornin'."




CHAPTER VI

THE PICNIC


Seth was true to his promise concerning Job. The next afternoon that
remarkable canine was decoyed, by the usual bone, into the box in which
he had arrived. Being in, the cover was securely renailed above him.
Brown and the light-keeper lifted the box into the back part of the
"open wagon," and Atkins drove triumphantly away, the pup's agonized
protests against the journey serving as spurs to urge Joshua faster
along the road to the village. When, about six o'clock, Seth reentered
the yard, he was grinning broadly.

"Well," inquired Brown, "did he take him back willingly?"

"Who? Henry G.? I don't know about the willin' part, but he'll take him
back. I attended to that."

"What did he say? Did he think you ungrateful for refusing to accept his
present?"

Atkins laughed aloud. "He didn't say nothin'," he declared. "He didn't
know it when I left Eastboro. I wa'n't such a fool as to cart that
critter to the store, where all the gang 'round the store could holler
and make fun. Not much! I drove way round the other way, up the back
road, and unloaded him at Henry's house. I cal'lated to leave him with
Aunt Olive--that's Henry's sister, keepin' house for him--but she'd gone
out to sewin' circle, and there wa'n't nobody to home. The side door was
unlocked, so I lugged that box into the settin' room and left it there.
Pretty nigh broke my back; and that everlastin' Job hollered so I
thought the whole town would hear him and come runnin' to stop the
murderin' that they'd cal'late was bein' done. But there ain't no nigh
neighbors, and those that are nighest ain't on speakin' terms with
Henry; ruther have him murdered than not, I shouldn't wonder. So I left
Job in his box in the settin' room and cleared out."

The substitute assistant smiled delightedly.

"Good enough!" he exclaimed. "What a pleasant surprise for friend Henry
or his housekeeper."

"Ho, ho! ain't it! I rather guess 'twill be Henry himself that's
surprised fust. Aunt Olive never leaves sewin' circle till the last bit
of supper's eat up--she's got some of her brother's stinginess in her
make-up--so I cal'late Henry'll get home afore she does. I shouldn't
wonder," with an exuberant chuckle, "if that settin' room' was some
stirred up when he sees it. The pup had loosened the box cover afore I
left. Ho, ho!"

"But won't he send the dog back here again?"

"No, he won't. I left a note for him on the table. There was
consider'ble ginger in every line of it. No, Job won't be sent here,
no matter what becomes of him. And if anything SHOULD be broke in that
settin' room--well, there was SOME damage done to our kitchen. No, I
guess Henry G. and me are square. He won't make any fuss; he wants to
keep our trade, you see."

It was a true prophecy. The storekeeper made no trouble, and Job
remained at Eastboro until a foray on a neighbor's chickens resulted
in his removal from this vale of tears. Neither the lightkeeper nor
his helper ever saw him again, and when Seth next visited the store
and solicitously inquired concerning the pup's health, Henry G. merely
looked foolish and changed the subject.

But the dog's short sojourn at the Twin-Lights had served to solve one
mystery, that of Atkins's daily excursions to Pounddug Slough. He
went there to work on the old schooner, the Daisy M. Seth made no more
disclosures concerning his past life--that remained a secret--but he did
suggest his helper's going to inspect the schooner. "Just walk across
and look her over," he said. "I'd like to know what you think of her.
See if I ain't makin' a pretty good job out of nothin'. FOR nothin', of
course," he added, gloomily; "but it keeps me from thinkin' too much. Go
and see her, that's a good feller."

So the young man did go. He climbed aboard the stranded craft--a forlorn
picture she made, lying on her side in the mud--and was surprised to
find how much had been manufactured "out of nothing." Her seams, those
which the sun had opened, were caulked neatly; her deck was clean and
white; she was partially rigged, with new and old canvas and ropes; and
to his landsman's eyes she looked almost fit for sea. But when he said
as much to Seth, the latter laughed scornfully.

"Fit for nothin'," scoffed the lightkeeper. "I could make her fit,
maybe, if I wanted to spend money enough, but I don't. I can't get at
her starboard side, that's down in the mud, and I cal'late she'd leak
like a skimmer. She's only got a fores'l and a jib, and the jib's only
a little one that used to belong to a thirty-foot sloop. Her anchor's
gone, and I wouldn't trust her main topmast to carry anything bigger'n a
handkerchief, nor that in a breeze no more powerful than a canary bird's
breath. And, as I told you, it would take a tide like a flood to float
her. No, she's no good, and never will be; but," with a sigh, "I get a
little fun fussin' over her."

"Er--by the way," he added, a little later, "of course you won't mention
to nobody what I told you about--about my bein' a fishin' skipper
once. Not that anybody ever comes here for you to mention it to, but I
wouldn't want . . . You see, nobody in Eastboro or anywheres on the Cape
knows where I come from, and so . . . Oh, all right, all right. I know
you ain't the kind to talk. Mind our own business, that's the motto you
and me cruise under, hey?"

Yet, although the conversation in the substitute assistant's room was
not again referred to by either, it had the effect of making the oddly
assorted pair a bit closer in their companionship. The mutual trust
was strengthened by the lightkeeper's half confidence and Brown's
sympathetic reception of it. Each was lonely, each had moments when
he felt he must express his hidden feelings to some one, and, though
neither recognized the fact, it was certain that the time was coming
when all mysteries would be mysteries no longer. And one day occurred a
series of ridiculous happenings which, bidding fair at first to end in
a quarrel the relationship between the two, instead revealed in both a
kindred trait that removed the last barrier.

At a little before ten on this particular morning, Brown, busy in
the kitchen, heard vigorous language outside. It was Atkins who was
speaking, and the assistant wondered who on earth he could be talking
to. A glance around the doorpost showed that he was, apparently, talking
to himself--at least, there was no other human being to be seen. He held
in his hand a battered pair of marine glasses and occasionally he peered
through them. Each time he did so his soliloquy became more animated and
profane.

"What's the matter?" demanded Brown, emerging from the house.

"Matter?" repeated Seth. "Matter enough! Here! take a squint through
them glasses and tell me who's in that buggy comin' yonder?"

The buggy, a black dot far down the sandy road leading from the village,
was rocking and dipping over the dunes. The assistant took the glasses,
adjusted them, and looked as directed.

"Why!" he said slowly, "there are three people in that buggy. A
man--and--"

"And two women; that's what I thought. Dum idiots comin' over to picnic
and spend the day, sure's taxes. And they'll want to be showed round the
lights and everywheres, and they'll ask more'n forty million questions.
Consarn the luck!"

Brown looked troubled. He had no desire to meet strangers.

"How do you know they're coming here?" he asked. The answer was
conclusive.

"Because," snarled Seth, "as I should think you'd know by this time,
there ain't no other place round here they COULD come to."

A moment later, he added, "Well, you'll have to show 'em round."

"I will?"

"Sartin. That's part of the assistant keeper's job."

He chuckled as he said it. That chuckle grated on the young man's
nerves.

"I'm not the assistant," he declared cheerfully.

"You ain't? What are you then?"

"Oh, just a helper. I don't get any wages. You've told me yourself, over
and over, that I have no regular standing here. And, according to
the government rules, those you've got posted in the kitchen, the
lightkeeper is obliged to show visitors about. I wouldn't break the
rules for the world. Good morning. Think I'll go down to the beach."

He stalked away whistling. Atkins, his face flaming, roared after him a
profane opinion concerning his actions. Then he went into the kitchen,
slamming the door with a bang.

Some twenty minutes later the helper heard his name shouted from the top
of the bluff.

"Mr. Brown! I say! Ahoy there, Mr. Brown! Come up here a minute, won't
ye?"

Brown clambered up the path. A little man, with grey throat whiskers,
and wearing an antiquated straw hat, the edge of the brim trimmed with
black braid, was standing waiting for him.

"Sorry to trouble you, Mr. Brown," stammered the little man, "but you be
Mr. Brown, ain't you?"

"I am. Yes."

"Well, I cal'lated you was. My name's Stover, Abijah Stover. I live over
to Trumet. Me and my wife drove over for a sort of picnic like. We've
got her cousin, Mrs. Sophia Hains, along. Sophi's a widow from Boston,
and she ain't never seen a lighthouse afore. I know Seth Atkins
slightly, and I was cal'latin' he'd show us around, but bein' as he's so
sick--"

"Sick? Is Mr. Atkins sick?"

"Why, yes. Didn't you know it? He's in the bedroom there groanin'
somethin' terrible. He told me not to say nothin' to the women folks,
but to hail you, and you'd look out for us. Didn't you know he was laid
up? Why, he--"

Brown did not wait to hear more. He strode to the house, with Mr. Stover
at his heels. On his way he caught a glimpse of the buggy, the horse
dozing between the shafts. On the seat of the buggy were two women, one
plump and round-faced, the other thin and gaunt.

Mr. Stover panted behind him.

"Say, Mr. Brown," he whispered, as they entered the kitchen; "don't tell
my wife nor Sophi about Seth's bein' sick. Better not say a word to them
about it."

The tone in which this was spoken made the substitute assistant curious.

"Why not?" he asked.

"'Cause--well, 'cause Hannah's hobby is sick folks, as you might say. If
there's a cat in the neighborhood that's ailin' she's always dosin' of
it up and fixin' medicine for it, and the like of that. And Sophi's one
of them 'New Thoughters' and don't believe anybody's got any right to be
sick. The two of 'em ain't done nothin' but argue and row over diseases
and imagination and medicines ever since Sophi got here. If they knew
Seth was laid up, I honestly believe they'd drop picnic and everythin'
and start fightin' over whether he was really sick or just thought he
was. And I sort of figgered on havin' a quiet day off."

Brown found the lightkeeper stretched on the bed in his room. He was
dressed, with the exception of coat and boots, and when the young man
entered he groaned feebly.

"What's the matter?" demanded the alarmed helper.

"Oh, my!" groaned Seth. "Oh, my!"

"Are you in pain? What is it? Shall I 'phone for the doctor?"

"No, no. No use gettin' the doctor. I'll be all right by and by. It's
one of my attacks. I have 'em every once in a while. Just let me alone,
and let me lay here without bein' disturbed; then I'll get better, I
guess."

"But it's so sudden!"

"I know. They always come on that way. Now run along, like a good
feller, and leave me to my suff'rin's. O-oh, dear!"

Much troubled, Brown turned to the door. As he was going out he happened
to look back. The dresser stood against the wall beyond the bed, and
in its mirror he caught a glimpse of the face of the sick man. On that
face, which should have been distorted with agony, was a broad grin.

Brown found the little Stover man waiting for him in the kitchen.

"Be you ready?" he asked.

"Ready?" repeated Brown, absently. "Ready for what?"

"Why, to show us round the lights. Sophi, she ain't never seen one
afore. Atkins said that, bein' as he wasn't able to leave his bed, you'd
show us around."

"He did, hey?"

"Yes. He said you'd be glad to."

"Hum!" Mr. Brown's tone was that of one upon whom, out of darkness, a
light has suddenly burst. "I see," he mused, thoughtfully. "Yes, yes. I
see."

For a minute he stood still, evidently pondering. Then, with a twinkle
in his eye, he strode out of the house and walked briskly across to the
buggy.

"Good morning, ladies," he said, removing the new cap which Seth had
recently purchased for him in Eastboro. "Mr. Stover tells me you wish to
be shown the lights."

The plump woman answered. "Yes," she said, briskly, "we do. Are you a
new keeper? Where's Mr. Atkins?"

"Mr. Atkins, I regret to say," began Brown, "is ill. He--"

Stover, standing at his elbow, interrupted nervously.

"Mr. Brown here'll show us around," he said quickly. "Seth said he
would."

"I shall be happy," concurred that young gentleman. "You must excuse me
if I seem rather worried. Mr. Atkins, my chief--I believe you know him,
Mrs. Stover--has been taken suddenly ill, and is, apparently, suffering
much pain. The attack was very sudden, and I--"

"Sick?" The plump woman seemed actually to prick up her ears, like a
sleepy cat at the sound of the dinner bell. "Is Seth sick? And you all
alone with him here? Can't I do anything to help?"

"All he wants is to be left alone," put in her husband anxiously. "He
said so himself."

"Do you know what's the matter? Have you got any medicine for him?" Mrs.
Stover was already climbing out of the buggy.

"No," replied Brown. "I haven't. That is, I haven't given him any yet."

The slim woman, Mrs. Hains of Boston, now broke into the conversation.

"Good thing!" she snapped. "Most medicine's nothing but opium and
alcohol. Fill the poor creature full of drugs and--"

"I s'pose you'd set and preach New Thought at him!" snapped Mrs. Stover.
"As if a body could be cured by hot air! I believe I'll go right in and
see him. Don't you s'pose I could help, Mr. Brown?"

Mr. Brown seemed pleased, but reluctant. "It's awfully good of you," he
said. "I couldn't think of troubling you when you've come so far on a
pleasure excursion. But I am at my wit s end."

"Don't say another word!" Mrs. Stover's bulky figure was already on the
way to the door of the house. "I'm only too glad to do what I can. And,
if I do say it, that shouldn't, I'm always real handy in a sick room.
'Bijah, be quiet; I don't care if we ARE on a picnic; no human bein'
shall suffer while I set around and do nothin'."

Mrs. Hains was at her cousin's heels.

"You'll worry him to death," she declared. "You'll tell him how sick
he is, and that he's goin' to die, and such stuff. What he needs is
cheerful conversation and mental uplift. It's too bad! Well, you sha'n't
have your own way with him, anyhow. Mr. Brown, where is he?"

"You two goin' to march right into his BEDROOM?" screamed the irate
Abijah. The women answered not. They were already in the kitchen. Brown
hastened after them.

"It's all right, ladies," he said. "Right this way, please."

He led the way to the chamber of the sick man. Mr. Atkins turned on his
bed of pain, caught a glimpse of the visitors, and sat up.

"What in time?" he roared.

"Seth," said Brown, benignly, "this is Mrs. Stover of Eastboro. I think
you know her. And Mrs. Hains of Boston. These ladies have heard of your
sickness, and, having had experience in such cases, have kindly offered
to stay with you and help in any way they can. Mrs. Stover, I will leave
him in your hands. Please call me if I can be of any assistance."

Without waiting for further comment from the patient, whose face was a
picture, he hastened to the kitchen, choking as he went. Mr. Stover met
him at the outer door.

"Now you've done it!" wailed the little man. "NOW you've done it! Didn't
I tell you? Oh, this'll be a hell of a picnic!"

He stalked away, righteous indignation overcoming him. Brown sat down in
a rocking chair and shook with emotion. From the direction of the sick
room came the sounds of three voices, each trying to outscream the
other. The substitute assistant listened to this for a while, and, as he
did so, a new thought struck him. He remembered a story he had read in a
magazine years before. He crossed to the pantry, found an empty bottle,
rinsed it at the sink, stepped again to the pantry, and, entering it,
closed the door behind him. There he busied himself with the molasses
jug, the soft-soap bucket, the oil can, the pepper shaker, and a few
other utensils and their contents. Footsteps in the kitchen caused him
to hurriedly reenter that apartment. Mrs. Stover was standing by the
range, her face red.

"Oh, there you are, Mr. Brown!" she exclaimed. "I wondered where you'd
gone to."

"How is he?" inquired Brown, the keenest anxiety in his utterance.

"H'm! he'd do well enough if he had the right treatment. I cal'late he's
better now, even as 'tis; but, when a person has to lay and hear over
and over again that what ails 'em is nothin' but imagination, it ain't
to be wondered at that they get mad. What he needs is some sort of
soothin' medicine, and I only wish 'twan't so fur over to home. I've got
just what he needs there."

"I was thinking--" began Brown.

"What was you thinkin'?"

"I was wondering if some of my 'Stomach Balm' wouldn't help him. It's
an old family receipt, handed down from the Indians, I believe. I always
have a bottle with me and . . . Still, I wouldn't prescribe, not knowing
the disease."

Mrs. Stover's eyes sparkled. Patent medicines were her hobby.

"Hum!" she said. "'Stomach Balm' sounds good. And he says his trouble is
principally stomach. Some of them Indian medicines are mighty powerful.
Have you--did you say you had a bottle with you, Mr. Brown?"

The young man went again to the pantry and returned with the bottle he
had so recently found there. Now, however, it was two thirds full of
a black sticky mixture. Mrs. Stover removed the cork and took an
investigating sniff.

"It smells powerful," she said, hopefully.

"It is. Would you like to taste it?" handing her a tablespoon. He
watched as she swallowed a spoonful.

"Ugh! oh!" she gasped; even her long suffering palate rebelled at THAT
taste. "It--I should think that OUGHT to help him."

"I should think so. It may be the very thing he needs. At any rate, it
can't hurt him. It's quite harmless."

Mrs. Stover's face was still twisted, under the influence of the "Balm";
but her mind was made up.

"I'm goin' to try it," she declared. "I don't care if every New
Thoughter in creation says no. He needs medicine and needs it right
away."

"The dose," said Mr. Brown, gravely, "is two tablespoonfuls every
fifteen minutes. I do hope it will help him. Give him my sympathy--my
deepest sympathy, Mrs. Stover, please."

The plump lady disappeared in the direction of the sick room. The
substitute assistant lingered and listened. He heard a shrill pow-wow
of feminine voices. Evidently "New Thought" and the practice of medicine
had once more clashed. The argument waxed and waned. Followed the click
of a spoon against glass. And then came a gasp, a gurgle, a choking
yell; and high upon the salty air enveloping Eastboro Twin-Lights rose
the voice of Mr. Seth Atkins, expressing his opinion of the "Stomach
Balm" and those who administered it.

John Brown darted out of the kitchen, dodged around the corner of
the house, tiptoed past the bench by the bluff, where Mr. Stover sat
gloomily meditating, and ran lightly down the path to the creek and
the wharf. The boathouse at the end of the wharf offered a convenient
refuge. Into the building he darted, closed the door behind him, and
collapsed upon a heap of fish nets.

At three-thirty that afternoon, Mr. Atkins, apparently quite recovered,
was sitting in the kitchen rocker, reading a last week's newspaper, one
of a number procured on his most recent trip to the village. The Stovers
and their guest had departed. Their buggy was out of sight beyond the
dunes. A slight noise startled the lightkeeper, and he looked up. His
helper was standing in the doorway, upon his face an expression of
intense and delighted surprise.

"What?" exclaimed Mr. Brown. "What? Is it really you?"

Seth put down the paper and nodded.

"Um-hm," he observed drily, "it's really me."

"Up? and WELL?" queried Brown.

"Um-hm. Pretty well, considerin', thank you. Been for a stroll up
Washin'ton Street, have you? Or a little walk on the Common, maybe?"

The elaborate sarcasm of these questions was intended to be withering.
Mr. Brown, however, did not wither. Neither did he blush.

"I have been," he said, "down at the boathouse. I knew you were in safe
hands and well looked after, so I went away. I couldn't remain here and
hear you suffer."

"Hum! HEAR me suffer, hey? Much obliged, I'm sure. What have you been
doin' there all this time? I hoped you was--that is, I begun to be
afraid you was dead. Thought your sympathy for me had been too much for
you, maybe."

Brown mournfully shook his head. "It was--almost," he said, solemnly. "I
think I dropped asleep. I was quite overcome."

"Hum! Better take a dose of that 'Stomach Balm,' hadn't you? That'll
liven you up, I'll guarantee."

"No, thank you. The sight of you, well and strong again, is all the
medicine I need. We must keep the 'Balm' in case you have another
attack. By the way, I notice the dinner dishes haven't been washed. I'll
do them at once. I know you must be tired, after your illness--and the
exertion of showing your guests about the lights."

Atkins did not answer, although he seemed to want to very much. However,
he made no objection when his helper, rolling up his sleeves, turned to
the sink and the dish washing.

Seth was silent all the rest of the afternoon and during supper. But
that evening, as Brown sat on the bench outside, Atkins joined him.

"Hello!" said Seth, as cheerfully as if nothing had happened.

"Hello!" replied the assistant, shortly. He had been thinking once more,
and his thoughts were not pleasant.

"I s'pose you cal'late," began Atkins, "that maybe I've got a grudge
against you on account of this mornin' and that 'Balm' and such. I
ain't."

"That's good. I'm glad to hear it."

"Yes. After the fust dose of that stuff--for thunder sakes WHAT did you
put in it?--I was about ready to murder you, but I've got over that. I
don't blame you for gettin' even. We are even, you know."

"I'm satisfied, if you are."

"I be. But what I don't understand is why you didn't want to show them
folks around."

"Oh, I don't know. I had my reasons, such as they were. Why didn't you
want to do it yourself?"

Seth crossed his legs and was silent for a moment or two. Then he spoke
firmly and as if his mind was made up.

"Young feller," he said, "I don't know whether you realize it or not,
and perhaps I shouldn't be the one to mention it--but you're under some
obligations to me."

His companion nodded. "I realize that," he said.

"Yes, but maybe you don't realize the amount of the obligations. I'm
riskin' my job keepin' you here. If it wa'n't for the superintendent
bein' such a friend of mine, there'd have been a reg'lar assistant
keeper app'inted long ago. The gov'ment don't pick up its lightkeepers
same as you would farm hands. There's civil service to be gone through,
and the like of that. But you wanted to stay, and I've kept you, riskin'
my own job, as I said. And now I cal'late we'd better have a plain
understandin'. You've got to know just what your job is. I'm goin' to
tell you."

He stopped, as if to let this sink in. Brown nodded again. "All right,"
he observed, carelessly; "go on and tell me; I'm listening."

"Your job around the lights you know already, part of it. But there's
somethin' else. Whenever men folks come here, I'll do my share
of showin' the place off. But when women come--women, you
understand--you've got to be guide. I'll forgive you to-day's doin's. I
tried to play a joke on you, and you evened it up with a better one on
me. That's all right. But, after this, showin' the lights to females is
your job, and you've got to do it--or get out. No hard feelin's at all,
and I'd really hate to lose you, but THAT'S got to be as I say."

He rose, evidently considering the affair settled. Brown caught his coat
and pulled him back to the bench.

"Wait, Atkins," he said. "I'm grateful to you for your kindness, I like
you and I'd like to please you; but if what you say is final, then--as
they used to say in some play or other--'I guess you'll have to hire
another boy.'"

"What? You mean you'll quit?"

"Rather than do that--yes."

"But why?"

"For reasons, as I told you. By the way, you haven't told me why you
object to acting as guide to--females."

"Because they are females. They're women, darn 'em!"

Before his helper could comment on this declaration, it was repeated.
The lightkeeper shook both his big fists in the air.

"Darn 'em! Darn all the women!" shouted Seth Atkins.

"Amen," said John Brown, devoutly.

Seth's fists dropped into his lap. "What?" he cried; "what did you say?"

"I said Amen."

"But--but . . . why . . . you didn't mean it!"

"Didn't I?" bitterly. "Humph!"

Seth breathed heavily, started to speak once more, closed his lips on
the words, rose, walked away a few paces, returned, and sat down.

"John Brown," he said, solemnly, "if you're jokin', the powers forgive
you, for I won't. If you ain't, I--I . . . See here, do you remember
what you asked me that night when you struck me for the assistant
keeper's job? You asked me if I was married?"

Brown assented wonderingly. "Why, yes," he said, "I believe I did."

"You did. And I ain't been so shook up for many a day. Young feller,
I'm goin' to tell you what no other man in Ostable County knows. I AM
married. I've got a wife livin'."




CHAPTER VII

OUT OF THE BAG


"I'm married, and I've got a wife livin'," continued Seth; adding
hurriedly and fiercely, "don't you say nothin' to me! Don't you put me
out. I'm goin' to tell you! I'm goin' to tell you all of it--all, by
time! I am, if I die for it."

He was speaking so rapidly that the words were jumbled together. He
knocked his hat from his forehead with a blow of his fist and actually
panted for breath. Brown had never before seen him in this condition.

"Hold on! Wait," he cried. "Atkins, you needn't do this; you mustn't. I
am asking no questions. We agreed to--"

"Hush up!" Seth waved both hands in the air. "DON'T you talk! Let me get
this off my chest. Good heavens alive, I've been smotherin' myself
with it for years, and, now I've got started, I'll blow off steam or my
b'iler'll bust. I'm GOIN' to tell you. You listen--

"Yes, sir, I'm a married man," he went on. "I wa'n't always married, you
understand. I used to be single once. Once I was single; see?"

"I see," said Brown, repressing a smile.

Seth was not aware that there was anything humorous in his statement.

"Yes," he said, "I was single and--and happy, by jiminy! I was skipper
of a mack'rel schooner down Cape Ann way, never mind where, and Seth
Atkins is only part of my name; never mind that, neither. I sailed that
schooner and I run that schooner--I RUN her; and when I said 'boo' all
hands aboard jumped, I tell you. When I've got salt water underneath me,
I'm a man. But I told you that afore.

"However, this is what I didn't tell you nor nobody else in this part of
the state: I stayed single till I got to be past forty. Everybody set me
down as an old bach. Then I met a woman; yes, sir, I met a woman."

He made this assertion as if it was something remarkable. His companion
on the bench made no comment.

"She was a widow woman," went on Seth, "and she had a little property
left her by her first husband. Owned a house and land, she did, and had
some money in the bank. Some folks cal'lated I married her for that, but
they cal'lated wrong. I wanted her for herself. And I got her. Her name
was Emeline. I always thought Emeline was a sort of pretty name."

He sighed. Brown observed that Emeline was a very pretty name, indeed.

"Um-hm. That's what I thought, and Emeline was a real pretty woman, for
her age and heft--she was fleshy. She had some consider'ble prejudice
against my goin' to sea, so I agreed to stay on shore a spell and farm
it, as you might say. We lived in the house she owned and was real happy
together. She bossed me around a good deal, but I didn't mind bein'
bossed by her. 'Twas a change, you see, for I'd always been used to
bossin' other folks. So I humored her. And, bein' on land made me lose
my--my grip or somethin'; 'cause I seemed to forget how to boss. But we
was happy, and then--then Bennie D. come. Consarn him!"

His teeth shut with a snap, and he struck his knee with his fist.
"Consarn him!" he repeated, and was silent.

The substitute assistant ventured to jog his memory.

"Who was Bennie D.?" he asked.

"What? Hey? Bennie D.? Oh, he was her brother-in-law, her husband's
brother from up Boston way. He was a genius--at least, he said he
was--and an inventor. The only invention I ever could l'arn he'd
invented to a finish was how to live without workin', but he'd got that
brought to a science. However, he was forever fussin' over some kind of
machine that was sartin sure to give power to the universe, when 'twas
done, and Emeline's husband--his name was Abner--thought the world and
all of him. 'Fore he died he made Emeline promise to always be kind to
Bennie D., and she said she would. Abner left him a little money, and he
spent it travelin' 'for his health.' I don't know where he traveled
to, but, wherever 'twas, the health must have been there. He was the
healthiest critter ever I see--and the laziest.

"Well, his travels bein' over, down he comes to make his sister-in-law
a little visit. And he stays on and stays on. He never took no shine
to me--I judge he figgered I hadn't no business sharin' Abner's
property--and I never took to him, much.

"Emeline noticed Bennie D. and me wa'n't fallin' on each other's necks
any to speak of, and it troubled her. She blamed me for it. Said Bennie
was a genius, and geniuses had sensitive natures and had to be treated
with consideration and different from other folks. And that promise to
Abner weighed on her conscience, I cal'late. Anyhow, she petted that
blame inventor, and it made me mad. And yet I didn't say much--not so
much as I'd ought to, I guess. And Bennie D. was always heavin' out
little side remarks about Emeline's bein' fitted for better things than
she was gettin', and how, when his invention was 'perfected,' HE'D see
that she didn't slave herself to death, and so on and so on. And he had
consider'ble to say about folks tryin' to farm when they didn't know
a cucumber from a watermelon, and how 'farmin'' was a good excuse for
doin' nothin', and such. And I didn't have any good answer to that,
'cause I do know more about seaweed than I do cucumbers, and the farm
wasn't payin' and I knew it.

"If he'd said these things right out plain, I guess likely I'd have give
him what he deserved. But he didn't; he just hinted and smiled and acted
superior and pityin'. And if I got mad and hove out a little sailor talk
by accident, he'd look as sorry and shocked as the Come-Outer parson
does when there's a baby born to a Universalist family. He'd get up
and shut the door, as if he was scart the neighbors' morals would
suffer--though the only neighbor within hearin' was an old critter that
used to run a billiard saloon in Gloucester, and HIS morals had been
put out of their misery forty years afore--and he'd suggest that Emeline
better leave the room, maybe. And then I'd feel ashamed and wouldn't
know what to do, and 'twould end, more'n likely, by my leavin' it
myself.

"You can see how matters was driftin'. I could see plain enough, and I
cal'late Emeline could, too--I'll give her credit for that. She didn't
begin to look as happy as she had, and that made me feel worse than
ever. One time, I found her cryin' in the wash room, and I went up and
put my arm round her.

"'Emeline,' I says, 'don't; please don't. Don't cry. I know I ain't the
husband I'd ought to be to you, but I'm doin' my best. I'm tryin' to do
it. I ain't a genius,' I says.

"She interrupted me quick, sort of half laughin' and half cryin'. 'No,
Seth,' says she, 'you ain't, that's a fact.'

"That made me sort of mad. 'No, I ain't,' I says again; 'and if you ask
me, I'd say one in the house was enough, and to spare.'

"'I know you don't like Bennie,' she says.

"''Taint that,' says I, which was a lie. 'It ain't that,' I says; 'but
somehow I don't seem to fit around here. Bennie and me, we don't seem to
belong together.'

"'He is Abner's brother,' she says, 'and I promised Abner. I can't tell
him to go. I can't tell him to leave this house, his brother's house.'

"Now, consarn it, there was another thing. It WAS Abner's house, or
had been afore he died, and now 'twas hers. If I ever forgot that fact,
which wa'n't by no means likely to happen, Bennie D. took occasions
enough to remind me of it. So I was set back again with my canvas
flappin', as you might say.

"'No,' says I, 'course you can't. He's your brother-in-law.'

"'But you are my husband,' she says, lookin' at me kind of queer.
Anyhow, it seems kind of queer to me now. I've thought about that look
a good deal since, and sometimes I've wondered if--if . . . However,
that's all past and by.

"'Yes,' I says, pretty average bitter, 'but second husbands don't count
for much.'

"'Some of 'em don't seem to, that's a fact,' she says.

"'By jiminy,' I says, 'I don't count for much in this house.'

"'Yes?' says she. 'And whose fault is that?'

"Well, I WAS mad. 'I tell you what I CAN do,' I sings out. 'I can quit
this landlubber's job where I'm nothin' but a swab, and go to sea again,
where I'm some account. That's what I can do.'

"She turned and looked at me.

"'You promised me never to go to sea again, she says.

"'Humph!' says I; 'some promises are hard to keep.'

"'I keep mine, hard or not,' says she. 'Would you go away and leave me?'

"'You've got Brother Bennie,' says I. 'He's a genius; I ain't nothin'
but a man.'

"She laughed, pretty scornful. 'Are you sartin you're that?' she wanted
to know.

"'Not since I been livin' here, I ain't,' I says. And that ended that
try of makin' up.

"And from then on it got worse and worse. There wan't much comfort at
home where the inventor was, so I took to stayin' out nights. Went down
to the store and hung around, listenin' to fools' gabble, and wishin'
I was dead. And the more I stayed out, the more Bennie D. laughed and
sneered and hinted. And then come that ridic'lous business about Sarah
Ann Christy. That ended it for good and all."

Seth paused in his long story and looked out across the starlit sea.

"Who was Sarah Ann?" asked Brown. The lightkeeper seemed much
embarrassed.

"She was a born fool," he declared, with emphasis; "born that way and
been developin' extry foolishness ever since. She was a widow, too; been
good lookin' once and couldn't forget it, and she lived down nigh the
store. When I'd be goin' down or comin' back, just as likely as not she
was settin' on the piazza, and she'd hail me. I didn't want to stop and
talk to her, of course."

"No, of course not."

"Well, I DIDN'T. And I didn't HAVE to talk. Couldn't if I wanted to;
she done it all. Her tongue was hung on ball-bearin' hinges and was
a self-winder guaranteed to run an hour steady every time she set it
goin'. Talk! my jiminy crimps, how that woman could talk! I couldn't
get away; I tried to, but, my soul, she wouldn't let me. And, if 'twas a
warm night, she'd more'n likely have a pitcher of lemonade or some sort
of cold wash alongside, and I must stop and taste it. By time, I can
taste it yet!

"Well, there wa'n't no harm in her at all; she was just a fool that had
to talk to somebody, males preferred. But my stayin' out nights wasn't
helpin' the joyfulness of things to home, and one evenin'--one evenin'
. . . Oh, there! I started to tell you this and I might's well get it
over.

"This evenin' when I came home from the store I see somethin' was extry
wrong soon's I struck the settin' room. Emeline was there, and Bennie
D., and I give you my word, I felt like turnin' up my coat collar, 'twas
so frosty. 'Twas hotter'n a steamer's stoke-hole outside, but that room
was forty below zero.

"Nobody SAID nothin', you know--that was the worst of it; but I'd have
been glad if they had. Finally, I said it myself. 'Well, Emeline,' says
I, 'here I be.'

"No answer, so I tried again. 'Well, Emeline,' says I, 'I've fetched
port finally.'

"She didn't answer me then, but Bennie D. laughed. He had a way of
laughin' that made other folks want to cry--or kill him. For choice I'd
have done the killin' first.

"'More nautical conversation, sister,' says he. 'He knows how fond you
are of that sort of thing.'

"You see, Emeline never did like to hear me talk sailor talk; it
reminded her too much that I used to be a sailor, I s'pose. And that
inventor knew she didn't like it, and so he rubbed it in every time I
made a slip. 'Twas just one of his little ways; he had a million of 'em.

"But I tried once more. 'Emeline,' I says, 'I'm home. Can't you speak to
me?'

"Then she looked at me. 'Yes, Seth,' says she, 'I see you are home.'

"'At last,' put in brother-in-law, '"There is no place like home"--when
the other places are shut up.' And he laughed again.

"'Stop, Bennie,' says Emeline, and he stopped. That was another of his
little ways--to do anything she asked him. Then she turned to me.

"'Seth,' she asks, 'where have you been?'

"'Oh, down street,' says I, casual. 'It's turrible warm out.'

"She never paid no attention to the weather signals. 'Where 'bouts down
street?' she wanted to know.

"'Oh, down to the store,' I says.

"'You go to the store a good deal, don't you,' says she. Bennie D.
chuckled, and then begged her pardon. That chuckle stirred my mad up.

"'I go where folks seem to be glad to see me,' I says. 'Where they treat
me as if I was somebody.'

"'So you was at the store the whole evenin'?' she asks.

"'Course I was,' says I. 'Where else would I be?'

"She looked at me hard, and her face sort of set. She didn't answer,
but took up the sewin' in her lap and went to work on it. I remember she
dropped it once, and Bennie D. jumped to pick it up for her, quick as a
wink. I set down in the rockin' chair and took the Gloucester paper. But
I didn't really read. The clock ticked and ticked, and 'twas so still
you could hear every stroke of the pendulum. Finally, I couldn't stand
it no longer.

"'What on earth is the matter?' I sings out. 'What have I done this
time? Don't you WANT me to go to the store? Is that it?'

"She put down her sewin'. 'Seth,' says she, quiet but awful cold, 'I
want you to go anywheres that you want to go. I never'll stand in your
way. But I want you tell the truth about it afterwards.'

"'The truth?' says I. 'Don't I always tell you the truth?'

"'No,' says she. 'You've lied to me tonight. You've been callin' on the
Christy woman, and you know it.'

"Well, you could have knocked me down with a baby's rattle. I'd forgot
all about that fool Sarah Ann. I cal'late I turned nineteen different
shades of red, and for a minute I couldn't think of a word to say. And
Bennie D. smiled, wicked as the Old Harry himself.

"'How--how did you--how do you know I see Sarah Ann Christy?' I hollered
out, soon's I could get my breath.

"'Because you were seen there,' says she.

"'Who see me?'

"'I did,' says she. 'I went down street myself, on an errand, and, bein'
as you weren't here to go with me, Bennie was good enough to go. It
ain't pleasant for a woman to go out alone after dark, and--and I have
never been used to it,' she says.

"That kind of hurt me and pricked my conscience, as you may say.

"'You know I'd been tickled to death to go with you, Emeline,' I says.
'Any time, you know it. But you never asked me to go with you.'

"'How long has it been since you asked to go with me?' she says.

"'Do you really want me to go anywheres, Emeline?' says I, eager. 'Do
you? I s'posed you didn't. If you'd asked--'

"'Why should I always do the askin'? Must a wife always ask her husband?
Doesn't the husband ever do anything on his own responsibility? Seth,
I married you because I thought you was a strong, self-reliant man, who
would advise me and protect me and--'

"That cussed inventor bust into the talk right here. I cal'late he
thought twas time.

"'Excuse me, sister,' he says; 'don't humiliate yourself afore him.
Remember you and me saw him tonight, saw him with our own eyes, settin'
on a dark piazza with another woman. Drinkin' with her and--'

"'Drinkin'!' I yells.

"'Yes, drinkin',' says he, solemn. 'I don't wonder you are ashamed of
it.'

"'Ashamed! I ain't ashamed.'

"'You hear that, sister? NOW I hope you're convinced.'

"''Twa'n't nothin' but lemonade I was drinkin',' I hollers, pretty nigh
crazy. 'She asked me to stop and have a glass 'cause 'twas so hot. And
as for callin' on her, I wa'n't. I was just passin' by, and she sings
out what a dreadful night 'twas, and I said 'twas, too, and she says
won't I have somethin' cold to drink. That's all there was to it.'

"Afore Emeline could answer, Bennie comes back at me again.

"'Perhaps you'll tell us this was the first time you have visited her,'
he purrs.

"Well, that was a sockdolager, 'cause twa'n't the first time. I don't
know how many times 'twas. I never kept no account of 'em. Too glad to
get away from her everlastin' tongue-clackin'. But when 'twas put right
up to me this way, I--I declare I was all fussed up. I felt sick and I
guess I looked so. Emeline was lookin' at me and seemin'ly waitin' for
me to say somethin'; yet I couldn't say it. And Bennie D. laughed, quiet
but wicked.

"That laugh fixed me. I swung round and lit into him.

"'You mind your own business,' I roars. 'Ain't you ashamed, makin'
trouble with a man's wife in his own house?'

"'I was under the impression the house belonged to my sister-in-law,' he
says. And again I was knocked off my pins.

"'You great big loafer!' I yelled at him; 'settin' here doin' nothin'
but raisin' the divil generally! I--I--'

"He jumped as if I'd stuck a brad-awl into him. The shocked expression
came across his face again, and he runs to Emeline and takes her arm.

"'Sister, sister,' he says, quick, but gentle, 'this is no place for
you. Language like that is . . . there! there! don't you think you'd
better leave the room?'

"She didn't go. As I remember it now, it keeps comin' back to me that
she didn't go. She just stood still and looked at me. And then she says:
'Seth, why did you lie to me?'"

"'I didn't lie,' I shouts. 'I forgot, I tell you. I never thought that
windmill of a Christy woman was enough importance to remember. I didn't
lie to you--I never did. Oh, Emeline, you know I didn't. What's the
matter with you and me, anyway? We used to be all right and now we're
all wrong.'

"'One of us is,' says Bennie D. That was the final straw that choked the
camel.

"'Yes,' I says to him, 'that's right, one of us is, and I don't know
which. But I know this: you and I can't stay together in this house any
longer.'

"I can see that room now, as 'twas when I said that. Us three lookin' at
each other, and the clock a-tickin', and everything else still as still.
I choked, but I kept on.

"'I mean it,' I says. 'Either you clear out of this house or I do.'

"And, while the words was on my lips, again it came to me strong that it
wa'n't really my house at all. I turned to my wife.

"'Emeline,' says I, 'it's got to be. You must tell him to go, or else--'

"She'd been lookin' at me again with that kind of queer look in her
eyes, almost a hopeful look, seem's if 'twas, and yet it couldn't have
been, of course. Now she drawed a long breath.

"'I can't tell him to go, Seth,' says she. 'I promised to give him a
home as long as I had one.'

"I set my jaws together. 'All right,' I says; 'then I'M goin'. Good by.'

"And I went. Yes, sir, I went. Just as I was, without any hat or dunnage
of any kind. When I slammed the back door it seemed as if I heard her
sing out my name. I waited, but I guess I was mistaken, for she didn't
call it again. And--and I never set eyes on her since. No, sir, not
once."

The lightkeeper stopped. John Brown said nothing, but he laid a
hand sympathetically on the older man's shoulder. Seth shuddered,
straightened, and went on.

"I cleared out of that town that very night," he said. "Walked clear
into Gloucester, put up at a tavern there till mornin', and then took
the cars to Boston. I cal'lated fust that I'd ship as mate or somethin'
on a foreign voyage, but I couldn't; somehow I couldn't bring myself to
do it. You see, I'd promised her I wouldn't ever go to sea again, and
so--well, I was a dum idiot, I s'pose, but I wouldn't break the promise.
I knew the superintendent of lighthouses in this district, and I'd been
an assistant keeper when I was younger. I told him my yarn, and he told
me about this job. I changed my name, passed the examination and come
directly here. And here I've stayed ever since."

He paused again. Brown ventured to ask another question.

"And your--and the lady?" he asked. "Where is she?"

"I don't know. Livin' in her house back there on Cape Ann, I s'pose. She
was, last I knew. I never ask no questions. I want to forget--to forget,
by time! . . . Hi hum! . . . Well, now you know what nobody this side of
Boston knows. And you can understand why I'm willin' to be buried alive
down here. 'Cause a woman wrecked my life; I'm done with women; and to
this forsaken hole no women scarcely ever come. But, when they DO come,
you must understand that I expect you to show 'em round. After hearin'
what I've been through, I guess you'll be willin' to do that much for
me."

He rose, evidently considering the affair settled. Brown stroked his
chin.

"I'm sorry, Atkins," he observed, slowly; "and I certainly do sympathize
with you. But--but, as I said, 'I guess you'll have to hire another
boy!'"

"What? What do you mean?"

"I mean that you're not the only woman-hater on the beach."

"Hey? Has a woman given YOU the go by?"

"No. The other way around, if anything. Look here, Atkins! I'm not
in the habit of discussing my private affairs with acquaintances,
but you've been frank with me--and well, hang it! I've got to talk to
somebody. At least, I feel that way just now. Let's suppose a case.
Suppose you were a young fellow not long out of college--a young fellow
whose mother was dead and whose dad was rich, and head over heels in
money-making, and with the idea that his will was no more to be disputed
than a law of the Almighty. Just suppose that, will you?"

"Huh! Well, 'twill be hard supposin', but I'll try. Heave ahead."

"Suppose that you'd never been used to working or supporting yourself.
Had a position, a nominal one, in your dad's office but absolutely no
responsibility, all the money you wanted, and so on. Suppose because
your father wanted you to--and HER people felt the same--you had become
engaged to a girl, a nice enough girl, too, in her way. But, then
suppose that little by little you came to realize that her way wasn't
yours. You and she liked each other well enough, but the whole thing
was a family arrangement, a money arrangement, a perfectly respectable,
buy-and-sell affair. That and nothing else. And the more you thought
about it, the surer you felt that it was so. But when you told your
governor he got on his ear and sailed into you, and you sailed back,
until finally he swore that you should either marry that girl or he'd
throw you out of his house and office to root for yourself. What would
you do?"

"Hey? Land sakes! I don't know. I always HAD to root, so I ain't a
competent judge. Go on, you've got me interested."

"Well, I said I'd root, that's all. But I didn't have the nerve to go
and tell the girl. The engagement had been announced, and all that, and
I knew what a mess it would make for her. I sat in my room, among
the things I was packing in my grip to take with me, and thought and
thought. If I went to her there would be a scene. If I said I had been
disinherited she would want to know why--naturally. I had quarreled
with the governor--yes, but why? Then I should have to tell her the
real reason: I didn't want to marry her or anybody else on such a
bargain-counter basis. That seemed such a rotten thing to say, and she
might ask why it had taken me such a long time to find it out. No, I
just COULDN'T tell her that. So, after my think was over, I wrote her
a note saying that my father and I had had a disagreement and he
had chucked me out, or words to that effect. Naturally, under the
circumstances, marriage was out of the question, and I released her from
the engagement. Good by and good luck--or something similar. I mailed
the letter and left the town the next morning."

He paused. The lightkeeper made no comment. After a moment the young man
continued.

"I landed in Boston," he said, "full of conceit and high-minded ideas of
working my own way up the ladder. But in order to work up, you've got to
get at least a hand-hold on the bottom rung. I couldn't get it. Nobody
wanted a genteel loafer, which was me. My money gave out. I bought a
steamboat passage to another city, but I didn't have enough left to buy
a square meal. Then, by bull luck, I fell overboard and landed here. And
here I found the solution. I'm dead. If the governor gets soft-hearted
and gets private detectives on my trail, they'll find I disappeared
from that steamer, that's all. Drowned, of course. SHE'LL think so, too.
'Good riddance to bad rubbish' is the general verdict. I can stay here
a year or so, and then, being dead and forgotten, can go back to
civilization and hustle for myself. BUT a woman is at the bottom of my
trouble, and I never want to see another. So, if my staying here depends
upon my seeing them, I guess, as I've said twice already, 'you'll have
to hire another boy.'"

He, too, rose. Seth laid a big hand on his shoulder.

"Son," said the lightkeeper, "I'm sorry for you; I cal'late I know how
you feel. I like you fust-rate, and if it's a possible thing, I'll fix
it so's you can stay right here long's you want to. As for women folks
that do come--why, we'll dodge 'em if we can, and share responsibility
if we must. But there's one thing you've GOT to understand. You're
young, and maybe your woman hate'll wear off. If it does, out you go. I
can't have any sparkin' or lovemakin' around these premises."

The assistant snorted contemptuously.

"If ever you catch me being even coldly familiar with a female of any
age," he declared, "I hereby request that you hit me, politely, but
firmly, with that axe," pointing to the kindling hatchet leaning against
the door post.

Seth chuckled. "Good stuff!" he exclaimed. "And, for my part, if ever
you catch me gettin' confectionery with a woman, I . . . well, don't
stop to pray over me; just drown me, that's all I ask. It's a bargain.
Shake!"

So they shook, with great solemnity.




CHAPTER VIII

NEIGHBORS AND WASPS


And now affairs at the lights settled down into a daily routine in
which the lightkeeper and his helper each played his appointed part.
All mysteries now being solved, and the trust between them mutual and
without reserve, they no longer were on their guard in each other's
presence, but talked freely on all sorts of topics, and expressed their
mutual dislike of woman with frequency and point. No regular assistant
was appointed or seemed likely to be, for the summer, at least. Seth and
his friend, the superintendent, held another lengthy conversation over
the wire, and, while Brown's uncertain status remained the same, there
was a tacit understanding that, by the first of September, if the young
man was sufficiently "broken in," the position vacated by Ezra Payne
should be his--if he still wanted it.

"You may change your mind by that time," observed Seth. "This ain't no
place for a chap with your trainin', and I know it. It does well enough
for an old derelict like me, with nobody to care a hang whether he lives
or dies, but you're different. And even for me the lonesomeness of it
drives me 'most crazy sometimes. I've noticed you've been havin' blue
streaks more often than when you first came. I cal'late that by fall
you'll be headin' somewheres else, Mr. 'John Brown,'" with significant
emphasis upon the name.

Brown stoutly denied being "bluer" than usual, and his superior did not
press the point. Seth busied himself in his spare time with the work on
the Daisy M. and with his occasional trips behind Joshua to the village.
Brown might have made some of these trips, but he did not care to.
Solitude and seclusion he still desired, and there were more of these
than anything else at the Twin-Lights.

The lightkeeper experimented with no more dogs, but he had evidently not
forgotten the lifesaving man's warning concerning possible thieves, for
he purchased a big spring-lock in Eastboro and attached it to the door
of the boathouse on the little wharf. The lock was, at first, a good
deal more of a nuisance than an advantage, for the key was always being
forgotten or mislaid, and, on one occasion, the door blew shut with
Atkins inside the building, and he pounded and shrieked for ten minutes
before his helper heard him and descended to the rescue.

June crawled by, and July came. Crawled is the proper word, for John
Brown had never known days so long or weeks so unending as those of that
early summer. The monotony was almost never broken, and he began to find
it deadly. He invented new duties about the lights and added swimming
and walks up and down the beach to his limited list of recreations.

The swimming he especially enjoyed. The cove made a fine bathing place,
and the boathouse was his dressing room, though the fragrance of the
ancient fish nets stored within it was not that of attar of roses. A
cheap bathing suit was one of the luxuries Atkins had bought for him, by
request, in Eastboro. Seth bought the suit under protest, for he scoffed
openly at his helper's daily bath.

"I should think," the lightkeeper declared over and over again, "that
you'd had salt water soak enough to last you for one spell; a feller
that come as nigh drownin' as you done!"

Seth did not care for swimming; the washtub every Saturday night
furnished him with baths sufficient.

He was particular to warn his helper against the tide in the inlet: "The
cove's all right," he said, "but you want to look out and not try to
swim in the crick where it's narrow, or in that deep hole by the end of
the wharf, where the lobster car's moored. When the tide's comin' in or
it's dead high water, the current's strong there. On the ebb it'll snake
you out into the breakers sure as I'm settin' here tellin' you. The
cove's all right and good and safe; but keep away from the narrer part
of the crick."

Swimming was good fun, and walking, on pleasant days, was an aid in
shaking off depression; but, in spite of his denials and his attempts at
appearing contented, the substitute assistant realized that he was far
from that happy condition. He did not want to meet people, least of all
people of his own station in life--his former station. Atkins was a
fine chap, in his way; but . . . Brown was lonely . . . and when one
is lonely, one thinks of what might have been, and, perhaps, regrets.
Regrets, unavailing regrets, are the poorest companions possible.

The lightkeeper, too, seemed lonely, which, considering his years
of experience in his present situation, was odd. He explained his
loneliness one evening by observing that he cal'lated he missed the
painting chaps.

"What painting chaps?" asked Brown.

"Oh, them two young fellers that always used to come to the
cottage--what you call the bungalow--across the cove there, the ones I
told you about. They was real friendly, sociable young chaps, and I kind
of liked to have 'em runnin' in and out. Seems queer to have it July,
and they not here to hail me and come over to borrow stuff. And they was
forever settin' around under white sunshades, sloppin' paint onto paper.
I most wish they hadn't gone to Europe. I cal'late you'd have liked 'em,
too."

"Perhaps," said the helper, doubtfully.

"Oh, you would; no perhaps about it. It don't seem right to see the
bungalow all shuttered up and deserted this time of year. You'd have
liked to meet them young painters; they was your kind."

"Yes, I know. Perhaps that's why I shouldn't like to meet them."

"Hey? . . . Oh, yes, yes; I see. I never thought of that. But 'tain't
likely they'd know you; they hailed from Boston, not New York."

"How did you know I came from New York? I didn't tell you that."

"No, you didn't, that's a fact. But, you said you left the city where
you lived and came to Boston, so I sort of guessed New York. But that's
all right; I don't know and I don't care. Names and places you and me
might just as well not tell, even to each other. If we don't tell them,
we can answer 'don't know' to questions and tell the truth; hey?"

One morning about a week later, Brown, his dish washing and sweeping
done, was busy in the light-room at the top of the right hand tower,
polishing the brass of the lantern. The curtains were drawn on the
landward side, and those toward the sea open. Seth, having finished his
night watching and breakfast, was audibly asleep in the house. Brown
rubbed and polished leisurely, his thoughts far away, and a frown on his
face. For the thousandth time that week he decided that he was a loafer
and a vagabond, and that it would have been much better for himself,
and creation generally, if he had never risen after the plunge over the
steamer's rail.

He pulled the cloth cover over the glittering lantern and descended the
iron stair to the ground floor. When he emerged into the open air, he
heard a sound which made him start and listen. The sound was the distant
rattle of wheels from the direction of the village. Was another "picnic"
coming? He walked briskly to the corner of the house and peered down the
winding road. A carriage was in sight certainly, but it was going, not
coming. He watched it move further away each moment. Someone--not the
grocer or a tradesman--was driving to the village. But where had he
been, and who was he? Not Seth, for Seth was asleep--he could hear him.

The driver of the carriage, whoever he was, had not visited the lights.
And, as Atkins had said, there was nowhere else to go on that road.
Brown, puzzled, looked about him, at the sea, the lights, the house,
the creek, the cove, the bluff on the other side of the cove, the
bungalow--ah! the bungalow!

For the door of the bungalow was open, and one or two of the shutters
were down. The carriage had brought some person or persons to the
bungalow and left them there. Instantly, of course, Brown thought of the
artists from Boston. Probably they had changed their minds and decided
to summer at Eastboro after all. His frown deepened.

Then, from across the cove, from the bungalow, came a shrill scream,
a feminine scream. The assistant started, scarcely believing his ears.
Before he could gather his wits, a stout woman, with a checked apron in
her hand, rushed out of the bungalow door, looked about, saw him, and
waved the apron like a flag.

"Hi!" she screamed. "Hi, you! Mr. Lighthouseman! come quick! do please
come here quick and help us!"

There was but one thing to do, and Brown did it instinctively. He raced
through the beach grass, down the hill, in obedience to the call. As he
ran, he wondered who on earth the stout woman could be. Seth had said
that the artists did their own housekeeping.

"Hurry up!" shrieked the stout woman, dancing an elephantine fandango in
front of the bungalow. "Come ON!"

To run around the shore line of the cove would have taken a good deal of
time. However, had the tide been at flood there would have been no other
way--excepting by boat--to reach the cottage. But the tide was out, and
the narrowest portion of the creek, the stream connecting the cove with
the ocean, was but knee deep. Through the water splashed the substitute
assistant and clambered up the bank beyond.

"Quick!" screamed the woman. "They'll eat us alive!"

"Who? What?" panted Brown.

"Wasps! They're in there! The room's full of 'em. If there's one thing
on earth I'm scart of, it's . . . Don't stop to talk! Go IN!"

She indicated the door of a room adjoining the living room of the little
cottage. From behind the door came sounds of upsetting furniture and
sharp slaps. Evidently the artists were having a lively time. But they
must be curious chaps to be afraid of wasps. Brown opened the door and
entered, partly of his own volition, partly because he was pushed by the
stout woman. Then he gasped in astonishment.

The wasps were there, dozens of them, and they had built a nest in the
upper corner of the room. But they were not the astonishing part of the
picture. A young woman was there, also; a young woman with dark hair and
eyes, the sleeves of a white shirtwaist rolled above her elbows, and a
wet towel in her right hand. She was skipping lightly about the room,
slapping frantically at the humming insects.

"Mrs. Bascom," she panted, "don't stand there screaming. Get another
towel and--"

Then she turned and saw Brown. For an instant she, too, seemed
astonished. But only for an instant.

"Oh, I'm so glad you came!" she exclaimed. "Here! take this! you must
hit quick and HARD."

"This" was the towel. The assistant took it mechanically. The young lady
did not wait to give further orders. She rushed out of the room and shut
the door. Brown was alone with the wasps, and they were lively company.
When, at last, the battle was over, the last wasp was dead, the nest was
a crumpled gray heap over in the corner, and the assistant's brow was
ornamented with four red and smarting punctures, which promised to
shortly become picturesque and painful lumps. Rubbing these absently
with one hand, and bearing the towel in the other, he opened the door
and stepped out into the adjoining room.

The two women were awaiting him. He found them standing directly in
front of him as he emerged.

"Have you--have you killed them?" begged the younger of the pair.

"Be they all dead?" demanded the other.

Brown nodded solemnly. "I guess so," he said. "They seem to be."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" cried the dark haired girl. "I'm--we--are so much
obliged to you."

"If there's any critters on earth," declared the stout woman, "that I
can't stand, it's wasps and hornets and such. Mice, I don't mind--"

"I do," interrupted her companion with emphasis.

"But when I walked into that room and seen that nest in the corner I was
pretty nigh knocked over--and," she added, "it takes consider'ble to do
that to ME."

The assistant looked at her. "Yes," he said, absently, "I should think
it might. That is, I mean--I--I beg your pardon."

He paused and wiped his forehead with the towel. The young lady burst
into a peal of laughter, in which the stout woman joined. The laugh was
so infectious that even Brown was obliged to smile.

"I apologize," he stammered. "I didn't mean that exactly as it sounded.
I'm not responsible mentally--yet--I guess."

"I don't wonder." It was the stout woman who answered. The girl had
turned away and was looking out the window; her shoulders shook. "I
shouldn't think you would be. Hauled in bodily, as you might say, and
shut up in a room to fight wasps! And by folks you never saw afore and
don't know from Adam! You needn't apologize. I'd forgive you if you
said somethin' a good deal worse'n that. I'm long past the age where I'm
sensitive about my weight, thank goodness."

"And we ARE so much obliged to you." The girl was facing him once more,
and she was serious, though the corners of her mouth still twitched.
"The whole affair is perfectly ridiculous," she said, "but Mrs. Bascom
was frightened and so was I--when I had time to realize it. Thank you
again."

"You're quite welcome, I'm sure. No trouble at all."

The assistant turned to go. His brain was beginning to regain a little
of its normal poise, and he was dimly conscious that he had been absent
from duty quite long enough.

"Maybe you'd like to know who 'tis you've helped," observed the stout
woman. "And, considerin' that we're likely to be next-door neighbors
for a spell, I cal'late introductions are the proper thing. My name's
Bascom. I'm housekeeper for Miss Ruth Graham. This is Miss Graham."

The young lady offered a hand. Brown took it.

"Graham?" he repeated. "Where?" Then, remembering a portion of what Seth
had told him, he added, "I see! the--the artist?"

"My brother is an artist. He and his friend, Mr. Hamilton, own this
bungalow. They are abroad this summer, and I am going to camp here for a
few weeks--Mrs. Bascom and I. I paint a little, too, but only for fun."

Brown murmured a conventionality concerning his delight at meeting the
pair, and once more headed for the door. But Mrs. Bascom's curiosity
would not permit him to escape so easily.

"I thought," she said, "when I see you standin' over there by the
lights, that you must be one of the keepers. Not the head keeper--I
knew you wa'n't him--but an assistant, maybe. But I guess you're only a
visitor, Mister--Mister--?"

"Brown."

"Yes, Mr. Brown. I guess you ain't no keeper, are you?"

"I am the assistant keeper at present. Yes."

"You don't say!" Mrs. Bascom looked surprised. So, too, did Miss Graham.
"You don't look like a lighthouse keeper," continued the former. "Oh, I
don't mean your clothes!" noticing the young man's embarrassed glance at
his wet and far from immaculate garments. "I mean the way you talk and
act. You ain't been here long, have you?"

"No."

"Just come this summer?"

"Yes."

"I thought so. You ain't a Cape Codder?"

"No."

"I was sure you wa'n't. Where DO you come from?"

Brown hesitated. Miss Graham, noticing his hesitation, hastened to end
the inquisition.

"Mr. Brown can't stop to answer questions, Mrs. Bascom," she said. "I'm
sure he wants to get back to his work. Good morning, Mr. Brown. No doubt
we shall see each other often, being the only neighbors in sight. Call
again--do. I solemnly promise that you shall have to fight no more
wasps."

"Say!" The stout woman took a step forward. "Speakin' of wasps . . .
stand still a minute, Mr. Brown, won't you. What's them lumps on your
forehead? Why, I do believe you've been bit. You have, sure and sartin!"

Miss Graham was very much concerned. "Oh, no!" she exclaimed; "I hope
not. Let me see."

"No, indeed!" The assistant was on the step by this time and moving
rapidly. "Nothing at all. No consequence. Good morning."

He almost ran down the hill and crossed the creek at the wading place.
As he splashed through, the voice of the housekeeper reached his ears.

"Cold mud's the best thing," she screamed. "Put it on thick. It takes
out the smart. Good and thick, mind!"

For the next hour or two the lightkeeper's helper moved about his
household tasks in a curious frame of mind. He was thoroughly angry--or
thought he was--and very much disturbed. Neighbors of any kind were
likely to be a confounded nuisance, but two women! Heavens! And the
stout woman was sure to be running in for calls and to borrow things. As
for the other, she seemed a nice girl enough, but he never wanted to see
another girl, nice or otherwise. Her eyes were pretty, so was her hair,
but what of it? Oh, hang the luck! Just here he banged his swollen
forehead on the sharp edge of the door, and found relief in profanity.

Seth Atkins was profane, also, when he heard the news. Brown said
nothing until his superior discovered with his own eyes that the
bungalow was open. Then, in answer to the lightkeeper's questions, came
the disclosure of the truth.

"Women!" roared Seth. "You say there's two WOMEN goin' to live there? By
Judas! I don't believe it!"

"Go and see for yourself, then," was the brusque answer.

"I sha'n't, neither. Who told you?"

"They did."

"They DID? Was you there?"

"Yes."

"What for? I thought you swore never to go nigh a woman again."

"I did, but--well, it wasn't my fault. I--"

"Yes? Go on."

"I went because I couldn't help myself. Went to help some one else, in
fact. I expected to find Graham and that other artist. But--"

"Well, go ON."

"I was stung," said Mr. Brown, gloomily, and rubbed his forehead.




CHAPTER IX

THE BUNGALOW GIRL


During the following day the occupants of the lightkeeper's dwelling saw
little or nothing of the newcomers at the bungalow. Brown, his forehead
resembling a section of a relief map of the Rocky Mountains, remained
indoors as much as possible, working when there was anything to do, and
reading back-number magazines when there was not. Seth went, as usual,
to his room soon after noon. His slumbers must, however, have been
fitful ones, for several times the substitute assistant, turning
quickly, saw the bedroom door swing silently shut. The third time that
this happened he ran to the door and threw it open in season to catch
Mr. Atkins in an undignified dive for the bed. A tremendous snore
followed the dive. The young man regarded him in silence for a few
moments, during which the snores continued. Then he shook his head.

"Humph!" he soliloquized; "I must 'phone for the doctor at once. Either
the doctor or the superintendent. If he has developed that habit, he
isn't fit for this job."

He turned away. The slumberer stirred uneasily, rolled over, opened one
eye, and sat up.

"Hi!" he called. "Come back here! Where you goin'?"

Brown returned, looking surprised and anxious.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, "are you awake?"

"Course I'm awake! What a fool question that is. Think I'm settin' up
here and talkin' in my sleep?"

"Well, I didn't know."

"Why didn't you know? And, see here! what did you mean by sayin' you was
goin' to 'phone the doctor or the superintendent, one or t'other? Yes,
you said it. I heard you."

"Oh, no! you didn't."

"Tell you I did. Heard you with my own ears."

"But how could you? You weren't awake."

"Course I was awake! Couldn't have heard you unless I was, could I? What
ails you? Them stings go clear through to your brains, did they?"

Again Brown shook his head.

"This is dreadful!" he murmured. "He walks in his sleep, and snores when
he's awake. I MUST call the doctor."

"What--what--" The lightkeeper's wrath was interfering with his
utterance. He swung his legs over the side of the bed and sputtered
incoherently.

"Be calm, Atkins," coaxed the assistant. "Don't complicate your diseases
by adding heart trouble. Three times today I've caught you peeping at me
through the crack of that door. Within fifteen seconds of the last peep
I find you snoring. Therefore, I say--"

"Aw, belay! I was only--only just lookin' out to see what time it was."

"But you must have done it in your sleep, because--"

"I never. I was wide awake as you be."

"But why did you snore? You couldn't have fallen asleep between the door
and the bed. And you hadn't quite reached the bed when I got here."

"I--I--I--Aw, shut up!"

Brown smiled blandly. "I will," he said, "provided you promise to keep
this door shut and don't do any more spying."

"Spyin'? What do you mean by that?"

"Just what I said. You and I had a discussion concerning that same
practice when I fell over the bank at the Slough a while ago. I was not
spying then, but you thought I was, and you didn't like it. Now I think
you are, and I don't like it."

"Wh--what--what would I be spyin' on you for? Wh--what reason would I
have for doin' it?"

"No good reason; because I have no intention of visiting our new
neighbors--none whatever. That being understood, perhaps you'll shut the
door and keep it shut."

Seth looked sheepish and guilty.

"Well," he said, after a moment's reflection, "I beg your pardon. But
I couldn't help feelin' kind of uneasy. I--I ought to know better, I
s'pose; but, with a young, good-lookin' girl landed unexpected right
next to us, I--I--"

"How did you know she was good-looking? I didn't mention her looks."

"No, you didn't, but--but . . . John Brown, I've been young myself, and
I know that at your age most ANY girl's good-lookin'. There!"

He delivered this bit of wisdom with emphasis and a savage nod of the
head. Brown had no answer ready, that is, no relevant answer.

"You go to bed and shut the door," he repeated, turning to go.

"All right, I will. But don't you forget our agreement."

"I have no intention of forgetting it."

"What ARE you goin' to do?"

"Do? What do you mean?"

"I mean what are you goin' to do now that things down here's changed,
and you and me ain't alone, same as we was?"

"I don't know. I'm not sure that I sha'n't leave--clear out."

"What? Clear out? Run away and leave me alone to--to . . . By time! I
didn't think you was a deserter."

The substitute assistant laughed bitterly. "You needn't worry," he said.
"I couldn't go far, even if I wanted to. I haven't any money."

"That's so." Seth was evidently relieved. "All right," he observed;
"don't you worry. 'Twon't be but a couple of months anyway, and we'll
fight it through together. But ain't it a shame! Ain't it an everlastin'
shame that this had to happen just as we'd come to understand each other
and was so contented and friendly! Well, there's only one thing to do;
that's to make the best of it for us and the worst for them. We'll keep
to ourselves and pay no attention to em no more'n if they wa'n't
there. We'll forget 'em altogether; hey? . . . I say we'll forget 'em
altogether, won't we?"

Brown's answer was short and sharp.

"Yes," he said, and slammed the door behind him. Seth slowly shook his
head before he laid it on the pillow. He was not entirely easy in his
mind, even yet.

However, there was no more spying, and the lightkeeper did not mention
the bungalow tenants when he appeared at supper time. After the meal
he bolted to the lights, and was on watch in the tower when his helper
retired.

Early the next afternoon Brown descended the path to the boathouse. He
had omitted his swim the day before. Now, however, he intended to have
it. Simply because those female nuisances had seen fit to intrude where
they had no business was no reason why he should resign all pleasure. He
gave a quick glance upward at the opposite bank as he reached the wharf.
There was no sign of life about the bungalow.

He entered the boathouse, undressed, and donned his bathing suit. In a
few minutes he was ready, and, emerging upon the wharf, walked briskly
back along the shore of the creek to where it widened into the cove.
There he plunged in, and was soon luxuriating in the cool, clear water.

He swam with long, confident strokes, those of a practiced swimmer. This
was worth while. It was the one place where he could forget that he
was no longer the only son of a wealthy father, heir to a respected
name--which was NOT Brown--a young man with all sorts of brilliant
prospects; could forget that he was now a disinherited vagabond, a
loafer who had been unable to secure a respectable position, an outcast.
He swam and dove and splashed, rejoicing in his strength and youth and
the freedom of all outdoors.

Then, as he lay lazily paddling in deep water, he heard the rattle of
gravel on the steep bank of the other side of the cove. Looking up,
he saw, to his huge disgust, a female figure in a trim bathing suit
descending the bluff from the bungalow. It was the girl who had left
him to fight the wasps. Her dark hair was covered with a jauntily tied
colored handkerchief, and, against the yellow sand of the bluff, she
made a very pretty picture. Not that Brown was interested, but she did,
nevertheless.

She saw him and waved a hand. "Good morning," she called. "Beautiful day
for a swim, isn't it?"

"Yes," growled the young man, brusquely. He turned and began to swim in
the opposite direction, up the cove. The girl looked after him, raised a
puzzled eyebrow, and then, with a shrug, waded into the water. The next
time the assistant looked at her, she was swimming with long, sweeping
strokes down the narrow creek to the bend and the deep hole at the end
of the wharf. Round that bend and through that hole the tide whirled,
like a rapid, out into the miniature bay behind Black Man's Point. It
was against that tide that Seth Atkins had warned him.

And the girl was swimming directly toward the dangerous narrows. Brown
growled an exclamation of disgust. He had no mind to continue the
acquaintance, and yet he couldn't permit her to do that.

"Miss Graham!" he called. "Oh, Miss Graham!"

She heard him, but did not stop.

"Yes?" she called in answer, continuing to swim. "What is it?"

"You mustn't--" shouted Brown. Then he remembered that he must not
shout. Shouting might awaken the lightkeeper, and the latter would
misunderstand the situation, of course. So he cut his warning to one
word.

"Wait!" he called, and began swimming toward her. She did not come to
meet him, but merely ceased swimming and turned on her back to float.
And, floating, the tide would carry her on almost as rapidly as if she
assisted it. That tide did not need any assistance. Brown swung on his
side and settled into the racing stroke, the stroke which had won him
cups at the athletic club.

He reached her in a time so short that she was surprised into an
admiring comment.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, "you CAN swim!"

He did not thank her for the compliment. There was no time for that,
even if he had felt like it.

"You shouldn't be here," he said sharply.

She looked at him.

"Why, what do you mean?" she demanded.

"It isn't safe. A little farther, and the tide would carry you out to
sea. Come back, back up to the cove at once."

He expected her to ask more questions, but she did not. Instead she
turned and struck out in silence. Against the tide, even there, the pull
was tremendous.

"Shall I help you?" he asked.

"No, I can make it."

And she did. It was his turn to be surprised into admiration.

"By Jove!" he panted, as they swung into the quiet water of the cove and
stood erect in the shallows, "that was great! You are a good swimmer."

"Thank you," she answered, breathlessly. "It WAS a tug, wasn't it? Thank
you for warning me. Now tell me about the dangerous places, please."

He told her, repeating Seth's tales of the tide's strength.

"But it is safe enough here?" she asked.

"Oh, yes! perfectly safe anywhere this side of the narrow part--the
creek."

"I'm so glad. This water is glorious, and I began to be afraid I should
have to give it up."

"The creek, and even the bay itself are safe enough at flood," he went
on. "I often go there then. When the tide is coming in it is all right
even for--"

He paused. She finished the sentence for him. "Even for a girl, you were
going to say." She waded forward to where the shoal ended and the deeper
part began. There she turned to look at him over her shoulder.

"I'm going to that beach over there," she said, pointing across the
cove. "Do you want to race?"

Without waiting to see whether he did or not, she struck out for the
beach. And, without stopping to consider why he did it, the young man
followed her.

The race was not so one-sided. Brown won it by some yards, but he had to
work hard. His competitor did not give up when she found herself falling
behind, but was game to the end.

"Well," she gasped, "you beat me, didn't you? I never could get that
side stroke, and it's ever so much faster."

"It's simple enough. Just a knack. I'll teach you if you like."

"Will you? That's splendid."

"You are the strongest swimmer, Miss Graham, for a girl, that I ever
saw. You must have practiced a great deal."

"Yes, Horace--my brother--taught me. He is a splendid swimmer, one of
the very best."

"Horace Graham? Why, you don't mean Horace Graham of the Harvard
Athletic?"

"Yes, I do. He is my brother. But how . . . Do you know him?"

The surprise in her tone was evident. Brown bit his lip. He remembered
that Cape Cod lightkeepers' helpers were not, as a usual thing, supposed
to be widely acquainted in college athletic circles.

"I have met him," he stammered.

"But where--" she began; and then, "why, of course! you met him here. I
forgot that he has been your neighbor for three summers."

The assistant had forgotten it, too, but he was thankful for the
reminder.

"Yes. Yes, certainly," he said. She regarded him with a puzzled look.

"It's odd he didn't mention you," she observed. "He has told me a great
deal about the bungalow, and the sea views, and the loneliness and the
quaintness of it all. That was what made me wish to spend a month
down here and experience it myself. And he has often spoken," with an
irrepressible smile, "of your--of the lightkeeper, Mr. Atkins. That is
his name, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"I want to meet him. Horace said he was--well, rather odd, but, when you
knew him, a fine fellow and full of dry humor. I'm sure I should like
him."

Brown smiled, also--and broadly. He mentally pictured Seth's reception
of the news that he was "liked" by the young lady across the cove. And
then it occurred to him, with startling suddenness, that he had been
conversing very familiarly with that young lady, notwithstanding the
solemn interchange of vows between the lightkeeper and himself.

"I must be going," he said hastily; "good morning, Miss Graham."

He waded to the shore and strode rapidly back toward the boathouse. His
companion called after him.

"I shall expect you to-morrow afternoon," she said. "You've promised to
teach me that side stroke, remember."

Brown dressed in a great hurry and climbed the path to the lights at the
double quick. All was safe and serene in the house, and he breathed more
freely. Atkins was sound asleep, really asleep, in the bedroom, and when
he emerged he was evidently quite unaware of his helper's unpremeditated
treason. Brown's conscience pricked him, however, and he went to
bed that night vowing over and over that he would be more careful
thereafter. He would take care not to meet the Graham girl again. Having
reached this decision, there remained nothing but to put her out of his
mind entirely; which he succeeded in doing at a quarter after eleven,
when he fell asleep. Even then she was not entirely absent, for he
dreamed a ridiculous dream about her.

Next day he did not go for a swim, but remained in the house. Seth, at
supper, demanded to know what ailed him.

"You're as mum as the oldest inhabitant of a deaf and dumb asylum," was
the lightkeeper's comment. "And ugly as a bull in fly time. What ails
you?"

"Nothing."

"Humph! better take somethin' for it, seems to me. Little 'Stomach
Balm,' hey? No? Well, GO to bed! Your room's enough sight better'n your
company just now."

The helper's ill nature was in evidence again at breakfast time. Seth
endeavored to joke him out of it, but, not succeeding, and finding
his best jokes received with groans instead of laughter, gave it up in
disgust and retired. The young man cleared the table, piled the dishes
in the sink, heated a kettleful of water and began the day's drudgery,
drudgery which he once thought was fun.

Why had he had the ill luck to fall overboard from that steamer. Or
why didn't he drown when he did fall overboard? Then he would have been
comfortably dead, at all events. Why hadn't he stayed in New York or
Boston or somewhere and kept on trying for a position, for work--any
kind of work? He might have starved while trying, but people who were
starving were self-respecting, and when they met other people--for
instance, sisters of fellows they used to know--had nothing to be
ashamed of and needn't lie--unless they wanted to. He was a common
loafer, under a false name, down on a sandheap washing dishes. At this
point he dropped one of the dishes--a plate--and broke it.

"D--n!" observed John Brown, under his breath, but with enthusiasm.

He stooped to pick up the fragments of the plate, and, rising once more
to an erect position, found himself facing Miss Ruth Graham. She was
standing in the doorway.

"Don't mind me, please," she said. "No doubt I should feel the same way
if it were my plate."

The young man's first move, after recovery, was to make sure that the
door between the kitchen and the hall leading to the lightkeeper's
bedroom was shut. It was, fortunately. The young lady watched him in
silence, though her eyes were shining.

"Good morning, Mr. Brown," she observed, gravely.

The assistant murmured a good morning, from force of habit.

"There's another piece you haven't picked up," continued the visitor,
pointing.

Brown picked up the piece.

"Is Mr. Atkins in?" inquired the girl.

"Yes, he's--he's in."

"May I see him, please?"

"I--I--"

"If he's busy, I can wait." She seated herself in a chair. "Don't let me
interrupt you," she continued. "You were busy, too, weren't you?"

"I was washing dishes," declared Brown, savagely.

"Oh!"

"Yes. Washing and sweeping and doing scrubwoman's work are my regular
employments."

"Indeed! Then I'm just in time to help. Is this the dish towel?"
regarding it dubiously.

"It is, but I don't need any help, thank you."

"Of course you do. Everyone is glad to be helped at doing dishes. I may
as well make myself useful while I'm waiting for Mr. Atkins."

She picked up a platter and proceeded to wipe it, quite as a matter of
course. Brown, swearing inwardly, turned fiercely to the suds.

"Did you wish to see Atkins on particular business?" he asked, a moment
later.

"Oh, no; I wanted to make his acquaintance, that's all. Horace told me
so many interesting things about him. By the way, was it last summer, or
the summer before, that you met my brother here?"

No answer. Miss Graham repeated her question. "Was it last summer or the
summer before?" she asked.

"Oh--er--I don't remember. Last summer, I think."

"Why, you must remember. How could any one forget anything that happened
down here? So few things do happen, I should say. So you met him last
summer?"

"Yes."

"Hum! that's odd."

"Shall I call Atkins? He's in his room."

"I say it is odd, because, when Mrs. Bascom and I first met you, you
told us this was your first summer here."

There wasn't any answer to this; at least the assistant could think of
none at the moment.

"Do you wish me to call Atkins?" he asked, sharply. "He's asleep, but I
can wake him."

"Oh! he's asleep. Now I understand why you whisper even when you
sw--that is, when you break a plate. You were afraid of waking him. How
considerate you are."

Brown put down the dishcloth. "It isn't altogether consideration for
him--or for myself," he said grimly. "I didn't care to wake him unless
you took the responsibility."

"Why?"

"Because, Miss Graham, Seth Atkins took the position of lightkeeper here
almost for the sole reason that no women ever came here. Mr. Atkins is a
woman-hater of the most rabid type. I'll wake him up if you wish, but I
won't be responsible for the consequences."

The young lady stared at him in surprise, delighted surprise apparently,
judging by the expression of her face.

"A woman-hater?" she repeated. "Is he really?"

"He is." Mr. Brown neglected to add that he also had declared himself a
member of the same fraternity. Perhaps he thought it was not necessary.

"A woman-hater!" Miss Graham fairly bubbled with mischievous joy. "Oh,
jolly! now I'm CRAZY to meet him!"

The assistant moved toward the hall door. "Very good!" he observed with
grim determination. "I think he'll cure your lunacy."

His hand was outstretched toward the latch, when the young lady spoke
again.

"Wait a minute," she said. "Perhaps I had better not wake him now."

"Just as you say. The pleasure is--or will be--entirely mine, I assure
you."

"No--o. On the whole, I think I'll wait until later. I may call again.
Good morning."

She moved across the threshold. Then, standing on the mica slab which
was the step to the kitchen door, she turned to say:

"You didn't swim yesterday."

"No--o. I--I was busy."

"I see."

She paused, as if expecting him to say something further on the subject.
He was silent. Her manner changed.

"Good morning," she said, coldly, and walked off. The assistant watched
her as she descended the path to the cove, but she did not once look
back. Brown threw himself into a chair. He had never hated anyone as
thoroughly as he hated himself at the moment.

"What a cheerful liar she must think I am," he reflected. "She caught me
in that fool yarn about meeting her brother here last summer; and now,
after deliberately promising to teach her that stroke, I don't go near
her. What a miserable liar she must think I am! And I guess I am. By
George, I can't be such a cad. I've got to make good somehow. I must
give her ONE lesson. I must."

The tide served for bathing about three that afternoon. At ten minutes
before that hour the substitute assistant keeper of Eastboro Twin-Lights
tiptoed silently to the bedroom of his superior and peeped in. Seth was
snoring peacefully. Brown stealthily withdrew. At three, precisely, he
emerged from the boathouse on the wharf, clad in his bathing suit.

Fifteen minutes after three, Seth Atkins, in his stocking feet and with
suspicion in his eye, crept along the path to the edge of the bluff.
Crouching behind a convenient sand dune he raised his head and peered
over it.

Below him was the cove, its pleasant waters a smooth, deep blue,
streaked and bordered with pale green. But the water itself did not
interest Seth. In that water was his helper, John Brown, of nowhere in
particular, John Brown, the hater of females, busily engaged in teaching
a young woman to swim.

Atkins watched this animated picture for some minutes. Then, carefully
crawling back up to the path until he was well out of possible sight
from the cove, he rose to his feet, raised both hands, and shook their
clenched fists above his head.

"The liar!" grated Mr. Atkins, between his teeth. "The traitor! The
young blackguard! After tellin' me that he . . . And after my doin'
everything for him that . . . Oh, by Judas, wait! only wait till he
comes back! I'LL l'arn him! I'LL show him! Oh, by jiminy crimps!"

He strode toward the doorway of the kitchen. There he stopped short.
A woman was seated in the kitchen rocker; a stout woman, with her back
toward him. The room, in contrast to the bright sunshine without, was
shadowy, and Seth, for an instant, could see her but indistinctly.
However, he knew who she must be--the housekeeper at the
bungalow--"Basket" or "Biscuit" his helper had said was her name, as
near as he could remember it. The lightkeeper ground his teeth. Another
female! Well, he would teach this one a few things!

He stepped across the threshold.

"Ma'am," he began, sharply, "perhaps you'll tell me what you--"

He stopped. The stout woman had, at the sound of his step, risen from
the chair, and turned to face him. And now she was staring at him, her
face almost as white as the stone-china cups and saucers on the table.

"Why . . . why . . . SETH!" she gasped.

The lightkeeper staggered back until his shoulders struck the doorpost.

"Good Lord!" he cried; "good . . . LORD! Why--why--EMELINE!"

For over a minute the pair stared at each other, white and speechless.
Then Mrs. Bascom hurried to the door, darted out, and fled along the
path around the cove to the bungalow. Atkins did not follow her; he did
not even look in the direction she had taken. Instead, he collapsed in
the rocking-chair and put both hands to his head.




CHAPTER X

THE BUNGALOW WOMAN


When, an hour later, the swimming teacher, his guilty conscience
pricking him, and the knowledge of having been false to his superior
strong within him, came sneaking into the kitchen, he was startled and
horrified to find the lightkeeper awake and dressed. Mentally he braced
himself for the battery of embarrassing questions which, he felt sure,
he should have to answer. It might be that he must face something more
serious than questions. Quite possible Seth, finding him absent, had
investigated--and seen. Well, if he had, then he had, that was all. The
murder would be out, and Eastboro Twin-Lights would shortly be shy a
substitute assistant keeper.

But there were no embarrassing questions. Atkins scarcely noticed
him. Seated in the rocker, he looked up as the young man entered, and
immediately looked down again. He seemed to be in a sort of waking dream
and only dimly conscious of happenings about him.

"Hello!" hailed the assistant, with an assumption of casual
cheerfulness.

"Hey? Oh! how be you?" was Mr. Atkins's reply.

"I've been for my dip," explained Brown. "The water was fine to-day."

"Want to know!"

"You're up early, aren't you?"

"Hey? Yes, I guess likely I be."

"What's wrong? Not sick, are you?"

"No. Course I ain't sick. Say!" Seth seemed to take a sudden interest in
the conversation, "you come straight up from the cove, have you?"

"Yes. Why?"

"You ain't been hangin' around outside here, have you?"

"Hanging around outside? What do you mean?"

"Nothin'. Why do you stand there starin' at me as if I was some sort of
dime show curiosity? Anything queer about me?"

"No. I didn't know I was staring." The young man was bewildered by
this strange behavior. He was prepared for suspicion concerning his own
actions; but Seth seemed rather to be defending himself from suspicion
on the part of his helper.

"Humph!" The lightkeeper looked keenly at him for a moment. Then he
said:

"Well, ain't there nothin' to do but stand around? Gettin' pretty nigh
to supper time, ain't it? Put the kettle on and set the table."

It was not supper time, but Brown obeyed orders. Seth went to cooking.
He spoke perhaps three words during the culinary operations, and a half
dozen more during the meal, of which he ate scarcely a mouthful. After
it was over, he put on his cap and went out, not to his usual lounging
spot, the bench, but to walk a full half mile along the edge of the
bluff and there sit in the seclusion of a clump of bayberry bushes
and gaze stonily at nothing in particular. Here he remained until the
deepening dusk reminded him that it was time the lights were burning.
Returning, he lit the lanterns and sat down in the room at the top of
the left-hand tower to think, and think, and think.

The shadows deepened; the last flush of twilight faded from the western
sky; the stars came out; night and the black silence of night shrouded
Eastboro Twin-Lights. The clock in the tower room ticked on to nine and
then to ten. Still Seth sat, a huddled, dazed figure in the camp chair,
by the great lantern. At last he rose and went out on the iron balcony.
He looked down at the buildings below him; they were black shapes
without a glimmer. Brown had evidently gone to bed. In the little stable
Joshua thumped the side of his stall once or twice--dreaming, perhaps,
that he was again pursued by the fly-papered Job--and subsided. Atkins
turned his gaze across the inlet. In the rear window of the bungalow a
dim light still burned. As he watched, it was extinguished. He groaned
aloud, and, with his arms on the railing, thought and thought.

Suddenly he heard sounds, faint, but perceptible, above the low grumble
of the surf. They were repeated, the sounds of breaking sticks, as if
some one was moving through the briers and bushes beyond the stable.
Some one was moving there, coming along the path from the upper end of
the cove. Around the corner of the stable a bulky figure appeared. It
came on until it stood beneath the balcony.

"Seth," called a low voice; "Seth, are you there?"

For a moment the agitated lightkeeper could not trust his voice to
answer.

"Seth," repeated the voice; "Seth."

The figure was moving off in the direction of the other tower. Then Seth
answered.

"Here--here I be," he stammered, in a hoarse whisper. "Who is it?"

He knew who it was, perfectly well; the question was quite superfluous.

"It's me," said the voice. "Let me in, I've got to talk to you."

Slowly, scarcely certain that this was not a part of some dreadful
nightmare, Seth descended the iron ladder to the foot of the tower,
dragged his faltering feet to the door, and slowly swung it open. The
bulky figure entered instantly.

"Shut the door," said Mrs. Bascom.

"Hey? What?" stammered Seth.

"I say, shut that door. Hurry up! Land sakes, HURRY! Do you suppose I
want anybody to know I'm here?"

The lightkeeper closed the door. The clang reverberated through the
tower like distant thunder. The visitor started nervously.

"Mercy!" she exclaimed; "what a racket! What made you slam it?"

"Didn't," grumbled Seth. "Any kind of a noise sounds up in here."

"I should think as much. It's enough to wake the dead."

"Ain't nobody BUT the dead to wake in this place."

"Yes, there is; there's that young man of yours, that Brown one. He
ain't dead, is he?"

"Humph! he's asleep, and that's next door to dead--with him."

"Well, I'm glad of it. My nerves are pretty steady as a general thing,
but I declare I'm all of a twitter to-night--and no wonder. It's darker
than a pocket in here. Can't we have a light?"

Atkins stumbled across the stone floor and took the lantern from
the hook by the stairs. He struck a match, and it went out; he tried
another, with the same result. Mrs. Bascom fidgeted.

"Mercy on us!" she cried; "what DOES ail the thing?"

Seth's trembling fingers could scarcely hold the third match. He raked
it across the whitewashed wall and broke the head short off.

"Thunder to mighty!" he snarled, under his breath.

"But what DOES--"

"What does? What do you s'pose? You ain't the only one that's got
nerves, are you?"

The next trial was successful, and the lantern was lighted. With it in
his hand, he turned and faced his caller. They looked at each other.
Mrs. Bascom drew a long breath.

"It is you," she said. "I couldn't scarcely believe it. It is really
you."

Seth's answer was almost a groan. "It's you," he said. "You--down here."

This ended the conversation for another minute. Then the lady seemed to
awake to the realities of the situation.

"Yes," she said, "it's me--and it's you. We're here, both of us. Though
why on earth YOU should be, I don't know."

"Me? Me? Why, I belong here. But you--what in time sent you here?
Unless," with returning suspicion, "you came because I--"

He paused, warned by the expression on his caller's face.

"What was that?" she demanded.

"Nothin'."

"Nothin', I guess. If you was flatterin' yourself with the idea that I
came here to chase after you, you never was more mistaken in your life,
or ever will be. You set down. You and I have got to talk. Set right
down."

The lightkeeper hesitated. Then he obeyed orders by seating himself on
an oil barrel lying on its side near the wall. The lantern he placed on
the floor at his feet. Mrs. Bascom perched on one of the lower steps of
the iron stairs.

"Now," she said, "we've got to talk. Seth Bascom--"

Seth started violently.

"What is it?" asked the lady. "Why did you jump like that? Nobody
comin', is there?"

"No. No . . . But I couldn't help jumpin' when you called me that name."

"That name? It's your name, isn't it? Oh," she smiled slightly; "I
remember now. You've taken the name of Atkins since we saw each other
last."

"I didn't take it; it belonged to me. You know my middle name. I just
dropped the Bascom, that's all."

"I see. Just as you dropped--some other responsibilities. Why didn't
you drop the whole christenin' and start fresh? Why did you hang on to
'Seth'?"

The lightkeeper looked guilty. Mrs. Bascom's smile broadened. "I know,"
she went on. "You didn't really like to drop it all. It was too much of
a thing to do on your hook, and there wasn't anybody to tell you to do
it, and so you couldn't quite be spunky enough to--"

He interrupted her. "That wa'n't the reason," he said shortly.

"What was the reason?"

"You want to know, do you?"

"Yes, I do."

"Well, the 'Bascom' part wa'n't mine no more--not all mine. I'd given it
to you."

"O--oh! oh, I see. And you ran away from your name as you ran away from
your wife. I see. And . . . why, of course! you came down here to run
away from all the women. Miss Ruth said this mornin' she was told--I
don't know who by--that the lightkeeper was a woman-hater. Are you the
woman-hater, Seth?"

Mr. Atkins looked at the floor. "Yes, I be," he answered, sullenly. "Do
you wonder?"

"I don't wonder at your runnin' away; that I should have expected. But
there," more briskly, "this ain't gettin' us anywhere. You're here--and
I'm here. Now what's your idea of the best thing to be done, under the
circumstances?"

Seth shifted his feet. "One of us better go somewheres else, if you ask
me," he declared.

"Run away again, you mean? Well, I sha'n't run away. I'm Miss Ruth's
housekeeper for the summer. I answered her advertisement in the Boston
paper and we agreed as to wages and so on. I like her and she likes me.
Course if I'd known my husband was in the neighborhood, I shouldn't have
come here; but I didn't know it. Now I'm here and I'll stay my time out.
What are you goin' to do?"

"I'm goin' to send in my resignation as keeper of these lights. That's
what I'm goin' to do, and I'll do it to-morrow."

"Run away again?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Why? WHY? Emeline Bascom, do you ask me that?"

"I do, yes. See here, Seth, we ain't children, nor sentimental young
folks. We're sensible, or we'd ought to be. Land knows we're old enough.
I shall stay here and you ought to. Nobody knows I was your wife or that
you was my husband, and nobody needs to know it. We ain't even got
the same names. We're strangers, far's folks know, and we can stay
strangers."

"But--but to see each other every day and--"

"Why not? We've seen each other often enough so that the sight won't be
so wonderful. And we'll keep our bein' married a secret. I sha'n't boast
of it, for one."

"But--but to SEE each other--"

"Well, we needn't see each other much. Why, we needn't see each other
any, unless I have to run over to borrer somethin', same as neighbors
have to every once in a while. I can guess what's troublin' you; it's
young Brown. You've told him you're a woman-hater, haven't you?"

"Yes, I have."

"Humph! Is he one, too?"

The lightkeeper's mouth was twisted with a violent emotion. He
remembered his view of that afternoon's swimming lesson.

"He said he was," he snarled. "He pretends he is."

Mrs. Bascom smiled. "I want to know," she said. "Umph! I thought . . .
However, it's no matter. Perhaps he is. Anyhow he can pretend to be and
you can pretend to believe him. That'll be the easiest way, I guess. Of
course," she added, "I ain't tellin' you what to do with any idea that
you'll do it because I say so. The time for that is all past and gone.
But it seems to me that, for once in my life, I'd be man enough to stick
it out. I wouldn't run away again."

Seth did not answer. He scowled and stared at the circle of lantern
light on the stone floor. Mrs. Bascom rose from her seat on the stairs.

"Well," she observed, "I must be gettin' back to the house if I want to
get any sleep to-night. I doubt if I get much, for a body don't get over
a shock, such as I've had, in a minute. But I'm goin' to get over it
and I'm goin' to stay right here and do my work; I'm goin' to go through
with what seems to be my duty, no matter how hard it is. I've done it
afore, and I'll do it again. I've promised, and I keep my promises. Good
night."

She started toward the door. Her husband sprang from the oil barrel.

"Hold on," he cried; "you wait a minute. I've got somethin' to say."

She shook her head. "I can't wait," she said; "I've got to go."

"No, you ain't, neither. You can stay a spell longer, if you want to."

"Perhaps, but I don't want to."

"Why not? What are you afraid of?"

"Afraid! I don't know as I'm afraid of anything--that is," with a
contemptuous sniff, "nothin' I see around here."

"Then what are YOU runnin' away for?"

This was putting the matter in a new light. Mrs. Bascom regarded her
husband with wrathful amazement, which slowly changed to an amused
smile.

"Oh," she said, "if you think I'm runnin' away, why--"

"I don't see what else 'tis. If I ain't scart to have you here, I don't
see why you should be scart to stay. Set down on them stairs again; I
want to talk to you."

The lady hesitated an instant and then returned to her former seat. Seth
went back to his barrel.

"Emeline," he said. "I'll stay here on my job."

She looked surprised, but she nodded.

"I'm glad to hear it," she said. "I'm glad you've got that much spunk."

"Yup; well, I have. I came down here to get clear of everybody, women
most of all. Now the one woman that--that--"

"That you 'specially wanted to get clear of--"

"No! No! that ain't the truth, and you know it. She set out to get clear
of me--and I let her have her way, same as I done in everything else."

"She didn't set out to get clear of you."

"She did."

"No, she didn't."

"I say she did."

Mrs. Bascom rose once more. "Seth Bascom," she declared, "if all you
wanted me to stay here for is to be one of a pair of katydids, hollerin'
at each other, I'm goin'. I'm no bug; I'm a woman."

"Emeline, you set down. You've hove out a whole lot of hints about my
not bein' a man because I run away from your house. Do you think I'd
have been more of a man if I'd stayed in it? Stayed there and been
a yaller dog to be kicked out of one corner and into another by you
and--and that brother-in-law of yours. That's all I was--a dog."

"Humph! if a dog's the right breed--and big enough--it's his own fault
if he's kicked twice."

"Not if he cares more for his master than he does for himself--'taint."

"Why, yes, it is. He can make his master respect him by provin' he ain't
the kind of dog to kick. And maybe one of his masters--his real master,
for he hadn't ought to have but one--might be needin' the right kind of
watchdog around the house. Might be in trouble her--himself, I mean; and
be hopin' and prayin' for the dog to protect her--him, I should say. And
then the--"

"Emeline, what are you talkin' about?"

"Oh, nothin', nothin'. Seth, what's the use of us two settin' here at
twelve o'clock at night and quarrelin' over what's past and settled? I
sha'n't do it, for one. I don't want to quarrel with you."

Seth sighed. "And I don't want to quarrel with you, Emeline," he agreed.
"As you say, there's no sense in it. Dear! dear! this, when you come
to think of it, is the queerest thing altogether that ever was in the
world, I guess. Us two had all creation to roam 'round in, and we landed
at Eastboro Twin-Lights. It seems almost as if Providence done it, for
some purpose or other."

"Yes; or the other critter, for HIS purposes. How did you ever come to
be keeper of a light, Seth?"

"Why--why--I don't know. I used to be in the service, 'fore I went to
sea much. You remember I told you I did. And I sort of drifted down
here. I didn't care much what became of me, and I wanted a lonesome
hole to hide in, and this filled the bill. I've been here ever since I
left--left--where I used to be. But, Emeline, how did YOU come here? You
answered an advertisement, you told me; but why?"

"'Cause I wanted to do somethin' to earn my livin'. I was alone, and I
rented my house and boarded. But boardin' ain't much comfort, 'specially
when you board where everybody knows you, and knows your story. So I--"

"Wait a minute. You was alone, you say? Where was--was HE?"

"He?"

"Yes. You know who I mean."

He would not speak the hated name. His wife spoke it for him.

"Bennie?" she asked. "Oh, he ain't been with me for 'most two year now.
He--he went away. He's in New York now. And I was alone and I saw Miss
Graham's advertisement for a housekeeper and answered it. I needed the
money and--"

"Hold on! You needed the money? Why, you had money."

"Abner left me a little, but it didn't last forever. And--"

"You had more'n a little. I wrote to bank folks there and turned over
my account to you. And I sent 'em a power of attorney turnin' over some
stocks--you know what they was--to you, too. I done that soon's I got to
Boston. Didn't they tell you?"

"Yes, they told me."

"Well, then, that ought to have helped along."

"You don't s'pose I took it, do you?"

"Why--why not?"

"Why not! Do you s'pose I'd use the money that belonged to the husband
that run off and left me? I ain't that kind of a woman. The money and
stocks are at the bank yet, I s'pose; anyhow they're there for all of
me."

The lightkeeper's mouth opened and stayed open for seconds before he
could use it as a talking machine. He could scarcely believe what he had
heard.

"But--but I wanted you to have it," he gasped. "I left it for you."

"Well, I didn't take it; 'tain't likely!" with fiery indignation. "Did
you think I could be bought off like a--a mean--oh, I don't know what?"

"But--but I left it at the bank--for you. What--what'll I do with it?"

"I don't know, I'm sure. You might give it to Sarah Ann Christy; I
wouldn't wonder if she was less particular than I be."

Seth's guns were spiked, for the moment. He felt the blood rush to face,
and his fists, as he brandished them in the air, trembled.

"I--I--you--you--" he stammered. "I--I--you think I--"

He knew that his companion would regard his agitation as an evidence of
conscious guilt, and this knowledge did not help to calm him. He strode
up and down the floor.

"Look out," said Mrs. Bascom, coldly, "you'll kick over the lantern."

Her husband stopped in his stride. "Darn the lantern!" he shouted.

"S-sh-sh! you'll wake up the Brown man."

This warning was more effective. But Seth was still furious.

"Emeline Bascom," he snarled, shaking his forefinger in her face,
"you've said over and over that I wa'n't a man. You have, haven't you?"

She was looking at his shirt cuff, then but a few inches from her nose.

"Who sewed on that button?" she asked.

This was so unexpected that his wrath was, for the instant, displaced by
astonishment.

"What?" he asked. "What button?"

"That one on your shirt sleeve. Who sewed it on?"

"Why, I did, of course. What a crazy question that is!"

She smiled. "I guessed you did," she said. "Nobody but a man would sew
a white button on a white shirt--or one that was white once--with black
thread."

He looked at the button and then at her. His anger returned.

"You said I wa'n't a man, didn't you?" he demanded.

"Yes, I did. But I'll have to take part of it back. You're half a man
anyhow; that sewin' proves it."

"Huh! I want to know. Well, maybe I ain't a man; maybe I'm only half a
one. But I ain't a fool! I ain't a fool!"

She sighed wearily. "Well, all right," she admitted. "I sha'n't argue
it."

"You needn't. I ain't--or anyhow I ain't an EVERLASTIN' fool. And nobody
but the everlastin'est of all fools would chase Sarah Ann Christy. I
didn't. That whole business was just one of your--your Bennie D.'s lies.
You know that, too."

"I know some one lied; I heard 'em. They denied seein' Sarah Ann, and I
saw 'em with her--with my own eyes I saw 'em. . . . But there, there,"
she added; "this is enough of such talk. I'm goin' now."

"I didn't lie; I forgot."

"All right, then, you forgot. I ain't jealous, Seth. I wa'n't even
jealous then. Even then I give you a chance, and you didn't take it--you
'forgot' instead. I'm goin' back to the bungalow, but afore I go let's
understand this: you're to stay here at the lights, and I stay where I
am as housekeeper. We don't see each other any oftener than we have to,
and then only when nobody else is around. We won't let my Miss Graham
nor your Brown nor anybody know we've ever met afore--or are meetin'
now. Is that it?"

Seth hesitated. "Yes," he said, slowly, "I guess that's it. But," he
added, anxiously, "I--I wish you'd be 'specially careful not to let
that young feller who's workin' for me know. Him and me had a--a sort of
agreement and--and I--I--"

"He sha'n't know. Good-by."

She fumbled with the latch of the heavy door. He stepped forward and
opened it for her. The night was very dark; a heavy fog, almost a rain,
had drifted in while they were together. She didn't seem to notice or
mind the fog or blackness, but went out and disappeared beyond the faint
radiance which the lantern cast through the open door. She blundered on
and turned the corner of the house; then she heard steps behind her.

"Who is it?" she whispered, in some alarm.

"Me," whispered the lightkeeper, gruffly. "I'll go with you a ways."

"No, of course you won't. I'm goin' alone."

"It's too dark for you to go alone. You'll lose the way."

"I'm goin' alone, I tell you! Go back. I don't want you."

"I know you don't; but I'm goin'. You'll fetch up in the cove or
somewheres if you try to navigate this path on your own hook."

"I sha'n't. I'm used to findin' my own way, and I'm goin' alone--as I've
had to do for a good while. Go back."

She stopped short. Seth stopped, also.

"Go back," she insisted, adding scornfully: "I don't care for your help
at all. I'm partic'lar about my company."

"I ain't," sullenly. "Anyhow, I'm goin' to pilot you around the end of
that cove. You sha'n't say I let you get into trouble when I might have
kept you out of it."

"Say? Who would I say it to? Think I'm so proud of this night's cruise
that I'll brag of it? WILL you go back?"

"No."

They descended the hill, Mrs. Bascom in advance. She could not see the
path, but plunged angrily on through the dripping grass and bushes.

"Emeline--Emeline," whispered Seth. She paid no attention to him. They
reached the foot of the slope and suddenly the lady realized that her
shoes, already wet, were now ankle deep in water. And there seemed to be
water amid the long grass all about her.

"Why? What in the world?" she exclaimed involuntarily. "What is it?"

"The salt marsh at the end of the cove," answered the lightkeeper. "I
told you you'd fetch up in it if you tried to go alone. Been tryin' to
tell you you was off the track, but you wouldn't listen to me."

And she would not listen to him now. Turning, she splashed past him.

"Hold on," he whispered, seizing her arm. "That ain't the way."

She shook herself from his grasp.

"WILL you let me be, and mind your own business?" she hissed.

"No, I won't. I've set out to get you home, and I'll do it if I have to
carry you."

"Carry me? You? You DARE!"

His answer was to pick her up in his arms. She was no light weight, and
she fought and wriggled fiercely, but Seth was big and strong and he
held her tight. She did not scream; she was too anxious not to wake
either the substitute assistant or Miss Graham, but she made her bearer
all the trouble she could. They splashed on for some distance; then Seth
set her on her feet, and beneath them was dry ground.

"There!" he grumbled, breathlessly. "Now I cal'late you can't miss the
rest of it. There's the bungalow right in front of you."

"You--you--" she gasped, chokingly.

"Ugh!" grunted her husband, and stalked off into the dark.




CHAPTER XI

BEHIND THE SAND DUNE


"A fog last night, wasn't there?" inquired Brown. Breakfast was over,
and Seth was preparing for his day's sleep.

"Yes, some consider'ble," was the gruff answer; then, more sharply,
"How'd you know? 'Twas all gone this mornin'."

"Oh, I guessed, that's all."

"Humph! Guessed, hey? You wa'n't up in the night, was you?"

"No. Slept like a top all through."

"Humph! . . . Well, that's good; sleep's a good thing. Cal'late I'll
turn in and get a little myself."

He moved toward the living room. At the door he paused and asked another
question.

"How'd you--er--guess there was fog last night?" he inquired.

"Oh, that was easy; everything--grass and bushes--were so wet this
morning. Those boots of yours, for example," pointing to the pair the
lightkeeper had just taken off, "they look as if you had worn them
wading."

His back was toward his superior as he spoke, therefore he did not see
the start which the latter gave at this innocent observation, nor the
horrified glare at the soaked boots. But he could not help noticing the
change in Seth's voice.

"Wa--wadin'?" repeated Atkins faintly. "What's that you say?"

"I said the boots were as wet as if you had been wading. Why?"

"Wha--what made you say a fool thing like that? How could I go wadin' on
top of a lighthouse?"

"I don't know. . . . There, there!" impatiently, "don't ask any more
questions. I didn't say you had been wading, and I didn't suppose you
really had. I was only joking. What IS the matter with you?"

"Nothin' . . . nothin'. So you was just jokin', hey? Ha, ha! Yes, yes,
wadin' up in a lighthouse would be a pretty good joke. I--I didn't see
it at first, you know. Ha, ha! I thought you must be off your head.
Thought you'd been swimmin' too much or somethin'. So long, I'm goin' to
bed."

But now it was the helper's turn to start and stammer.

"Wait!" he cried. "What--what did you say about my--er--swimming, was
it?"

"Oh, nothin', nothin'. I was just jokin', same as you was about the
wadin'. Ha, ha!"

"Ha, ha!"

Both laughed with great heartiness. The door shut between them, and each
stared doubtfully at his side of it for several moments before turning
away.

That forenoon was a dismal one for John Brown. His troublesome
conscience, stirred by Seth's reference to swimming, was again in full
working order. He tried to stifle its reproaches, tried to give his
entire attention to his labors about the lights and in the kitchen, but
the consciousness of guilt was too strong. He felt mean and traitorous,
a Benedict Arnold on a small scale. He had certainly treated Atkins
shabbily; Atkins, the man who trusted him and believed in him, whom he
had loftily reproved for "spying" and then betrayed. Yet, in a way his
treason, so far, had been unavoidable. He had promised--had even OFFERED
to teach the Graham girl the "side stroke." He had not meant to make
such an offer or promise, but Fate had tricked him into it, and he could
not, as a gentleman, back out altogether. He had been compelled to give
her one lesson. But he need not give her another. He need not meet her
again. He would not. He would keep the agreement with Seth and forget
the tenants of the bungalow altogether. Good old Atkins! Good old Seth,
the woman-hater! How true he was to his creed, the creed which he,
Brown, had so lately professed. It was a good creed, too. Women were at
the bottom of all the world's troubles. They deserved to be hated. He
would never, never--

"Well, by George!" he exclaimed aloud.

He was looking once more at the lightkeeper's big leather boots. One of
them was lying on its side, and the upturned sole and heel were thickly
coated with blue clay. He crossed the room, picked up the boots and
examined them. Each was smeared with the clay. He put them down again,
shook his head, wandered over to the rocking-chair and sat down.

Seth had cleaned and greased those boots before he went to bed the day
before; Brown had seen him doing it. He had put them on after supper,
just before going on watch; the substitute assistant had seen him do
that, also. Therefore, the clay must have been acquired sometime during
the evening or night just past. And certainly there was no clay at the
"top of the lighthouse," or anywhere in the neighborhood except at
one spot--the salt marsh at the inner end of the cove. Seth must have
visited that marsh in the nighttime. But why? And, if he had done so,
why did he not mention the fact? And, now that the helper thought of it,
why had he been so agitated at the casual remark concerning wading? What
was he up to? Now that the Daisy M. and story of the wife were no longer
secrets, what had Seth Atkins to conceal?

Brown thought and guessed and surmised, but guesses and surmises were
fruitless. He finished his dishwashing and began another of the loathed
housekeeping tasks, that of rummaging the pantry and seeing what
eatables were available for his luncheon and the evening meal.

He spread the various odds and ends on the kitchen table, preparatory to
taking account of stock. A part of a slab of bacon, a salt codfish, some
cold clam fritters, a few molasses cookies, and half a loaf of bread. He
had gotten thus far in the inventory when a shadow darkened the doorway.
He turned and saw Mrs. Bascom, the bungalow housekeeper.

"Good mornin'," said Mrs. Bascom.

Brown answered coldly. Why on earth was it always his luck to be present
when these female nuisances made their appearance? And why couldn't
they let him alone, just as he had determined to let them alone--in the
future? Of course he was glad that the caller was not Miss Graham, but
this one was bad enough.

"Morning," he grunted, and took another dish, this one containing a
section of dry and ancient cake, Seth's manufacture, from the pantry.

"What you doin'? Gettin' breakfast this time of day?" asked the
housekeeper, entering the kitchen. She had a small bowl in her hand.

"No," replied Brown.

"Dinner, then? Pretty early for that, ain't it?"

"I am not getting either breakfast or dinner--or supper, madam," replied
the helper, with emphasis. "Is there anything I can do for you?"

"Well, I don't know but there is. I come over hopin' you might. How's
the stings?"

"The what?"

"The wasp bites."

"They're all, right, thank you."

"You're welcome, I'm sure. Did you put the cold mud on 'em, same as I
told you to?"

"No. . . . What was it you wanted?"

Mrs. Bascom looked about for a seat. The rocker was at the opposite side
of the room, and the other chair contained a garment belonging to Mr.
Atkins, one which that gentleman, with characteristic disregard of the
conventionalities, had discarded before leaving the kitchen and had
forgotten to take with him. The lady picked up the garment, looked at
it, and sat down in the chair.

"Your boss is to bed, I s'pose likely?" she asked.

"You mean Mr. Atkins? I suppose likely he is."

"Um. I judged he was by"--with a glance at the garment which she still
held--"the looks of things. What in the world ARE you doin'--cleanin'
house?"

The young man sighed wearily. "Yes," he said with forced resignation,
"something of that sort."

"Seein' what there was to eat, I guess."

"You guess right. You said you had an errand, I think."

"Did I? Well, I come to see if I couldn't . . . What's that stuff?
Cake?"

She rose, picked up a slice of the dry cake, broke it between her
fingers, smelled of it, and replaced it on the plate.

"'Tis cake, ain't it?" she observed; "or it was, sometime or other. Who
made it? You?"

"No."

"Oh, your boss, Mr.--er--Atkins, hey?"

"Yes. Considering that there are only two of us here, and I didn't make
it, it would seem pretty certain that he must have."

"Yes, I guess that's right; unless 'twas some that washed ashore from
Noah's Ark, and it's too dry for that. What on earth are these?" picking
up one of the molasses cookies; "stove lids?"

Brown grinned, in spite of his annoyance.

"Those are supposed to be cookies," he admitted.

"Are they? Yes, yes. Mr. Atkins responsible for them?"

"No--o. I'm afraid those are one of my experiments, under Mr. Atkins's
directions and orders. I'm rather proud of those cookies, myself."

"You'd ought to be. There, there!" with a smile, "I guess you think I'm
pretty free with my criticism and remarks, don't you? You must excuse
me. Housekeepin'--'specially the cookin' part--is my hobby, as you might
say, and I was interested to see how a couple of men got along with the
job. I mustn't set around and keep you from your work. You might want to
make some more cookies, or somethin'."

The substitute assistant laughed aloud. "I wasn't thinking of it," he
said; "but I shall be glad to make the attempt if it would afford you
amusement."

Mrs. Bascom laughed, too. "I guess you're better natured than I thought
you was," she observed. "It might amuse me some, I will admit, but I
ain't got the time. I came to borrow some butter, if you've got any to
spare. Down here we're as far from supplies as the feller that run the
Ark I was mentionin', old Noah himself."

Brown took the bowl from her hands and went to the pantry to get the
butter. When he turned again she was standing by the door, one hand
hidden beneath her apron. She took the bowl with the other.

"Much obliged," she said. "I'll fetch this back soon's the grocery cart
comes. Miss Graham made arrangements to have him drive across every
Saturday. Or, rather, I arranged for it myself. Her head's too full of
paintin' and scenery to think of much else. I tell her you can't eat an
ile paintin'--unless you're born a goat. Good-by."

She went away. Brown chuckled and went on with his account of stock.

Seth "turned out" rather early that day. At half past one he appeared in
the kitchen, partially dressed.

"Where in time is my shirt?" he demanded impatiently.

"Your what?"

"My shirt. I thought I took it off out here. Could have sworn I did.
Guess likely I didn't, though. Must be gettin' absent-minded."

He was on his way back to the bedroom when his helper called.

"You did take it off out here," he cried. "It was on that chair there. I
remember seeing it. Probably it has fallen on the floor somewhere."

Atkins returned, grumbling that the kitchen floor was a "healthy place
to heave a shirt."

"Where is it?" he asked after a hurried search. "I can't find it
nowheres. Didn't put it in the fire, did ye?"

"Of course I didn't. I saw it. . . . Why, I remember that woman's
picking it up when she sat down."

"Woman? What woman?"

"That Baskin--Buskin--whatever her name is. The housekeeper at the
bungalow."

"Was she--HERE?" Seth's question was almost a shout. His helper stared
at him.

"Yes," he answered; "she was. She came to borrow some butter."

"To--to borrow--butter?"

"Why, yes. You didn't think I invited her in for a morning call, did
you? Don't act as if you had been struck by lightning. It's not so very
serious. We've got to expect some trouble of that kind. I got rid of her
as soon as I could."

"You--you did?"

"Yes, I did. You should thank me. I am on duty during the day, and I
suppose most of that sort of thing will fall on me. You're lucky. Our
neighbors aren't likely to make many calls after dark. . . . What's the
matter now? Why are you looking at me like that?"

Seth walked to the door and leaned against the post. Brown repeated his
question. "What IS the matter?" he asked. "You act just as you did when
I first happened into this forsak--this place. If you've got any more
hideous secrets up your sleeve I'm going to quit."

"Secrets!" Atkins laughed, or tried to. "I ain't got any secrets," he
declared, "any more than you have."

The latter half of this speech shut off further questioning. Brown
turned hastily away, and the lightkeeper went into his bedroom and
finished dressing.

"Find your shirt?" asked the young man an hour or so later.

"Hey? Yes, yes; I found it."

"In your room? That's odd. I could have sworn I saw it out here. Is that
it you're wearing?"

"Hey? No. That was--was sort of s'iled, so I put on my other one. I--I
cal'late I'll go over and work on the Daisy M. a spell, unless you need
me."

"I don't need you. Go ahead."

The time dragged for John Brown after his superior's departure. There
was work enough to be done, but he did not feel like doing it. He
wandered around the house and lights, gloomy, restless and despondent.
Occasionally he glanced at the clock.

It was a beautiful afternoon, just the afternoon for a swim, and he was
debarred from swimming, not only that day, but for all the summer days
to come. No matter what Seth's new secret might be, it was surely not
connected with the female sex, and Brown would be true to the solemn
compact between them. He could not bathe in the cove because Miss Graham
would be there.

At four o'clock he stood in the shadow of the light tower looking across
the cove. As he looked he saw Miss Graham, in bathing attire, emerge
from the bungalow and descend the bluff. She did not see him and, to
make sure that she might not, he dodged back out of sight. Then he saw
something else.

Out on the dunes back of the barn he caught a glimpse of a figure
darting to cover behind a clump of bushes. The figure was a familiar
one, but what was it doing there? He watched the bushes, but they did
not move. Then he entered the house, went upstairs, and cautiously
peered from the back attic window.

The bushes remained motionless for some minutes. Then they stirred
ever so slightly, and above them appeared the head of Seth Atkins. Seth
seemed to be watching the cove and the lights. For another minute he
peered over the bushes, first at the bathing waters below and then at
his own dwelling. Brown ground his teeth. The light-keeper was "spying"
again, was watching to see if he violated his contract.

But no, that could not be, for now Seth, apparently sure that the coast
was clear, emerged from his hiding place and ran in a stooping posture
until he reached another clump further off and nearer the end of the
cove. He remained there an instant and then ran, still crouching, until
he disappeared behind a high dune at the rear of the bungalow. And there
he stayed; at least Brown did not see him come out.

What he did see, however, was just as astonishing. The landward door of
the bungalow opened, and Mrs. Bascom, the housekeeper, stepped out into
the yard. She seemed to be listening and looking. Apparently she must
have heard something, for she moved away for some little distance and
stood still. Then, above the edge of the dune, showed Seth's head and
arm. He beckoned to her. She walked briskly across the intervening
space, turned the ragged, grass-grown corner of the knoll and
disappeared, also. Brown, scarcely believing his eyes, waited and
watched, but he saw no more. Neither Seth nor the housekeeper came out
from behind that dune.

But the substitute assistant had seen enough--quite enough. Seth Atkins,
Seth, the woman-hater, the man who had threatened him with all sorts of
penalties if he ever so much as looked at a female, was meeting one of
the sex himself, meeting her on the sly. What it meant Brown could not
imagine. Probably it explained the clay smears on the boots and Seth's
discomfiture of the morning; but that was immaterial. The fact, the one
essential fact, was this: the compact was broken. Seth had broken it.
Brown was relieved of all responsibility. If he wished to swim in that
cove, no matter who might be there, he was perfectly free to do it. And
he would do it, by George! He had been betrayed, scandalously, meanly
betrayed, and it would serve the betrayer right if he paid him in his
own coin. He darted down the attic stairs, ran down the path to the
boathouse, hurriedly changed his clothes for his bathing suit, ran along
the shore of the creek and plunged in.

Miss Graham waved a hand to him as he shook the water from his eyes.

Over behind the sand dune a more or less interesting interview was
taking place. Seth, having made sure that his whistles were heard and
his signals seen, sank down in the shadow and awaited developments. They
were not long in coming. A firm footstep crunched the sand, and Mrs.
Bascom appeared.

"Well," she inquired coldly, "what's the matter now?"

Mr. Atkins waved an agitated hand.

"Set down," he begged. "Scooch down out of sight, Emeline, for the land
sakes. Don't stand up there where everybody can see you."

The lady refused to "scooch."

"If I ain't ashamed of bein' seen," she observed, "I don't know why you
should be. What are you doin' over here anyhow; skippin' 'round in the
sand like a hoptoad?"

The lightkeeper repeated his plea.

"Do set down, Emeline, please," he urged. "I thought you and me'd agreed
that nobody'd ought to see us together."

Mrs. Bascom gathered her skirts about her and with great deliberation
seated herself upon a hummock.

"We did have some such bargain," she replied. "That's why I can't
understand your hidin' at my back door and whistlin' and wavin' like a
young one. What did you come here for, anyway?"

Seth answered with righteous indignation.

"I come for my shirt," he declared.

"Your shirt?"

"Yes, my other shirt. I left it in the kitchen this mornin', and
that--that helper of mine says you was in the chair along with it."

"Humph! Did he have the impudence to say I took it?"

"No--o. No, course he didn't. But it's gone and--and--"

"What would I want of your shirt? Didn't think I was cal'latin' to wear
it, did you?"

"No, but--"

"I should hope not. I ain't a Doctor Mary Walker, or whatever her name
is."

"But you did take it, just the same. I'm sartin you did. You must have."

The lady's mouth relaxed, and there was a twinkle in her eye.

"All right, Seth," she said. "Suppose I did; what then?"

"I want it back, that's all."

"You can have it. Now what do you s'pose I took it for?"

"I--I--I don't know."

"You don't know? Humph! Did you think I wanted to keep it as a souveneer
of last night's doin's?"

Her companion looked rather foolish. He picked up a handful of sand and
sifted it through his fingers.

"No--o," he stammered. "I--I know how partic'lar you are--you used to
be about such things, and I thought maybe you didn't like the way that
button was sewed on."

He glanced up at her with an embarrassed smile, which broadened as he
noticed her expression.

"Well," she admitted, "you guessed right. There's some things I can't
bear to have in my neighborhood, and your kind of sewin' is one of 'em.
Besides, I owed you that much for keepin' me out of the wet last night."

"Oh! I judged by the way you lit into me for luggin' you acrost that
marsh that all you owed me was a grudge. I DID lug you, though, in spite
of your kickin', didn't I?"

He nodded with grim triumph. She smiled.

"You did, that's a fact," she said. "I was pretty mad at the time, but
when I come to think it over I felt diff'rent. Anyhow I've sewed on
those buttons the way they'd ought to be."

"Much obliged. I guess they'll stay now for a spell. You always could
sew on buttons better'n anybody ever I see."

"Humph!" . . . Then, after an interval of silence: "What are you
grinnin' to yourself about?"

"Hey? . . . Oh, I was just thinkin' how you mended up that Rogers
young one's duds when he fell out of our Bartlett pear tree. He was the
raggedest mess ever I come acrost when I picked him up. Yellin' like a
wild thing he was, and his clothes half tore off."

"No wonder he yelled. Caught stealin' pears--he expected to be thrashed
for that--and he KNEW Melindy Rogers would whip him, for tearin' his
Sunday suit. Poor little thing! Least I could do was to make his clothes
whole. I always pity a child with a stepmother, special when she's
Melindy's kind."

"What's become of them Rogerses? Still livin' in the Perry house, are
they?"

"No. Old Abel Perry turned 'em out of that when the rent got behind.
He's the meanest skinflint that ever strained skim milk. He got married
again a year ago."

"NO! Who was the victim? Somebody from the Feeble-Minded Home?"

She gave the name of Mr. Perry's bride, and before they knew it the
pair were deep in village gossip. For many minutes they discussed the
happenings in the Cape Ann hamlet, and then Seth was recalled to the
present by a casual glance at his watch.

"Land!" he exclaimed. "Look at the time! This talk with you has seemed
so--so natural and old-timey, that . . . Well, I've got to go."

He was scrambling to his feet. She also attempted to rise, but found it
difficult.

"Here," he cried, "give me your hand. I'll help you up."

"I don't want any help. Let me alone. Let me ALONE, I tell you."

His answer was to seize her about the waist and swing her bodily to
her feet. She was flushed and embarrassed. Then she laughed shortly and
shook her head.

"What are you laughin' at?" he demanded, peering over the knoll to make
sure that neither John Brown nor Miss Graham was in sight.

"Oh, not much," she answered. "You kind of surprise me, Seth."

"Why?"

"'Cause you've changed so."

"Changed? How?"

"Oh, changed, that's all. You seem to have more spunk than you used to
have."

"Humph! Think so, do you?"

"Yes, I do. I think bein' a lightkeeper must be good for some
folks--some kind of folks."

"I want to know!"

"Yes, you better be careful, or you'll be a real man some day."

His answer was an angry stare and a snort. Then he turned on his heel
and was striding off.

"Wait!" she called. "Hold on! Don't you want your shirt? Stay here, and
I'll go into the house and fetch it."

He waited, sullen and reluctant, until she returned with the article of
apparel in one hand and the other concealed beneath her apron.

"Here it is," she said, presenting the shirt to him.

"Thank you," he grumbled, taking it. "Much obliged for sewin' on the
button."

"You're welcome. It squares us for your pilotin' me over the marsh,
that's all. 'Twa'n't any favor; I owed it to you."

He was turning the shirt over in his hands.

"Well," he began, then stopped and looked fixedly at the garment.

"I see you've mended that hole in the sleeve," he said. "You didn't owe
me that, did you?"

She changed color slightly.

"Oh," she said, with a toss of her head, "that's nothin'. Just for good
measure. I never could abide rags on anybody that--that I had to look at
whether I wanted to or not."

"'Twas real good of you to mend it, Emeline. Say," he stirred the sand
with his boot, "you mentioned that you cal'lated I'd changed some, was
more of a man than I used to be. Do you know why?"

"No. Unless," with sarcasm, "it was because I wa'n't around."

"It ain't that. It's because, Emeline, it's because down here I'm nigher
bein' where I belong than anywheres else but one place. That place is at
sea. When I'm on salt water I'm a man--you don't believe it, but I am.
On land I--I don't seem to fit in right. Keepin' a light like this is
next door to bein' at sea."

"Seth, I want to ask you a question. Why didn't you go to sea when you
ran--when you left me? I s'posed of course you had. Why didn't you?"

He looked at her in surprise.

"Go to sea?" he repeated. "Go to SEA? How could I? Didn't I promise you
I'd never go to sea again?"

"Was that the reason?"

"Sartin. What else?"

She did not answer. There was an odd expression on her face. He turned
to go.

"Well, good-by," he said.

"Good-by. Er--Seth."

"Yes; what is it?"

"I--I want to tell you," she stammered, "that I appreciated your leavin'
that money and stocks at the bank in my name. I couldn't take 'em, of
course, but 'twas good of you. I appreciated it."

"That's all right."

"Wait. Here! Maybe you'd like these." She took the hand from beneath
her apron and extended it toward him. It held a pan heaped with objects
flat, brown, and deliciously fragrant. He looked at the pan and its
contents uncomprehendingly.

"What's them?" he demanded.

"They're molasses cookies. I've been bakin', and these are some extry
ones I had left over. You can have 'em if you want 'em."

"Why--why, Emeline! this is mighty kind of you."

"Not a mite," sharply. "I baked a good many more'n Miss Ruth and I can
dispose of, and that poor helper man of yours ought to be glad to get
'em after the cast-iron pound-weights that you and he have been tryin'
to live on. Mercy on us! the thoughts of the cookies he showed me this
mornin' have stayed in my head ever since. Made me feel as if I was
partly responsible for murder."

"But it's kind of you, just the same."

"Rubbish! I'd do as much for a pig any day. There! you've got your
shirt; now you'd better go home."

She forced the pan of cookies into his hand and moved off. The
lightkeeper hesitated.

"I--I'll fetch the pan back to-morrer," he called after her in a loud
whisper.




CHAPTER XII

THE LETTER AND THE 'PHONE


The cookies appeared on the table that evening. Brown noticed them at
once.

"When did you bake these?" he asked.

Atkins made no reply, so the question was repeated with a variation.

"Did you bake these this afternoon?" inquired the substitute assistant.

"Humph? Hey? Oh, yes, I guess so. Why? Anything the matter with 'em?"

"Matter with them? No. They're the finest things I've tasted since I
came here. New receipt, isn't it?"

"Cal'late so."

"I thought it must be. I'll take another."

He took another, and many others thereafter. He and his superior cleared
the plate between them.

Brown was prepared for questions concerning his occupation of the
afternoon and was ready with some defiant queries of his own. But no
occasion arose for either defiance or cross-examination. Seth never
hinted at a suspicion nor mentioned the young lady at the bungalow.
Brown therefore remained silent concerning what he had seen from the
attic window. He would hold that in reserve, and if Atkins ever did
accuse him of bad faith or breach of contract he could retort in kind.
His conscience was clear now--he was no more of a traitor than Seth
himself--and, this being so, he felt delightfully independent. If
trouble came he was ready for it, and in the meantime he should do as he
pleased.

But no trouble came. That day, and for many days thereafter, the
lightkeeper was sweetness itself. He and his helper had never been more
anxious to please each other, and the house at Twin-Lights was--to all
appearances--an abode of perfect trust and peace. Every day, when Seth
was asleep or out of the way, "working on the Daisy M.," the assistant
swam to the cove, and every day he met Miss Graham there! During the
first week he returned from his dips expecting to be confronted by his
superior, and ready with counter accusations of his own. After this
he ceased to care. Seth did not ask a question and was so trustful and
unsuspecting that Brown decided his secret was undiscovered. In fact,
the lightkeeper was so innocent that the young man felt almost wicked,
as if he were deceiving a child. He very nearly forgot the meeting
behind the sand dune, having other and much more important things to
think of.

July passed, and the first three weeks of August followed suit. The
weather, which had been glorious, suddenly gave that part of the coast
a surprise party in the form of a three days' storm. It was an offshore
gale, but fierce, and the lighthouse buildings rocked in its grasp.
Bathing was out of the question, and one of Seth's dories broke its
anchor rope and went to pieces in the breakers. Atkins and Brown slept
but little during the storm, both being on duty the greater part of the
time.

The fourth day broke clear, but the wind had changed to the east and
the barometer threatened more bad weather to come. When Seth came in to
breakfast he found his helper sound asleep in a kitchen chair, his head
on the table. The young man was pretty well worn out. Atkins insisted
upon his going to bed for the forenoon.

"Of course I sha'n't," protested Brown. "It's my watch, and you need
sleep yourself."

"No, I don't, neither," was the decided answer. "I slept between times
up in the tower, off and on. You go and turn in. I've got to drive over
to Eastboro by and by, and I want you to be wide awake while I'm away.
We ain't done with this spell of weather yet. We'll have rain and an
easterly blow by night, see if we don't. You go right straight to bed."

"I shall do nothing of the sort."

"Yes, you will. I'm your boss and I order you to do it. No back talk,
now. Go!"

So Brown went, unwilling but very tired. He was sound asleep in ten
minutes.

Seth busied himself about the house, occasionally stepping to the window
to look out at the weather. An observer would have noticed that before
leaving the window on each of these occasions, his gaze invariably
turned toward the bungalow. His thoughts were more constant than his
gaze; they never left his little cottage across the cove. In fact, they
had scarcely left it for the past month. He washed the breakfast dishes,
set the room in order, and was turning once more toward the window, when
he heard a footstep approaching the open door. He knew the step; it was
one with which he had been familiar during other and happier days, and
now, once more--after all the years and his savage determination to
forget and to hate--it had the power to awaken strange emotions in his
breast. Yet his first move was to run into the living room and close his
helper's chamber door. When he came back to the kitchen, shutting the
living-room door carefully behind him, Mrs. Bascom was standing on the
sill. She started when she saw him.

"Land sakes!" she exclaimed. "You? I cal'lated, of course, you was abed
and asleep."

The lightkeeper waved his hands.

"S-sh-h!" he whispered.

"What shall I s-sh-h about? Your young man's gone somewhere, I s'pose,
else you wouldn't be here."

"No, he ain't. He's turned in, tired out."

"Oh, then I guess I'd better go back home. 'Twas him I expected to see,
else, of course, I shouldn't have come."

"Oh, I know that," with a sigh. "Where's your boss, Miss Graham?"

"She's gone for a walk along shore. I came over to--to bring back them
eggs I borrowed."

"Did you? Where are they?"

The housekeeper seemed embarrassed, and her plump cheeks reddened.

"I--I declare I forgot to bring 'em after all," she stammered.

"I want to know. That's funny. You don't often--that is, you didn't use
to forget things hardly ever, Emeline."

"Hum! you remember a lot, don't you."

"I remember more'n you think I do, Emeline."

"That's enough of that, Seth. Remember what I told you last time we saw
each other."

"Oh, all right, all right. I ain't rakin' up bygones. I s'pose I deserve
all I'm gettin'."

"I s'pose you do. Well, long's I forgot the eggs I guess I might as well
be trottin' back. . . . You--you've been all right--you and Mr. Brown, I
mean--for the last few days, while the storm was goin' on?"

"Um-h'm," gloomily. "How about you two over to the bungalow? You've kept
dry and snug, I judge."

"Yes."

"I didn't know but you might be kind of nervous and scart when 'twas
blowin'. All alone so."

"Humph! I've got used to bein' alone. As for Miss Ruth, I don't think
she's scart of anythin'."

"Well, I was sort of nervous about you, if you wa'n't about yourself.
'Twas consider'ble of a gale of wind. I thought one spell I'd blow out
of the top of the tower."

"So did I. I could see your shadow movin' 'round up there once in a
while. What made you come out on the gallery in the worst of it night
afore last?"

"Oh, the birds was smashin' themselves to pieces against the glass same
as they always do in a storm, and I . . . But say! 'twas after twelve
when I came out. How'd you come to see me? What was your doin' up that
time of night?"

Mrs. Bascom's color deepened. She seemed put out by the question.

"So much racket a body couldn't sleep," she explained sharply. "I
thought the shingles would lift right off the roof."

"But you wa'n't lookin' at the shingles. You was lookin' at the
lighthouses; you jest said so. Emeline, was you lookin' for me? Was you
worried about me?"

He bent forward eagerly.

"Hush!" she said, "you'll wake up the other woman-hater."

"I don't care. I don't care if I wake up all creation. Emeline, I
believe you was worried about me, same as I was about you. More'n that,"
he added, conviction and exultation in his tone, "I don't believe 'twas
eggs that fetched you here this mornin' at all. I believe you came to
find out if we--if I was all right. Didn't you?"

"I didn't come to SEE you, be sure of that," with emphatic scorn.

"I know. But you was goin' to see Brown and find out from him. Answer
me. Answer me now, didn't--"

She stepped toward the door. He extended an arm and held her back.

"You answer me," he commanded.

She tried to pass him, but his arm was like an iron bar. She hesitated a
moment and then laughed nervously.

"You certainly have took to orderin' folks round since the old days,"
she said. "Why, yes, then; I did come to find out if you hadn't got
cold, or somethin'. You're such a child and I'm such a soft-headed fool
I couldn't help it, I cal'late?"

"Emeline, s'pose I had got cold. S'pose you found I was sick--what
then?"

"Why--why, then I guess likely I'd have seen the doctor on my way
through Eastboro. I shall be goin' that way to-morrer when I leave
here."

"When you leave here? What do you mean by that?"

"Just what I say. Miss Graham's goin' to Boston to-morrer, and I'm goin'
with her--as far as the city."

"But--but you're comin' back!"

"What should I come back here for? My summer job's over. If you want
to know, my principal reason for comin' here this mornin' was to say
good-by--to Mr. Brown, of course."

Seth's arm dropped. He leaned heavily against the doorpost.

"You're goin' away!" he exclaimed. "You're goin' away! Where?"

"I don't know. Back home, I s'pose. Though what I'll do when I get there
I don't know. I've sold the house, so I don't exactly know where I'll
put up. But I guess I'll find a place."

"You've sold your house? The house we used to live in?"

"Yes. The man that's been hirin' it has bought it. I'm glad, for I need
the money. So good-by, Seth. 'Tain't likely we'll meet again in this
life."

She started toward the door once more, and this time he was too greatly
disturbed and shaken by what she had told him to detain her. At the
threshhold she turned and looked at him.

"Good-by, Seth," she said again. "I hope you'll be happy. And," with
a half smile, "if I was you I'd stay keepin' lights; it, or somethin'
else, has improved you a whole lot. Good-by."

Then he sprang forward. "Emeline," he cried, "Emeline, wait. You mustn't
go. I can't let you go this way. I . . . What's that?"

"That" was the sound of horse's feet and the rattle of wheels. The
lightkeeper ran to the window.

"It's Henry G.'s grocery cart," he said. "I cal'late he's fetchin' some
truck I ordered last week. Do you want him to see you here?"

"I don't care. He don't know but what you and me are the best of
friends. Yet, I don't know. Maybe it's just as well he don't see me;
then there'll be no excuse for talk. I'll step inside and wait."

She returned to the kitchen, and Seth went out to meet the wagon. Its
driver was the boy who had brought the flypaper and "Job."

"Hello," hailed the youngster, pulling in his steed; "how be you, Mr.
Atkins? I've got some of them things you ordered. The rest ain't come
from Boston yet. Soon's they do, Henry G.'ll send 'em down. How you
feelin' these days? Ain't bought no more dogs, have you?"

Seth curtly replied that he "wa'n't speculatin' in dogs to no great
extent any more," and took the packages which the boy handed him. With
them was a bundle of newspapers and an accumulation of mail matter.

"I fetched the mail for the bungalow, too," said the boy. "There's two
or three letters for that Graham girl and one for Mrs. Bascom. She's
housekeeper there, you know."

"Yes. Here, you might's well leave their mail along with mine. I'll see
it's delivered, all right."

"Will you? Much obliged. Goin' to take it over yourself? Better look
out, hadn't you? That Graham girl's a peach; all the fellers at the
store's talkin' about her. Seems a pity she's wastin' her sassiety on a
woman-hater like you; that's what they say. You ain't gettin' over your
female hate, are you? Haw, haw!"

Mr. Atkins regarded his questioner with stern disapproval.

"There's some things--such as chronic sassiness--some folks never get
over," he observed caustically. "Though when green hides are too fresh
they can be tanned; don't forget that, young feller. Any more chatty
remarks you've got to heave over? No? Well, all right; then I'd be
trottin' back home if I was you. Henry G.'ll have to shut up shop if you
deprive him of your valuable services too long. Good day to you."

The driver, somewhat abashed, gathered up the reins. "I didn't mean to
make you mad," he observed. "Anything in our line you want to order?"

"No. I'm cal'latin' to go to the village myself this afternoon, and if I
want any more groceries I'll order 'em then. As for makin' me mad--well,
don't you flatter yourself. A moskeeter can pester me, but he don't make
me mad but once--and his funeral's held right afterwards. Now trot along
and keep in the shade much as you can. You're so fresh the sun might
spile you."

The boy, looking rather foolish, laughed and drove out of the yard.
Seth, his arms full, went back to the kitchen. He dumped the packages
and newspapers on the table and began sorting the letters.

"Here you are, Emeline," he said. "Here's Miss Graham's mail and
somethin' for you."

"For me?" The housekeeper was surprised. "A letter for me! What is it, I
wonder? Somethin' about sellin' the house maybe."

She took the letter from him and turned to the light before opening it.
Seth sat down in the rocker and began inspecting his own assortment
of circulars and papers. Suddenly he heard a sound from his companion.
Glancing up he saw that she was leaning against the doorpost, the open
letter in her hand, and on her face an expression which caused him to
spring from his chair.

"What is it, Emeline?" he demanded. "Any bad news?"

She scarcely noticed him until he spoke again. Then she shook her head.

"No," she said slowly. "Nothin' but--but what I might have expected."

"But what is it? It is bad news. Can't I help you? Please let me, if I
can. I--I'd like to."

She looked at him strangely, and then turned away. "I guess nobody can
help me," she answered. "Least of all, you."

"Why not? I'd like to; honest, I would. If it's about that house
business maybe I--"

"It ain't"

"Then what is it? Please, Emeline. I know you don't think much of me.
Maybe you've got good reasons; I'm past the place where I'd deny that.
I--I've been feelin' meaner'n meaner every day lately. I--I don't know's
I done right in runnin' off and leavin' you the way I did. Don't you
s'pose you could give me another chance? Emeline, I--"

"Seth Bascom, what do you mean?"

"Just what I say. Emeline, you and me was mighty happy together once.
Let's try it again. I will, if you will."

She was staring at him in good earnest now.

"Why, Seth!" she exclaimed. "What are you talkin' about? You--the
chronic woman-hater!"

"That be blessed! I wa'n't really a woman-hater. I only thought I was.
And--and I never hated you. Right through the worst of it I never did.
Let's try it again, Emeline. You're in trouble. You need somebody to
help you. Give me the chance."

There was a wistful look in her eyes; she seemed, or so he thought, to
be wavering. But she shook her head. "I was in trouble before, Seth,"
she said, "and you didn't help me then. You run off and left me."

"You just as much as told me to go. You know you did."

"No, I didn't."

"Well, you didn't tell me to stay."

"It never seemed to me that a husband--if he was a man--would need to be
coaxed to stay by his wife."

"But don't you care about me at all? You used to; I know it. And I
always cared for you. What is it? Honest, Emeline, you never took any
stock in that Sarah Ann Christy doin's, you know you didn't; now, did
you?"

She was close to tears, but she smiled in spite of them.

"Well, no, Seth," she answered. "I will confess that Sarah Ann never
worried me much."

"Then DON'T you care for me, Emeline?"

"I care for you much as I ever did. I never stopped carin' for you, fool
that I am. But as for livin' with you again and runnin' the risk of--"

"You won't run any risk. You say I've improved, yourself. Your principal
fault with me was, as I understand it, that I was too--too--somethin'
or other. That I wa'n't man enough. By jiminy crimps, I'll show you that
I'm a man! Give me the chance, and nothin' nor nobody can make me leave
you again. Besides, there's nobody to come between us now. We was all
right until that--that Bennie D. came along. He was the one that took
the starch out of me. Now he's out of the way. HE won't bother us any
more and . . . Why, what is it, Emeline?"

For she was looking at him with an expression even more strange. And
again she shook her head.

"I guess," she began, and was interrupted by the jingle of the telephone
bell.

The instrument was fastened to the kitchen wall, and the lightkeeper
hastened to answer the ring.

"Testin' the wire after the storm, most likely," he explained, taking
the receiver from the hook. "Hello! . . . Hello! . . . Yep, this is
Eastboro Lights. . . . I'm the lightkeeper, yes. . . . Hey? . . . Miss
Graham? . . . Right next door. . . . Yes. . . . WHO?" Then, turning to
his companion, he said in an astonished voice: "It's somebody wants to
talk with you, Emeline."

"With ME?" Mrs. Bascom could hardly believe it. "Are you sure?"

"So they say. Asked me if I could get you to the 'phone without any
trouble. She's right here now," he added, speaking into the transmitter.
"I'll call her."

The housekeeper wonderingly took the receiver from his hand.

"Hello!" she began. "Yes, this is Mrs. Bascom. . . . Who? . . .
What? . . . OH!"

The last exclamation was almost a gasp, but Seth did not hear it. As she
stepped forward to the 'phone she had dropped her letter. Atkins went
over and picked it up. It lay face downward on the floor, and the last
page, with the final sentence and signature, was uppermost. He could
not help seeing it. "So we shall soon be together as of old. Your loving
brother, Benjamin."

When Mrs. Bascom turned away from the 'phone after a rather protracted
conversation she looked more troubled than ever. But Seth was not
looking at her. He sat in the rocking-chair and did not move nor raise
his head. She waited for him to speak, but he did not.

"Well," she said with a sigh, "I guess I must go. Good-by, Seth."

The lightkeeper slowly rose to his feet. "Emeline," he stammered, "you
ain't goin' without--"

He stopped without finishing the sentence. She waited a moment and then
finished it for him.

"I'll answer your question, if that's what you mean," she said. "And the
answer is no. All things considered, I guess that's best."

"But Emeline, I--I--"

"Good-by, Seth."

"Sha'n't I," desperately, "sha'n't I see you again?"

"I expect to be around here for another day or so. But I can't see
anythin' to be gained by our meetin'. Good-by."

Taking her letter and those addressed to Miss Graham from the table
she went out of the kitchen. Seth followed her as far as the door, then
turned and collapsed in the rocking-chair.




CHAPTER XIII

"JOHN BROWN" CHANGES HIS NAME


"So we shall soon be together again as of old. Your loving brother,
Benjamin."

The sentence which had met his eyes as he picked up the note which
his caller had dropped was still before them, burned into his memory.
Benjamin! "Bennie D."! the loathed and feared and hated Bennie D., cause
of all the Bascom matrimonial heartbreaks, had written to say that he
and his sister-in-law were soon to be together as they used to be. That
meant that there had been no quarrel, but merely a temporary
separation. That she and he were still friendly. That they had been in
correspondence and that the "inventor" was coming back to take his
old place as autocrat in the household with all his old influence
over Emeline. Seth's new-found courage and manhood had vanished at the
thought. Bennie D.'s name had scarcely been mentioned during the various
interviews between the lightkeeper and his wife. She had said her first
husband's brother had been in New York for two years, and her manner of
saying it led Seth to imagine a permanent separation following some sort
of disagreement. And now! and now! He remembered Bennie D.'s superior
airs, his polite sneers, his way of turning every trick to his advantage
and of perverting and misrepresenting his, Seth's, most innocent speech
and action into crimes of the first magnitude. He remembered the meaning
of those last few months in the Cape Ann homestead. All his
fiery determination to be what he had once been--Seth Bascom, the
self-respecting man and husband--collapsed and vanished. He groaned in
abject surrender. He could not go through it again; he was afraid. Of
any other person on earth he would not have been, but the unexpected
resurrection of Bennie D. made him a hesitating coward. Therefore he was
silent when his wife left him, and he realized that his opportunity was
gone, gone forever.

In utter misery and self-hatred he sat, with his head in his hands,
beside the kitchen table until eleven o'clock. Then he rose, got dinner,
and called Brown to eat it. He ate nothing himself, saying that he'd
lost his appetite somehow or other. After the meal he harnessed Joshua
to the little wagon and started on his drive to Eastboro. "I'll be back
early, I cal'late," were his last words as he drove out of the yard.

After he had gone, and Brown had finished clearing away and the
other housekeeping tasks which were now such a burden, the substitute
assistant went out to sit on the bench and smoke. The threatened
easterly wind had begun to blow, and the sky was dark with tumbling
clouds. The young man paid little attention to the weather, however. All
skies were gloomy so far as he was concerned, and the darkest day was no
blacker than his thoughts. Occasionally he glanced at the bungalow,
and on one such occasion was surprised to see a carriage, one of the
turnouts supplied by the Eastboro livery stable, roll up to its door
and Mrs. Bascom, the housekeeper, emerge, climb to the seat beside the
driver, and be driven away in the direction of the village. He idly
wondered where she was going, but was not particularly interested. When,
a half hour later, Ruth Graham left the bungalow and strolled off along
the path at the top of the bluff, he was very much interested indeed.
He realized, as he had been realizing for weeks, that he was more
interested in that young woman than in anything else on earth. Also,
that he had no right--miserable outcast that he was--to be interested in
her; and certainly it would be the wildest insanity to imagine that she
could be interested in him.

For what the lightkeeper might say or do, in the event of his secret
being discovered, he did not care in the least. He was long past that
point. And for the breaking of their solemn compact he did not care
either. Seth might or might not have played the traitor; that, too, was
a matter of no importance. Seth himself was of no importance; neither
was he. There was but one important person in the whole world, and she
was strolling along the bluff path at that moment. Therefore he left his
seat on the bench, hurried down the slope to the inner end of the cove,
noting absently that the tide of the previous night must have been
unusually high, climbed to the bungalow, turned the corner, and walked
slowly in the direction of the trim figure in the blue suit, which was
walking, even more slowly, just ahead of him.

It may be gathered that John Brown's feelings concerning the opposite
sex had changed. They had, and he had changed in other ways, also. How
much of a change had taken place he did not himself realize, until this
very afternoon. He did not realize it even then until, after he and the
girl in blue had met, and the customary expressions of surprise at their
casual meeting had been exchanged, the young lady seated herself on a
dune overlooking the tumbling sea and observed thoughtfully:

"I shall miss all this"--with a wave of her hand toward the waves--"next
week, when I am back again in the city."

Brown's cap was in his hand as she began to speak. After she had
finished he stooped to pick up the cap, which had fallen to the ground.

"You are going away--next week?" he said slowly.

"We are going to-morrow. I shall remain in Boston for a few days. Then I
shall visit a friend in the Berkshires. After that I may join my brother
in Europe; I'm not sure as to that."

"To-morrow?"

"Yes!"

There was another one of those embarrassing intervals of silence which
of late seemed to occur so often in their conversation. Miss Graham, as
usual, was the first to speak.

"Mr. Brown," she began. The substitute assistant interrupted her.

"Please don't call me that," he blurted involuntarily. "It--oh, confound
it, it isn't my name!"

She should have been very much surprised. He expected her to be. Instead
she answered quite calmly.

"I know it," she said.

"You DO?"

"Yes. You are 'Russ' Brooks, aren't you?"

Russell Brooks, alias John Brown, dropped his cap again, but did not
pick it up. He swallowed hard.

"How on earth did you know that?" he asked as soon as he could say
anything.

"Oh, it was simple enough. I didn't really know; I only guessed. You
weren't a real lightkeeper, that was plain. And you weren't used to
washing dishes or doing housework--that," with the irrepressible curl of
the corners of her lips, "was just as plain. When you told me that fib
about meeting my brother here last summer I was sure you had met him
somewhere, probably at college. So in my next letter to him I described
you as well as I could, mentioned that you were as good or a better
swimmer than he, and asked for particulars. He answered that the
only fellow he could think of who fitted your description was 'Russ'
Brooks--Russell, I suppose--of New York; though what Russ Brooks was
doing as lightkeeper's assistant at Eastboro Twin-Lights he DIDN'T know.
Neither did I. But then, THAT was not my business."

The substitute assistant did not answer: he could not, on such short
notice.

"So," continued the girl, "I felt almost as if I had known you for a
long time. You and Horace were such good friends at college, and he
had often told me of you. I was very glad to meet you in real life,
especially here, where I had no one but Mrs. Bascom to talk to; Mr.
Atkins, by reason of his aversion to my unfortunate sex, being barred."

Mr. Brown's--or Mr. Brooks'--next speech harked back to her previous
one.

"I'll tell you while I'm here," he began.

"You needn't, unless you wish," she said. "I have no right to
know"--adding, with characteristic femininity, "though I'm dying to."

"But I want you to know. As I told Atkins when I first came, I haven't
murdered anyone and I haven't stolen anything. I'm not a crook running
from justice. I'm just a plain idiot who fell overboard from a steamer
and"--bitterly--"hadn't the good luck to drown."

She made no comment, and he began his story, telling it much as he had
told it to the lightkeeper.

"There!" he said in conclusion, "that's the whole fool business. That's
why I'm here. No need to ask what you think of it, I suppose."

She was silent, gazing at the breakers. He drew his own conclusions from
her silence.

"I see," he said. "Well, I admit it. I'm a low down chump. Still, if I
had it to do over again, I should do pretty much the same. A few things
differently, but in general the very same."

"What would you do differently?" she asked, still without looking at
him.

"For one thing, I wouldn't run away. I'd stay and face the music. Earn
my living or starve."

"And now you're going to stay here?"

"No longer than I can help. If I get the appointment as assistant keeper
I'll begin to save every cent I can. Just as soon as I get enough to
warrant risking it I'll head for Boston once more and begin the earning
or starving process. And," with a snap of his jaws, "I don't intend to
starve."

"You won't go back to your father?"

"If he sees fit to beg my pardon and acknowledge that I was right--not
otherwise. And he must do it of his own accord. I told him that when I
walked out of his office. It was my contribution to our fond farewell.
His was that he would see me damned first. Possibly he may."

She smiled.

"You must have been a charming pair of pepper pots," she observed. "And
the young lady--what of her?"

"She knows that I am fired, cut off even without the usual shilling.
That will be quite sufficient for her, I think."

"How do you know it will? How do you know she might not have been
willing to wait while you earned that living you are so sure is coming?"

"Wait? She wait for me? Ann Davidson wait for a man without a cent while
he tried to earn a good many dollars? Humph! you amuse me."

"Why not? You didn't give her a chance. You calmly took it for granted
that she wanted only money and social position and you walked off and
left her. How do you know she wouldn't have liked you better for telling
her just how you felt. If a girl really cared for a man it seems to me
that she would be willing to wait for him, years and years if it were
necessary, provided that, during that time, he was trying his best for
her."

"But--but--she isn't that kind of a girl."

"How do you know? You didn't put her to the test. You owed her that. It
seems to me you owe it to her now."

The answer to this was on his tongue. It was ready behind his closed
lips, eager to burst forth. That he didn't love the Davidson girl, never
had loved her. That during the past month he had come to realize there
was but one woman in the wide world for him. And did that woman mean
what she said about waiting years--and years--provided she cared? And
did she care?

He didn't utter one word of this. He wanted to, but it seemed so
preposterous. Such an idiotic, outrageous thing to ask. Yet it is
probable that he would have asked it if the young lady had given him
the chance. But she did not; after a sidelong glance at his face, she
hurriedly rose from the rock and announced that she must be getting back
to the house.

"I have some packing to do," she explained; "and, besides, I think it is
going to rain."

"But, Miss Graham, I--"

A big drop of rain splashing upon his shoe confirmed the weather
prophecy. She began to walk briskly toward the bungalow, and he walked
at her side.

"Another storm," she said. "I should think the one we have just passed
through was sufficient for a while. I hope Mrs. Bascom won't get wet."

"She has gone to the village, hasn't she?"

"Yes. She has received some message or other--I don't know how it
came--which sent her off in a hurry. A livery carriage came for her. She
will be back before night."

"Atkins has gone, too. He had some errands, I believe. I can't make out
what has come over him of late. He has changed greatly. He used to be so
jolly and good-humored, except when female picnickers came. Now he is as
solemn as an owl. When he went away he scarcely spoke a word. I thought
he seemed to be in trouble, but when I asked him, he shut me up so
promptly that I didn't press the matter."

"Did he? That's odd. Mrs. Bascom seemed to be in trouble, too. I thought
she had been crying when she came out of her room to go to the carriage.
She denied it, but her eyes looked red. What can be the matter?"

"I don't know."

"Nor I. Mr.--er--Brooks--Or shall I still call you 'Brown'?"

"No. Brown is dead; drowned. Let him stay so."

"Very well. Mr. Brooks, has it occurred to you that your Mr. Atkins is a
peculiar character? That he acts peculiarly?"

"He has acted peculiarly ever since I knew him. But to what particular
peculiarity do you refer?"

"His queer behavior. Several times I have seen him--I am almost sure
it was he--hiding or crouching behind the sand hills at the rear of our
bungalow."

"You have? Why, I--"

He hesitated. Before he could go on or she continue, the rain came in a
deluge. They reached the porch just in time.

"Well, I'm safe and reasonably dry," she panted. "I'm afraid you will be
drenched before you get to the lights. Don't you want an umbrella?"

"No. No, indeed, thank you."

"Well, you must hurry then. Good-by."

"But, Miss Graham," anxiously, "I shall see you again before you go.
To-morrow, at bathing time, perhaps?"

"Judging by the outlook just at present, bathing will be out of the
question to-morrow."

"But I want to see you. I must."

She shook her head doubtfully. "I don't know," she said. "I shall be
very busy getting ready to leave; but perhaps we may meet again."

"We must. I--Miss Graham, I--"

She had closed the door. He ran homeward through the rain, the storm
which soaked him to the skin being but a trifle compared to the tornado
in his breast.

He spent the balance of the day somehow, he could not have told how. The
rain and wind continued; six o'clock came, and Seth should have returned
an hour before, but there was no sign of him. He wondered if Mrs. Bascom
had returned. He had not seen the carriage, but she might have come
while he was inside the house. The lightkeeper's nonappearance began to
worry him a trifle.

At seven, as it was dark, he took upon himself the responsibility
of climbing the winding stairs in each tower and lighting the great
lanterns. It was the first time he had done it, but he knew how, and the
duty was successfully accomplished. Then, as Atkins was still absent and
there was nothing to do but wait, he sat in the chair in the kitchen and
thought. Occasionally, and it showed the trend of his thoughts, he
rose and peered from the window across the dark to the bungalow. In
the living room of the latter structure a light burned. At ten it was
extinguished.

At half past ten he went to Seth's bedroom, found a meager assortment of
pens, ink and note paper, returned to the kitchen, sat down by the table
and began to write.

For an hour he thought, wrote, tore up what he had written, and began
again. At last the result of his labor read something like this:


"DEAR MISS GRAHAM:

"I could not say it this afternoon, although if you had stayed I think I
should. But I must say it now or it may be too late. I can't let you go
without saying it. I love you. Will you wait for me? It may be a very
long wait, although God knows I mean to try harder than I have ever
tried for anything in my life. If I live I will make something of myself
yet, with you as my inspiration. You know you said if a girl really
cared for a man she would willingly wait years for him. Do you care for
me as much as that? With you, or for you, I believe I can accomplish
anything. DO you care?

"RUSSELL BROOKS."


He put this in an envelope, sealed and addressed it, and without
stopping to put on either cap or raincoat went out in the night.

The rain was still falling, although not as heavily, but the wind was
coming in fierce squalls. He descended the path to the cove, floundering
through the wet bushes. At the foot of the hill he was surprised to find
the salt marsh a sea of water not a vestige of ground above the surface.
This was indeed a record-breaking tide, such as he had never known
before. He did not pause to reflect upon tides or such trivialities,
but, with a growl at being obliged to make the long detour, he rounded
the end of the cove and climbed up to the door of the bungalow. Under
the edge of that door he tucked the note he had written. As soon as
this was accomplished he became aware that he had expressed himself very
clumsily. He had not written as he might. A dozen brilliant thoughts
came to him. He must rewrite that note at all hazards.

So he spent five frantic minutes trying to coax that envelope from under
the door. But, in his care to push it far enough, it had dropped beyond
the sill, and he could not reach it. The thing was done for better
or for worse. Perfectly certain that it was for worse, he splashed
mournfully back to the lights. In the lantern room of the right-hand
tower he spent the remainder of the night, occasionally wandering out on
the gallery to note the weather.

The storm was dying out. The squalls were less and less frequent, and
the rain had been succeeded by a thick fog. The breakers pounded in the
dark below him, and from afar the foghorns moaned and wailed. It was a
bad night, a night during which no lightkeeper should be absent from his
post. And where was Seth?




CHAPTER XIV

"BENNIE D."


Seth's drive to Eastboro was a dismal journey. Joshua pounded along over
the wet sand or through ruts filled with water, and not once during the
trip was he ordered to "Giddap" or "Show some signs of life." Not
until the first scattered houses of the village were reached did the
lightkeeper awaken from his trance sufficiently to notice that the old
horse was limping slightly with the right forefoot.

"Hello!" exclaimed Seth. "What's the matter with you, Josh?"

Joshua slopped on, but this was a sort of three-legged progress. The
driver leaned forward and then pulled on the reins.

"Whoa!" he ordered. "Stand still!"

Joshua stood still, almost with enthusiasm. Seth tucked the end of the
reins between the whip socket and the dashboard, and swung out of
the wagon to make an examination. Lifting the lame foot, he found the
trouble at once. The shoe was loose.

"Humph!" he soliloquized. "Cal'late you and me'll have to give Benijah
a job. Well," climbing back into the vehicle, "I said I'd never give him
another after the row we had about the last, but I ain't got ambition
enough to go clear over to the Denboro blacksmith's. I don't care. I
don't care about nothin' any more. Giddap."

Benijah Ellis's little, tumble-down blacksmith shop was located in the
main street of Eastboro, if that hit-or-miss town can be said to possess
a main street. Atkins drove up to its door, before which he found
Benijah and a group of loungers inspecting an automobile, the body of
which had been removed in order that the engine and running gear might
be the easier reached. The blacksmith was bending over the car, his head
and shoulders down amidst the machinery; a big wrench was in his hand,
and other wrenches, hammers, and tools of various sizes were scattered
on the ground beside him.

"Hello, Benije," grunted Seth.

Ellis removed his nose from its close proximity to the gear shaft
and straightened up. He was a near-sighted, elderly man, and wore
spectacles. Just now his hands, arms, and apron were covered with grease
and oil, and, as he wiped his forehead with the hand not holding the
wrench, he left a wide mourning band across it.

"Well?" he panted. "Who is it? Who wants me?"

One of the loafers, who had been assisting the blacksmith by holding his
pipe while he dove into the machinery, languidly motioned toward the new
arrival. Benijah adjusted his spectacles and walked over to the wagon.

"Who is it?" he asked crossly. Then, as he recognized his visitor, he
grunted: "Ugh! it's you, hey. Well, what do YOU want?"

"Want you to put a new shoe on this horse of mine," replied Seth, not
too graciously.

"Is that so! Well, I'm busy."

"I don't care if you be. I guess you ain't so busy you can't do a job of
work. If you are, you're richer'n I ever heard you was."

"I want to know! Maybe I'm particular who I work for, Seth Atkins."

"Maybe you are. I ain't so particular; if I was, I wouldn't come here,
I tell you that. This horse of mine's got a loose shoe, and I want him
attended to quick."

"Thought you said you'd never trust me with another job."

"I ain't trustin' you now. I'll be here while it's done. And I ain't
askin' you to trust me, neither. I'll pay cash--cash, d'ye understand?"

The bystanders grinned. Mr. Ellis's frown deepened. "I'm busy," he
declared, with importance. "I've got Mr. Delancey Barry's automobile to
fix, and I can't stop to bother with horses--specially certain kind of
horses."

This sneer at Joshua roused his owner's ire. He dropped the reins and
sprang to the ground.

"See here, Benije Ellis," he growled, advancing upon the repairer of
automobiles, who retreated a step or two with promptness. "I don't care
what you're fixin', nor whose it is, neither. I guess 'twill be 'fixed'
all right when you get through with it, but that ain't neither here nor
there. And it don't make no difference if it does belong to Mr. Barry.
If 'twas Elijah's chariot of fire 'twould be just the same. That auto
won't be done this afternoon, and nobody expects it to be. Here's my
horse sufferin' to be shod; I want him shod and I've got the money to
pay for it. When it's winter time you're around cryin' that you can't
earn money to pay your bills. Now, just because it's summer and there's
city big-bugs in the neighborhood innocent enough to let you tinker with
their autos--though they'll never do it but once--I don't propose to
be put off. If you won't shoe this horse of mine I'll know it's because
you've got so much money you don't need more. And if that's the case,
there's a whole lot of folks would be mighty glad to know it--Henry G.
Goodspeed for one. I'm goin' up to his store now. Shall I tell him?"

This was a shot in the bull's-eye. Mr. Ellis owed a number of bills,
had owed them for a long time, and Mr. Goodspeed's was by no means
the smallest. The loafers exchanged winks, and the blacksmith's manner
became more conciliatory.

"I didn't say I wouldn't do it for you, Seth," he pleaded. "I'm always
willin' to do your work. You're the one that's been complainin'."

"Ugh! Well, I'm likely to complain some more, but the complaint's one
thing, and the need's another. I'm like Joel Knowles--he said when he
couldn't get whisky he worried along best he could with bay rum. I
need a blacksmith, and if I can't get a real one I'll put up with an
imitation. Will you shoe this horse for me?"

"Course I'll shoe him. But I can't do it this minute. I've got this
consarned machine," waving a hand toward the automobile, "out of door
here and all to pieces. And it's goin' to rain. Just let me put enough
of it together so's I can shove it into the shop out of the wet, and
then I'll tackle your job. You leave your horse and team here and go do
your other errands. He'll be ready when you come back."

So on this basis the deal was finally made. Seth was reluctant to trust
the precious Joshua out of his sight, but, after some parley, he agreed
to do so. The traces were unfastened, and the animal was led into the
shop, the carriage was backed under a shed, and the lightkeeper went
away promising to be back in an hour. As soon as he had gone, Ellis
dived again into the vitals of the auto.

The argument with the blacksmith had one satisfactory result so far as
Seth was concerned. In a measure it afforded a temporary vent for his
feelings. He was moderately agreeable during his brief stay at the
grocery store, and when his orders were given and he found the hour not
half over, he strolled out to walk about the village. And then, alone
once more, all his misery and heartache returned. He strode along, his
head down, scarcely speaking to acquaintances whom he met, until he
reached the railway station, where he sat down on the baggage truck to
mentally review, over and over again, the scene with Emeline and the
dreadful collapse of his newborn hopes and plans.

As he sat there, the door of the station opened and a man emerged, a man
evidently not a native of Eastboro. He was dressed in a rather loud, but
somewhat shabby, suit of summer plaid, his straw hat was set a trifle
over one ear, and he was smoking the stump of a not too fragrant
cigar. Altogether he looked like a sporting character under a temporary
financial cloud, but the cloud did not dim his self-satisfaction nor
shadow his magnificent complaisance. He regarded the section of Eastboro
before him with condescending scorn, and then, catching sight of the
doleful figure on the baggage truck, strolled over and addressed it.

"I say, my friend," he observed briskly, "have you a match concealed
about your person? If so, I--"

He stopped short, for Mr. Atkins, after one languid glance in his
direction, had sprung from the truck and was gazing at him as if he was
some apparition, some figure in a nightmare, instead of his blase self.
And he, as he looked at the lightkeeper's astounded countenance,
dropped the cigar stump from his fingers and stepped backward in alarmed
consternation.

"You--you--YOU?" gasped Seth.

"YOU!" repeated the stranger.

"You!" cried Seth again; not a brilliant nor original observation, but,
under the circumstances, excusable, for the nonchalant person in
the plaid suit was Emeline Bascom's brother-in-law, the genius, the
"inventor," the one person whom he hated--and feared--more than anyone
else in the world--Bennie D. himself.

There was a considerable interval during which neither of the pair
spoke. Seth, open-mouthed and horror-stricken, was incapable of speech,
and the inventor's astonishment seemed to be coupled with a certain
nervousness, almost as if he feared a physical assault. However, as the
lightkeeper made no move, and his fists remained open, the nervousness
disappeared, and Bennie D. characteristically took command of the
situation.

"Hum!" he observed musingly. "Hum! May I ask what you are doing here?"

"Huh--hey?" was Seth's incoherent reply.

"I ask what you are doing here? Have you followed me?"

"Fol-follered you? No."

"You're sure of that, are you?"

"Yes, I be." Seth did not ask what Bennie D. was doing there. Already
that question was settled in his mind. The brother-in-law had found
out that Emeline was living next door to the man she married, that her
summer engagement was over, and he had come to take her away.

"Well?" queried the inventor sharply, "if you haven't followed me, what
are you doing here? What do you mean by being here?"

"I belong here," desperately. "I work here."

"You do? And may I ask what particular being is fortunate enough to
employ you?"

"I'm keeper down to the lighthouses, if you want to know. But I cal'late
you know it already."

Bennie D.'s coolness was not proof against this. He started.

"The lighthouses?" he repeated. "The--what is it they call them?--the
Twin-Lights?"

"Yes. You know it; what's the use of askin' fool questions?"

The inventor had not known it--until that moment, and he took time to
consider before making another remark. His sister-in-law was employed as
housekeeper at some bungalow or other situated in close proximity to
the Twin-Lights; that he had discovered since his arrival on the morning
train. Prior to that he had known only that she was in Eastboro for
the summer. Before that he had not been particularly interested in her
location. Since the day, two years past, when, having decided that he
had used her and her rapidly depleting supply of cash as long as was
safe or convenient, he had unceremoniously left her and gone to New
York to live upon money supplied by a credulous city gentleman, whom his
smooth tongue had interested in his "inventions," he had not taken the
trouble even to write to Emeline. But within the present month the New
Yorker's credulity and his "loans" had ceased to be material assets.
Then Bennie D., face to face with the need of funds, remembered his
sister and the promise given his dead brother that he should be provided
with a home as long as she had one.

He journeyed to Cape Ann and found, to his dismay, that she was no
longer there. After some skillful detective work, he learned of the
Eastboro engagement and wrote the letter--a piteous, appealing letter,
full of brotherly love and homesickness--which, held back by the storm,
reached Mrs. Bascom only that morning. In it he stated that he was
on his way to her and was counting the minutes until they should be
together once more. And he had, as soon after his arrival in the village
as possible, 'phoned to the Lights and spoken with her. Her tone, as
she answered, was, he thought, alarmingly cold. It had made him
apprehensive, and he wondered if his influence over her was on the wane.
But now--now he understood. Her husband--her husband, of all people--had
been living next door to her all summer. No doubt she knew he was there
when she took the place. Perhaps they had met by mutual agreement. Why,
this was appalling! It might mean anything. And yet Seth did not
look triumphant or even happy. Bennie D. resolved to show no signs of
perturbation or doubt, but first to find out, if he could, the truth,
and then to act accordingly.

"Mr. Bascom--" he began. The lightkeeper, greatly alarmed, interrupted
him.

"Hush!" he whispered. "Don't say that. That ain't my name--down here."

"Indeed? What is your name?"

"Down here they call me Seth Atkins."

Bennie D. looked puzzled. Then his expression changed. He was relieved.
When he 'phoned to the Lights--using the depot 'phone--the station agent
had seemed to consider his calling a woman over the lighthouse wire
great fun. The lightkeeper, so the agent said, was named Atkins, and was
a savage woman-hater. He would not see a woman, much less speak to one;
it was a standing joke in the neighborhood, Seth's hatred of females.
That seemed to prove that Emeline and her husband were not reconciled
and living together, at least. Possibly their being neighbors was merely
a coincidence. If so, he might not have come too late. When he next
addressed his companion it was in a different tone and without the
"Mister."

"Bascom--or--er--Atkins," he said sharply, "I hoped--I sincerely hoped
that you and I might not meet during my short stay here; but, as we have
met, I think it best that we should understand each other. Suppose we
walk over to that clump of trees on the other side of the track.
We shall be alone there, and I can say what is necessary. I don't
wish--even when I remember your behavior toward my sister--to humiliate
you in the town where you may be trying to lead a better life. Come."

He led the way, and Seth, yielding as of old to this man's almost
hypnotic command over him and still bewildered by the unexpected
meeting, followed like a whipped dog. Under the shelter of the trees
they paused.

"Now then," said Bennie D., "perhaps you'll tell me what you mean by
decoying my sister down here in my absence, when I was not present to
protect her. What do you mean by it?"

Seth stared at him uncomprehendingly. "Decoyin' her?" he repeated. "I
never decoyed her. I've been here ever since I left--left you and her
that night. I never asked her to come. I didn't know she was comin'. And
she didn't know I was here until--until a month or so ago. I--"

Bennie D. held up a hand. He was delighted by this piece of news, but he
did not show it.

"That will do," he said. "I understand all that. But since then--since
then? What do you mean by trying to influence her as you have? Answer
me!"

The lightkeeper rubbed his forehead.

"I ain't tried to influence her," he declared. "She and me have scarcely
seen each other. Nobody knows that we was married, not even Miss Graham
nor the young feller that's--that's my helper at the lights. You must
know that. She must have wrote you. What are you talkin' about?"

She had not written; he had received no letters from her during the two
years, but again the wily "genius" was equal to the occasion. He looked
wise and nodded.

"Of course," he said importantly. "Of course. Certainly."

He hesitated, not knowing exactly what his next move should be. And
Seth, having had time to collect, in a measure, his scattered wits,
began to do some thinking on his own account.

"Say," he said suddenly, "if you knew all this aforehand, what are you
askin' these questions for?"

"That," Bennie D.'s gesture was one of lofty disdain, "is my business."

"I want to know! Well, then, maybe I've got some business of my own. Who
made my business your business? Hey?"

"The welfare of my sister--"

"Never you mind your sister. You're talkin' with me now. And you ain't
got me penned up in a house, neither. By jiminy crimps!" His anger
boiled over, and, to the inventor's eyes, he began to look alarmingly
alive. "By jiminy crimps!" repeated Seth, "I've been prayin' all these
years to meet you somewheres alone, and now I've a good mind to--to--"

His big fist closed. Bennie D. stepped backward out of reach.

"Bascom--" he cried, "don't--"

"Don't you call me that!"

"Bascom--" The inventor was thoroughly frightened, and his voice rose
almost to a shout.

The lightkeeper's wrath vanished at the sound of the name. If any native
of Eastboro, if the depot master on the other side of the track, should
hear him addressed as "Bascom," the fat would be in the fire for good
and all. The secret he had so jealously guarded would be out, and all
the miserable story would, sooner or later, be known.

"Don't call me Bascom," he begged. "Er--please don't."

Bennie D.'s courage returned. Yet he realized that if a trump card was
to be played it must be then. This man was dangerous, and, somehow
or other, his guns must be spiked. A brilliant idea occurred to him.
Exactly how much of the truth Seth knew he was not sure, but he took the
risk.

"Very well then--Atkins," he said contemptuously. "I am not used to
aliases--not having dealt with persons finding it necessary to employ
them--and I forget. But before this disagreeable interview is ended I
wish you to understand thoroughly why I am here. I am here to protect my
sister and to remove her from your persecution. I am here to assist her
in procuring a divorce."

"A divorce! A DIVORCE! Good heavens above!"

"Yes, sir," triumphantly, "a divorce from the man she was trapped into
marrying and who deserted her. You did desert her, you can't deny
that. So long as she remains your wife, even in name, she is liable
to persecution from you. She understands this. She and I are to see a
lawyer at once. That is why I am here."

Seth was completely overwhelmed. A divorce! A case for the papers to
print, and all of Ostable county to read!

"I--I--I--" he stammered, and then added weakly, "I don't believe it.
She wouldn't . . . There ain't no lawyer here."

"Then we shall seek the one nearest here. Emeline understands. I 'phoned
her this morning."

"Was it YOU that 'phoned?"

"It was. Now--er--Atkins, I am disposed to be as considerate of your
welfare as possible. I know that any publicity in this matter might
prejudice you in the eyes of your--of the government officials. I shall
not seek publicity, solely on your account. The divorce will be obtained
privately, provided--PROVIDED you remain out of sight and do not
interfere. I warn you, therefore, not to make trouble or to attempt to
see my sister again. If you do--well, if you do, the consequences will
be unpleasant for you. Do you understand?"

Seth understood, or thought he did. He groaned and leaned heavily
against a tree trunk.

"You understand, do you?" repeated Bennie D. "I see that you do. Very
good then. I have nothing more to say. I advise that you remain--er--in
seclusion for the next few days. Good-by."

He gave a farewell glance at the crushed figure leaning against the
tree. Then he turned on his heel and walked off.

Seth remained where he was for perhaps ten minutes, not moving a muscle.
Then he seemed to awaken, looked anxiously in the direction of the depot
to make sure that no one was watching, pulled his cap over his eyes,
jammed his hands into his pockets, and started to walk across the
fields. He had no fixed destination in mind, had no idea where he was
going except that he must go somewhere, that he could not keep still.

He stumbled along, through briers and bushes, paying no attention to
obstacles such as fences or stone walls until he ran into them, when he
climbed over and went blindly on. A mile from Eastboro, and he was
alone in a grove of scrub pines. Here he stopped short, struck his hands
together, and groaned aloud:

"I don't believe it! I don't believe it!"

For he was beginning not to believe it. At first he had not thought
of doubting Bennie D.'s statement concerning the divorce. Now, as his
thoughts became clearer, his doubts grew. His wife had not mentioned the
subject in their morning interview. Possibly she would not have done
so in any event, but, as the memory of her behavior and speech became
clearer in his mind, it seemed to him that she could not have kept such
a secret. She had been kinder, had seemed to him more--yes, almost--why,
when he asked her to be his again, to give him another chance, she had
hesitated. She had not said no at once, she hesitated. If she was about
to divorce him, would she have acted in such a way? It hardly seemed
possible.

Then came the letter and the telephone message. It was after these that
she had said no with decision. Perhaps . . . was it possible that she
had known of her brother-in-law's coming only then? Now that he thought
of it, she had not gone away at once after the talk over the 'phone. She
had waited a moment as if for him to speak. He, staggered and paralyzed
by the sight of his enemy's name in that letter, had not spoken and
then she . . . He did not believe she was seeking a divorce! It was all
another of Bennie D.'s lies!

But suppose she was seeking it. Or suppose--for he knew the persuasive
power of that glib tongue only too well--suppose her brother-in-law
should persuade her to do it. Should he sit still--in seclusion, as his
late adviser had counseled--and let this irrevocable and final move
be made? After a divorce--Seth's idea of divorces were vague and
Puritanical--there would be no hope. He and Emeline could never come
together after that. And he must give her up and all his hopes of
happiness, all that he had dreamed of late, would be but dreams, never
realities. No! he could not give them up. He would not. Publicity,
scandal, everything, he could face, but he would not give his wife up
without a fight. What should he do?

For a long time he paced up and down beneath the pines trying to plan,
to come to some decision. All that he could think of was to return to
the Lights, to go openly to the bungalow, see Emeline and make one last
appeal. Bennie D. might be there, but if he was--well, by jiminy crimps,
let him look out, that's all!

He had reached this point in his meditations when the wind, which had
been steadily increasing and tossing the pinetops warningly, suddenly
became a squall which brought with it a flurry of rain. He started and
looked up. The sky was dark, it was late in the afternoon, and the storm
he had prophesied had arrived.

Half an hour later he ran, panting and wet, into the blacksmith's shop.
The automobile was standing in the middle of the floor, and Mr. Ellis
was standing beside it, perspiring and troubled.

"Where's Joshua?" demanded Seth.

"Hey?" inquired the blacksmith absently.

"Where's my horse? Is he ready?"

Benijah wiped his forehead.

"Gosh!" he exclaimed. "By . . . gosh!"

"What are you b'goshin' about?"

"Seth--I don't know what you'll say to me--but--but I declare I forgot
all about your horse."

"You FORGOT about him?"

"Yes. You see that thing?" pointing pathetically at the auto. "Well,
sir, that pesky thing's breakin' my heart--to say nothin' of my back. I
got it apart all right, no trouble about that. And by good rights
I've got it together again, leastways it looks so. Yet, by time," in
distracted agitation, "there's a half bucket of bolts and nuts and odds
and ends that ain't in it yet--left over, you might say. And I can't
find any place to put one of 'em. Do you wonder I forget trifles?"

Trifles! the shoeing of Joshua a trifle! The lightkeeper had been
suffering for an opportunity to blow off steam, and the opportunity was
here. Benijah withered under the blast.

"S-sh-sh! sh-sh!" he pleaded. "Land sakes, Seth Atkins, stop it! I don't
blame you for bein' mad, but you nor nobody else sha'n't talk to me that
way. I'll fix your horse in five minutes. Yes, sir, in five minutes.
Shut up now, or I won't do it at all!"

He rushed over to the stall in the rear of the shop, woke Joshua from
the sweet slumber of old age, and led him to the halter beside the
forge. The lightkeeper, being out of breath, had nothing further to say
at the moment.

"What's the matter with all you lighthouse folks?" asked Benijah,
anxious to change the subject. "What's possessed the whole lot of you to
come to the village at one time? Whoa, boy, stand still!"

"The whole lot of us?" repeated Seth. "What do you mean?"

"Mean I've seen two of you at least this afternoon. That Bascom woman,
housekeeper at the Graham bungalow she is, went past here twice. Fust
time she was in one of Snow's livery buggies, Snow's boy drivin' her.
Then, about an hour ago, she went by again, but the boy'd gone, and
there was another feller pilotin' the team--a stranger, nobody I ever
see afore."

Seth's red face turned pale. "What?" he cried. "Em--Mrs. Bascom ridin'
with a stranger! What sort of a stranger?"

"Oh, a feller somewheres between twenty and fifty. Smooth-faced critter
with a checked suit and a straw hat. . . . What on earth's the matter
with you now?"

For the lightkeeper was shaking from head to foot.

"Did--did--which way was they goin'? Back to the Lights or--or where?"

"No, didn't seem to be goin' to the Lights at all. They went on the
other road. Seemed to be headin' for Denboro if they kept on as they
started. . . . Seth Atkins, have you turned loony?"

Seth did not answer. With a leap he landed at Joshua's head, unhooked
the halter, and ran out of the shop leading the horse. The astonished
blacksmith followed as far as the door. Seth was backing the animal into
his wagon, which stood beneath the shed. He fastened the traces with
trembling fingers.

"What in the world has struck you?" shouted Ellis. "Ain't you goin' to
have that shoe fixed? He can't travel that way. Seth! Seth Atkins! . . .
By time, he IS crazy!"

Seth did not deny the charge. Climbing into the wagon, he took up the
reins.

"Are you sure and sartin' 'twas the Denboro road they took?" he
demanded.

"Who took? That feller and the Bascom woman? Course I am, but . . .
Well, I swan!"

For the lightkeeper waited to hear no more. He struck the unsuspecting
Joshua with the end of the reins and, with a jump, the old horse started
forward. Another moment, and the lighthouse wagon was splashing and
rattling through the pouring rain along the road leading to Denboro.




CHAPTER XV

THE VOYAGE OF THE DAISY M.


Denboro is many long miles from Eastboro, and the road, even in the
best of weather, is not a good one. It winds and twists and climbs and
descends through woods and over hills. There are stretches of marshy
hollows where the yellow clay needs but a little moistening to become a
paste which sticks to wheels and hoofs and makes traveling, even behind
a young and spirited horse, a disheartening progress.

Joshua was neither young nor spirited. And the weather could not have
been much worse. The three days' storm had soaked everything, and the
clay-bottomed puddles were near kin to quicksands. As the lighthouse
wagon descended the long slope at the southern end of the village and
began the circle of the inner extremity of Eastboro Back Harbor, Seth
realized that his journey was to be a hard one. The rain, driven by the
northeast wind, came off the water in blinding gusts, and the waves in
the harbor were tipped with white. Also, although the tide was almost
at its lowest, streaks of seaweed across the road showed where it had
reached that forenoon, and prophesied even a greater flood that night.
He turned his head and gazed up the harbor to where it narrowed and
became Pounddug Slough. In the Slough, near its ocean extremity, his old
schooner, the Daisy M., lay stranded. He had not visited her for a week,
and he wondered if the "spell of weather" had injured her to any extent.
This speculation, however, was but momentary. The Daisy M. must look out
for herself. His business was to reach Judge Gould's, in Denboro, before
Mrs. Bascom and Bennie D. could arrange with that prominent citizen and
legal light for the threatened divorce.

That they had started for Judge Gould's he did not doubt for a moment.
"I shall seek the nearest lawyer," Bennie D. had said. And the judge
was the nearest. They must be going there, or why should they take
that road? Neither did he doubt now that their object was to secure the
divorce. How divorces were secured, or how long it took to get one, Seth
did not know. His sole knowledge on that subject was derived from the
newspapers and comic weeklies, and he remembered reading of places in
the West where lawyers with the necessary blanks in their pockets met
applicants at the arrival of one train and sent them away, rejoicing and
free, on the next.

     "You jump right off the cars and then
     Turn round and jump right on again."

This fragment of a song, sung at a "moving-picture" show in the town
hall, and resung many times thereafter by Ezra Payne, John Brown's
predecessor as assistant keeper at the lights, recurred to him as he
urged the weary Joshua onward. So far as Seth knew, the Reno custom
might be universal. At any rate, he must get to Judge Gould's before
Emeline and her brother-in-law left there. What he should do when he
arrived and found them there was immaterial; he must get there, that was
all.

Eastboro Back Harbor was left behind, and the long stretch of woods
beyond was entered. Joshua, his hoofs swollen by the sticky clay
to yellow cannon balls, plodded on, but, in spite of commands and
pleadings--the lightkeeper possessed no whip and would not have used one
if he had--he went slower and slower. He was walking now, and limping
sadly on the foot where the loose shoe hung by its bent and broken
nails.

Five miles, six, seven, and the limp was worse than ever. Seth, whose
conscience smote him, got out of the carriage into the rain and mud
and attempted repairs, using a stone as a hammer. This seemed to help
matters some, but it was almost dark when the granite block marking the
township line was passed, and the windows in the houses were alight when
he pulled up at the judge's door.

The judge himself answered the knock, or series of knocks. He seemed
much surprised to find the keeper of Eastboro Twin-Lights standing on
his front step.

"Why, hello, Atkins!" he cried. "What in the world are you doing over
here? a night like this!"

"Has--has Mrs. Bascom been here? Is she here now?" panted Seth
anxiously.

"Mrs. Bascom? Who is Mrs. Bascom?"

"She--she's a friend of mine. She and--and a relation of hers was comin'
over here to see you on business. Ain't they here? Ain't they been
here?"

"No. No one has been here this afternoon. I've been in since one
o'clock, and not a soul has called, on business or otherwise."

The lightkeeper could scarcely believe it.

"You're sure?" he demanded.

"Certainly. If they came before one my wife would have told me, I think.
I'll ask her."

"No, no," hastily. "You needn't. If they ain't been since one they ain't
been. But I don't understand. . . . There's no other lawyer nigh here,
is there?"

"No; none nearer than Bayport."

"My land! My LAND! Then--then I'm out of soundin's somehow. They never
came for it, after all."

"Came for what?"

"Nothin', nothin', I guess," with a sickly smile. "I've made some sort
of mistake, though I don't know how. Benije must have . . . I'll break
that feller's neck; I will!"

The lawyer began to share the blacksmith's opinion that his caller had
gone crazy.

"Come in, Atkins," he urged. "Come in out of the wet. What IS the
matter? What are you doing here at this time of night so far from the
Lights? Is it anything serious? Come in and tell me about it."

But Seth, instead of accepting the invitation, stared at him aghast.
Then, turning about, he leaped down the steps, ran to the wagon and
climbed in.

"Giddap!" he shouted. Poor, tired Joshua lifted his clay-daubed hoofs.

"You're not going back?" cried Gould. "Hold on, Atkins! Wait!"

But Seth did not wait. Already he had turned his horse's head toward
Eastboro, and was driving off. The lawyer stood still, amazedly looking
after him. Then he went into the house and spent the next quarter of an
hour trying to call the Twin-Lights by telephone. As the northeast wind
had finished what the northwest one had begun and the wire was down,
his attempt was unsuccessful. He gave it up after a time and sat down to
discuss the astonishing affair with his wife. He was worried.

But his worriment was as nothing compared to Seth's. The lawyer's
reference to the Lights had driven even matrimonial troubles from the
Atkins mind. The lights! the Twin-Lights! It was long past the time for
them to be lit, and there was no one to light them but Brown, a green
hand. Were they lit at all? If not, heaven knew what might happen or had
happened already.

He had thought of this before, of course, had vaguely realized that
he was betraying his trust, but then he had not cared. The Lights, his
position as keeper, everything, were side issues compared with the one
thing to be done, the getting to Denboro. He had reached Denboro
and found his journey all a mistake; his wife and Bennie D. had not,
apparently, visited that village; perhaps had not even started for it.
Therefore, in a measure relieved, he thought of other things. He was
many miles from his post of duty, and now his sole idea was to get back
to it.

At ten o'clock Mrs. Hepsibah Deacon, a widow living in a little house
in the woods on the top of the hill on the Denboro side of Eastboro Back
Harbor, with no neighbors for a mile in either direction, was awakened
by shouts under her bedroom window. Opening that window she thrust forth
her head.

"Who is it?" she demanded quaveringly. "What's the matter? Is anything
afire?"

From the blackness of the rain and fog emerged a vague shape.

"It's me, Mrs. Deacon; Seth Atkins, down to the Lights, you know. I've
left my horse and carriage in your barn. Josh--he's the horse--is
gone lame and played himself out. He can't walk another step. I've
unharnessed him and left him in the stall. He'll be all right. I've
given him some water and hay. Just let him stay there, if it ain't too
much trouble, and I'll send for him to-morrer and pay for his keep. It's
all right, ain't it? Much obliged. Good night."

Before the frightened widow could ask a question or utter a word he was
gone, ploughing down the hill in the direction of the Back Harbor. When
he reached the foot of that hill where the road should have been, he
found that it had disappeared. The tide had risen and covered it.

It was pitch-dark, the rain was less heavy, and clouds of fog were
drifting in before the wind. Seth waded on for a short distance,
but soon realized that wading would be an impossibility. Then, as in
despair, he was about ready to give up the attempt, a dark object came
into view beside him. It was a dory belonging to one of the lobstermen,
which, at the end of its long anchor rope, had swung inshore until
it floated almost over the road. Seth seized it in time to prevent
collision with his knees. The thole pins were in place, and the oars
laid lengthwise on its thwarts. As his hands touched the gunwale a new
idea came to him.

He had intended walking the rest of the way to Eastboro, routing out the
liveryman and hiring a horse and buggy with which to reach the Lights.
Now he believed chance had offered him an easier and more direct method
of travel. He could row up the Harbor and Slough, land close to where
the Daisy M. lay, and walk the rest of the way in a very short time. He
climbed into the dory, pulled up the anchor, and seated himself at the
oars.

The bottom of the boat was two inches deep with rain water, and the
thwart was dripping and cold. Seth, being already about as wet as he
could be, did not mind this, but pulled with long strokes out into the
harbor. The vague black shadows of the land disappeared, and in a minute
he was, so far as his eyes could tell him, afloat on a shoreless sea.
He had no compass, but this did not trouble him. The wind, he knew, was
blowing directly from the direction he wished to go, and he kept the
dory's bow in the teeth of it. He rowed on and on. The waves, out here
in the deep water, were of good size, and the spray flew as he splashed
into them. He knew that he was likely to get off the course, but the
Back Harbor was, except for its upper entrance, landlocked, and he could
not go far astray, no matter where he might hit the shore.

The fog clouds, driven by the squalls, drifted by and passed. At rare
intervals the sky was almost clear. After he had rowed for half an hour
and was beginning to think he must be traveling in circles, one of
these clear intervals came and, far off to the left and ahead, he saw
something which caused him to utter an exclamation of joy. Two
fiery eyes shone through the dark. The fog shut them in again almost
immediately, but that one glance was sufficient to show that all was
well at the post he had deserted. The fiery eyes were the lanterns in
the Twin-Lights towers. John Brown had been equal to the emergency, and
the lamps were lighted.

Seth's anxiety was relieved, but that one glimpse made him even more
eager for home. He rowed on for a short time, and then began edging in
toward the invisible left-hand shore. Judging by the length of time he
had been rowing, he must be close to the mouth of the Slough, where,
winding through the salt marshes, it emerged into the Back Harbor.

He crept in nearer and nearer, but no shore came in sight. The fog was
now so thick that he could see not more than ten feet from the boat,
but if he was in the mouth of the Slough he should have grounded on the
marsh bank long before. The reason that he did not, a reason which did
not occur to him at the time, was that the marshes were four feet under
water. Owing to the tremendous tide Pounddug Slough was now merely a
continuation of the Harbor and almost as wide.

The lightkeeper began to think that he must have miscalculated his
distance. He could not have rowed as far as he thought. Therefore,
he again turned the dory's nose into the teeth of the wind and pulled
steadily on. At intervals he stopped and listened. All he heard was
the moan of distant foghorns and the whistling of the gusts in trees
somewhere at his left. There were pine groves scattered all along the
bluffs on the Eastboro side, so this did not help him much except to
prove that the shore was not far away. He pulled harder on the right
oar. Then he stopped once more to listen.

Another blast howled through the distant trees and swept down upon him.
Then, borne on the wind, he heard from somewhere ahead, and alarmingly
near at hand, other sounds, voices, calls for help.

"Ahoy!" he shouted. "Ahoy there! Who is it? Where are you?"

"Help!" came the calls again--and nearer. "Help!"

"Look out!" roared Seth, peering excitedly over his shoulder into the
dark. "Where are you? Look out or you'll be afoul of . . . Jumpin'
Judas!"

For out of the fog loomed a bulky shape driving down upon him. He pulled
frantically at the oars, but it was too late. A mast rocked against the
sky, a stubby bowsprit shot over the dory, and the little boat, struck
broadside on, heeled to the water's edge. Seth, springing frantically
upward, seized the bowsprit and clung to it. The dory, pushed aside and
half full of water, disappeared. From the deck behind the bowsprit two
voices, a man's voice and a woman's, screamed wildly.

Seth did not scream. Clinging to the reeling bowsprit, he swung up on
it, edged his way to the vessel's bows and stepped upon the deck.

"For thunder sakes!" he roared angrily, "what kind of navigation's this?
Where's your lights, you lubbers? What d'you mean by--Where are you
anyhow? And--and what schooner's this?"

For the deck, as much as he could see of it in the dark, looked
astonishingly familiar. As he stumbled aft it became more familiar
still. The ropes, a combination of new and old, the new boards in the
deck planking, the general arrangement of things, as familiar to him as
the arrangement of furniture in the kitchen of the Lights! It could not
be . . . but it was! The little schooner was his own, his hobby, his
afternoon workshop--the Daisy M. herself. The Daisy M., which he had
last seen stranded and, as he supposed, hard and fast aground! The Daisy
M. afloat, after all these years!

From the stern by the cabin hatch a man came reeling toward him, holding
to the rail for support with one hand and brandishing the other.

"Help!" cried the man wildly. "Who is it? Help us! we're drowning! We're
. . . Can't you put us ashore. Please put us . . . Good Lord!"

Seth made no answer. How could he? The man was Bennie D.

And then another figure followed the first, and a woman's voice spoke
pleadingly.

"Have you got a boat?" it cried. "We're adrift on this dreadful thing
and . . . why, SETH!"

The woman was Emeline Bascom.

"Why, SETH!" she said again. Then the sounds of the wind and waves and
the creaking and cracking of the old schooner alone broke the silence.

But Bennie D., even under the shock of such a surprise as this, did not
remain silent long. His precious self was in danger.

"You put us ashore!" he shouted. "You put us ashore right off, do you
hear? Don't stand there like a fool! Do something. Do you want us to
drown? DO something!"

Seth came to life. His first speech was sharp and businesslike.

"Emeline," he said, "there's a lantern hanging up in the cabin. Go light
it and fetch it to me. Hurry!"

"It's upset," was the frightened answer. "Bennie found it when we first
came aboard. When we--when this awful boat started, it upset and went
out."

"Never mind. Probably there's ile enough left for a spell. Go fetch
it. There's matches in a box on the wall just underneath where 'twas
hangin'. Don't stop to talk! Move!"

Mrs. Bascom moved. Seth turned to the "inventor."

"Come for'ard with me," he ordered. "Here! this way! for'ard! FOR'ARD!"

He seized his companion by the arm and pulled him toward the bow. The
frightened genius held back.

"What in time is the matter with you?" snarled the lightkeeper. "Are
your feet asleep? Come!"

Bennie D. came, under compulsion. Seth half led, half dragged him to the
bow, and, bending down, uncoiled a rope and put it in his hands.

"Them's the jib halliards," he explained. "Haul on 'em quick and hard
as you can. If we can h'ist the jib we can get some steerage way on her,
maybe. Haul! haul till you can't haul no more. Then hang on till I come
back and make fast."

He rushed back to the wheel. The tiller ropes were new, and he could
trust them, fortunately. From the cabin hatchway emerged Mrs. Bascom
bearing the lighted lantern.

"Good!" snapped Seth. "Now we can see what we're doin' and, if we show
a glim, maybe we won't run down no more dories. You go for'ard and--No,
you take this wheel and hold it just as 'tis. JUST as 'tis; understand?
I'll be back in a jiffy. What in thunder's the matter with that foolhead
at the jib?"

He seized the lantern and rushed to the bow. Bennie D. had dropped the
halliard and was leaning over the rail screaming for help.

Seth hoisted the jib himself, made it fast, and then turned his
attention to the mutinous hand.

"Shut up!" he bellowed, catching him by the arm. "Who do you cal'late's
goin' to hear you? Shut up! You come with me. I want you to pump. The
old craft would do well enough if she was tight, but she's more'n likely
takin' water like a sieve. You come and pump."

But Bennie had no notion of pumping. With a jerk he tore loose from the
lightkeeper's grasp and ran to the stern, where he continued his howls
for help.

Seth was at his heels.

"Stop that, I tell you," he commanded angrily. "It don't do no good. If
you don't want to go to the bottom you'll work that pump. Don't be such
a clown."

The frantic genius paid no attention. His sister-in-law left the wheel
and put her hand on his shoulder. "Please, Bennie," she pleaded. "Please
do as he says. He knows, and--"

Bennie D. pushed her backward with savage force. "Mind your own
business," he yelled with an oath. "'Twas your foolishness got me into
this." Then, leaning over the rail, he called shrilly, "He--lp! I'm
drowning! Help!"

Mrs. Bascom staggered back against the wheel, which Seth had seized the
instant she deserted it. "Oh!" she said, "you hurt me."

Her husband freed an arm and put it about her. "Are you much hurt,
Emeline?" he asked sharply.

"No--o. No, Seth. I--I guess I ain't really hurt at all."

"Good! Then you take this wheel and hold her just so. That's it. AND
DON'T YOU DROP IT AGAIN. I'll attend to this feller."

His wiry fingers locked themselves in Bennie D.'s shirt collar.

"I ordered you to pump," said Seth. "Now then, you come and pump!"

"Let go!" screamed his captive. "Take your hands off me, or--"

The back of his head striking the deck put a period in the middle of
his sentence. The next moment he was being dragged by the collar to the
little hand pump amidships.

"Pump!" roared the lightkeeper. "Pump! or I'll break your everlastin'
neck. Lively now!"

The dazed genius rose to his knees. "What--" he stammered. "Where--"

"Right there in front of you. Lively, you lubber!"

A well-directed kick helped to facilitate liveliness.

"What shall I do?" wailed Bennie D., fumbling the pump brake. "How does
it go?"

"Up and down--so." Seth jerked his victim's head up and down, by way of
illustration. "Now, then," he continued, "you pump till I say quit, or
I'll--I swan to man I'll make a spare tops'l out of your hide!"

He left the inventor working as he had not worked in the memory of man,
and strode back to the wheel. Mrs. Bascom was clinging to the spokes for
dear life.

"I--I ain't dropped it, Seth," she declared. "Truly I ain't."

"All right. You can drop it now. I'll take it myself. You set down and
rest."

He took the wheel and she collapsed, breathless, against the rail. After
a time she ventured to ask a question.

"Seth!" she said, "how do you know which way to steer?"

"I don't," was the reply. "All I'm tryin' to do is keep her afore it. If
this no'theast wind would hold, we'd be all right, but it's dyin' fast.
And the tide must be at flood, if not startin' to go out. With no wind,
and no anchor, and the kind of ebb tide there'll be pretty soon--well,
if we don't drift out to sea we'll be lucky. . . . Pump! pump! you son
of a roustabout. If I hear you stoppin' for a second I'll come for'ard
and murder you."

Bennie D., who had ventured to rest for a moment, bent his aching back
to the task. Was this man-slaughtering tyrant his mild-mannered, meek
brother-in-law, the creature whom he had brow-beaten so often and
managed so effectively? He could not understand--but he pumped.

Perhaps Seth did not understand, either; perhaps he did not try to.
Yet the explanation was simple and natural. The sea, the emergency, the
danger, his own deck beneath his feet--these were like old times,
here was a situation he knew how to handle. He forgot that he was a
lightkeeper absent from duty, forgot that one of his passengers was the
wife he had run away from, and the other his bugbear, the dreaded and
formidable Bennie D. He forgot all this and was again the able seaman,
the Tartar skipper who, in former days, made his crews fear, respect,
and swear by him.

And he reveled in his authority. Once Mrs. Bascom rose to peer over the
rail.

"Emeline," he snapped, "didn't I tell you to set down and set still?
Must I give orders twice? SET DOWN!"

Emeline "set."

The wind died to fitful gusts. The schooner barely moved. The fog was
as thick as ever. Still Seth did not lose courage. When the housekeeper
ventured to murmur that she was certain they would drown, he reassured
her.

"Keep your pennant mast-high, Emeline," he said cheerfully. "We ain't
out at sea, that's sure and sartin. And, until we get in the breakers,
we're safe enough. The old gal leaks some; she ain't as dry as a
Good-Templar prayer meetin', but she's afloat. And when I'm afloat I
ain't afraid, and you needn't be."

Some time after that he asked a question in his turn.

"Emeline," he said, "what in the world are you doin' here, on my
schooner?"

"Your schooner, Seth? Yours? Is this dreadful--is this boat yours?"

"Yup. She's mine. I bought her just for fun a long spell ago, and I've
been fussin' with her ever since. But I did it FOR fun; I never s'posed
she'd take a cruise--like this. And what are you and--him--doin' on
her?"

Mrs. Bascom hesitated. "It was all an accident, Seth," she explained.
"This has been an awful night--and day. Bennie and I was out ridin'
together, and we took the wrong road. We got lost, and the rain was
awful. We got out of the buggy to stand under some trees where 'twas
drier. The horse got scared at some limbs fallin' and run off. Then it
was most dark, and we got down to the shore and saw this boat. There
wa'n't any water round her then. Bennie, he climbed aboard and said the
cabin was dry, so we went into it to wait for the storm to let up. But
it kept gettin' worse. When we came out of the cabin it was all fog like
this and water everywhere. Bennie was afraid to wade, for we couldn't
see the shore, so we went back into the cabin again. And then, all at
once, there was a bump that knocked us both sprawlin'. The lantern
went out, and when we come on deck we were afloat. It was terrible. And
then--and then you came, Seth, and saved our lives."

"Humph! Maybe they ain't saved yet. . . . Emeline, where was you drivin'
to?"

"Why, we was drivin' home, or thought we was."

"Home?"

"Yes, home--back to the bungalow."

"You was?"

"Yes."

A pause. Then: "Emeline, there's no use your tellin' me what ain't so.
I know more than you think I do, maybe. If you was drivin' home why did
you take the Denboro road?"

"The Denboro road? Why, we only went on that a ways. Then we turned off
on what we thought was the road to the Lights. But it wa'n't; it must
have been the other, the one that goes along by the edge of the
Back Harbor and the Slough, the one that's hardly ever used. Seth,"
indignantly, "what do you mean by sayin' that I told you what wa'n't so?
Do you think I lie?"

"No. No more than you thought I lied about that Christy critter."

"Seth, I was always sorry for that. I knew you didn't lie. At least I
ought to have known you didn't. I--"

"Wait. What did you take the Denboro road at all for?"

"Why--why--Well, Seth, I'll tell you. Bennie wanted to talk to me.
He had come on purpose to see me, and he wanted me to do somethin'
that--that . . . Anyhow, he'd come to see me. I didn't know he was
comin'. I hadn't heard from him for two years. That letter I got
this--yesterday mornin' was from him, and it most knocked me over."

"You hadn't HEARD from him? Ain't he been writin' you right along?"

"No. The fact is he left me two years ago without even sayin' good-by,
and--and I thought he had gone for good. But he hadn't," with a sigh,
"he hadn't. And he wanted to talk with me. That's why he took the other
road--so's he'd have more time to talk, I s'pose."

"Humph! Emeline, answer me true: Wa'n't you goin' to Denboro to get--to
get a divorce from me?"

"A divorce? A divorce from YOU? Seth Bascom, I never heard such--"

She rose from her seat against the rail.

"Set down," ordered her husband sharply. "You set down and keep down."

She stared, gasped, and resumed her seat. Seth gazed straight ahead into
the blackness. He swallowed once or twice, and his hands tightened on
the spokes of the wheel.

"That--that feller there," nodding grimly toward the groaning figure at
the pumps, "told me himself that him and you had agreed to get a divorce
from me--to get it right off. He give me to understand that you expected
him, 'twas all settled and that was why he'd come to Eastboro. That's
what he told me this afternoon on the depot platform."

Mrs. Bascom again sprang up.

"Set down!" commanded Seth.

"I won't."

"Yes, you will. Set down." And she did.

"Seth," she cried, "did he--did Bennie tell you that? Did he? Why, I
never heard such a--I never! Seth, it ain't true, not a word of it. Did
you think I'd get a divorce? Me? A self-respectin' woman? And from you?"

"You turned me adrift."

"I didn't. You turned yourself adrift. I was in trouble, bound by a
promise I give my dyin' husband, to give his brother a home while I had
one. I didn't want to do it; I didn't want him with us--there, where
we'd been so happy. But I couldn't say anything. I couldn't turn him
out. And you wouldn't, you--"

She was interrupted. From beneath the Daisy M.'s keel came a long,
scraping noise. The little schooner shook, and then lay still. The
waves, no longer large, slapped her sides.

Mrs. Bascom, startled, uttered a little scream. Bennie D., knocked
to his knees, roared in fright. Seth alone was calm. Nothing, at that
moment, could alarm or even surprise him.

"Humph!" he observed, "we're aground somewheres. And in the Harbor.
We're safe and sound now, I cal'late. Emeline, go below where it's
dry and stay there. Don't talk--go. As for you," leaving the wheel and
striding toward the weary inventor, "you can stop pumpin'--unless," with
a grim smile, "you like it too well to quit--and set down right where
you be. Right where you be, I said! Don't you move till I say the word.
WHEN I say it, jump!"

He went forward, lowered the jib, and coiled the halliards. Then,
lantern in hand, he seated himself in the bows. After a time he filled
his pipe, lit it by the aid of the lantern, and smoked. There was
silence aboard the Daisy M.

The wind died away altogether. The fog gradually disappeared. From
somewhere not far away a church clock struck the hour. Seth heard it and
smiled. Turning his head he saw in the distance the Twin-Lights burning
steadily. He smiled again.

Gradually, slowly, the morning came. The last remnant of low-hanging
mist drifted away. Before the bows of the stranded schooner appeared a
flat shore with a road, still partially covered by the receding tide,
along its border. Fish houses and anchored dories became visible. Behind
them were hills, and over them roofs and trees and steeples.

A step sounded behind the watcher in the bows. Mrs. Bascom was at his
elbow.

"Why, Seth!" she cried, "why, Seth! it's Eastboro, ain't it? We're close
to Eastboro."

Seth nodded. "It's Eastboro," he said. "I cal'lated we must be there or
thereabouts. With that no'theast breeze to help us we couldn't do much
else but fetch up at the inner end of the Back Harbor."

She laid her hand timidly on his arm.

"Seth," she whispered, "what should we have done without you? You saved
our lives."

He swung about and faced her. "Emeline," he said, "we've both been
awful fools. I've been the biggest one, I guess. But I've learned my
lesson--I've swore off--I told you I'd prove I was a man. Do you think
I've been one tonight?"

"Seth!"

"Well, do you? Or," with a gesture toward the "genius" who was beginning
to take an interest in his surroundings, "do you like that kind better?"

"Seth," reproachfully, "I never liked him better. If you had--"

She was interrupted by her brother-in-law, who came swaggering toward
them. With the sight of land and safety, Bennie D.'s courage returned;
also, his old assurance.

"Humph!" he observed. "Well, sister, we are safe, I really believe.
In spite of," with a glare at the lightkeeper, "this person's insane
recklessness and brutality. Now I will take you ashore and out of his
presence."

Seth rose to his feet.

"Didn't I tell you," he demanded, "not to move till I said the word?
Emeline, stay right here."

Bennie D. stared at the speaker; then at his sister-in-law.

"Sister," he cried, in growing alarm, "sister, come! come! we're going
ashore, I tell you. What are you waiting for?"

Seth put his arm about the lady.

"She is goin' ashore," he said. "But she's goin' with me, and she's
goin' to stay with me. Ain't you, Emeline?"

The lady looked up into his face and then down again. "If you want me,
Seth," she said.

Bennie D. sprang forward. "Emeline," he shrieked, "what do you mean? Are
you going to leave me? Have you forgotten--"

"She ain't forgot nothin'," broke in Seth. "But YOU'RE forgettin' what I
told you. Will you go aft there and set down, or shall I make you?"

"But--but, Emeline--sister--have you forgotten your promise to your
dying husband? To my brother? You promised to give me a home as long as
you owned one."

Then Seth played his trump.

"She don't own any home," he declared triumphantly. "She sold her house,
and she ain't got any home--except the one I'm goin' to give her. And
if you ever dare to show your head inside of THAT, I'll--I'll heave you
over both lights. If you think I'm foolin', just try and see. Now then,
Emeline."

And, with his wife in his arms, Seth Atkins--Seth Atkins Bascom--CAPTAIN
Seth Atkins Bascom--swung over the rail and waded to land.




CHAPTER XVI

THE EBB TIDE


"John Brown," his long night's vigil over, extinguished the lights in
the two towers, descended the iron stairs, and walked across the yard
into the kitchen. His first move, after entering the house, was to
ring the telephone bell and endeavor to call Eastboro. He was anxious
concerning Atkins. Seth had not returned, and the substitute assistant
was certain that some accident must have befallen him. The storm had
been severe, but it would take more than weather to keep the lightkeeper
from his post; if he was all right he would have managed to return
somehow.

Brown rang the bell time and time again, but got no response. The storm
had wrecked the wires, that was certain, and that means of communication
was cut off. He kindled the fire in the range and tried to forget his
anxiety by preparing breakfast. When it was prepared he waited a while
and then sat down to a lonely meal. But he had no appetite, and, after
dallying with the food on his plate, gave it up and went outside to look
about him.

The first thing he looked at was the road from the village. No sign of
life in that direction as far as he could see. Then he looked at the
bungalow. Early as it was, a thread of blue smoke was ascending from the
chimney. Did that mean that the housekeeper had returned? Or had Ruth
Graham been alone all through the miserable night? Under ordinary
circumstances he would have gone over and asked if all was well. He
would have done that, even if Seth were at home--he was past the point
where the lightkeeper or their compact could have prevented him--but he
could not muster courage to go now. She must have found the note he
had tucked under the door, and he was afraid to hear her answer. If it
should be no, then--well, then he did not care what became of him.

He watched the bungalow for a time, hoping that she might come out--that
he might at least see her--but the door did not open. Auguring all sorts
of dismal things from this, he moped gloomily back to the kitchen. He
was tired and had not slept for thirty hours, but he felt no desire for
bed. He could not go to bed anyway until Atkins returned--and he did not
want to.

He sat down in a chair and idly picked up one of a pile of newspapers
lying in the corner. They were the New York and Boston papers which the
grocery boy had brought over from Eastboro, with the mail, the previous
day. Seth had not even looked at them, and Brown, who seldom or never
read newspapers, found that he could not do so now. He tossed them on
the table and once more went out of doors. After another glance at the
bungalow, he walked to the edge of the bluff and looked over.

He was astonished to see how far the tide had risen in the night. The
line of seaweed and drift marking its highest point was well up the
bank. Now the ebb was foaming past the end of the wharf. He looked for
the lobster car, which should have been floating at its moorings, but
could not see it. Either it was under the wharf or it had been swept
away and was gone. And one of the dories was gone, too. No, there it
was, across the cove, high and dry on the beach. If so much damage was
visible from where he stood, it was probable that a closer examination
might show even more. He reentered the kitchen, took the boathouse key
from its nail--the key to Seth's wonderful purchase, the spring lock
which was to keep out thieves and had so far been of no use except as
a trouble-maker--and started for the wharf. As he passed the table he
picked up the bundle of newspapers and took them with him. The boathouse
was the repository for rubbish, old papers and magazines included,
and these might as well be added to the heap. Atkins had not read this
particular lot, but the substitute assistant did not think of this.

The lobster car was not under the wharf. The ropes which had moored
it were broken, and the car was gone. Splinters and dents in the piles
showed where it had banged and thumped in the grasp of the tide before
breaking loose. And, lying flat on the wharf and peering under it, it
seemed to him that the piles themselves were a trifle aslant; that the
whole wharf had settled down on the outer side.

He rose and was about to go further out for another examination, when
his foot struck the pile of papers he had brought with him. He picked
them up, and, unlocking the boathouse door--it stuck and required
considerable effort to open it--entered the building, tossed the papers
on the floor, and turned to go out. Before he could do so the door swung
shut with a bang and a click.

At first he did not realize what the click meant. Not until he tried to
open it did he understand. The settling of the wharf had thrown the door
and its frame out of the perpendicular. That was why it stuck and opened
with such reluctance. When he opened it, he had, so to speak, pushed it
uphill. Its own weight had swung it back, and the spring lock--in which
he had left the key--had worked exactly as the circular of directions
declared it would do. He was a prisoner in that boathouse.

Even then he did not fully grasp the situation. He uttered an
exclamation of impatience and tugged at the door; but it was heavy,
jammed tight in its frame, and the lock was new and strong. He might as
well have tried to pull up the wharf.

After a minute of fruitless effort he gave up the attempt on the door
and moved about the little building, seeking other avenues of escape.
The only window was a narrow affair, high up at the back, hung on hinges
and fastened with a hook and staple. He climbed up on the fish nets and
empty boxes, got the window open, and thrust his head and one shoulder
through the opening. That, however, was as far as he could go. A dwarf
might have squeezed through that window, but not an ex-varsity athlete
like Russell Brooks or a husky longshoreman like "John Brown." It was
at the back, facing the mouth of the creek and the sea, and afforded
a beautiful marine view, but that was all. He dropped back on the fish
nets and audibly expressed his opinion of the lock and the man who had
bought it.

Then he tried the door again, again gave it up, and sat down on the fish
nets to think. Thinking was unsatisfactory and provoking. He gave that
up, also, and, seeing a knothole in one of the boards in the landward
side of his jail, knelt and applied his eye to the aperture. His only
hope of freedom, apparently, lay in the arrival home of the lightkeeper.
If Seth had arrived he could shout through that knothole and possibly be
heard.

The knothole, however, commanded a view, not of the lighthouse
buildings, but of the cove and the bungalow. The bungalow! Ruth Graham!
Suddenly, and with a shock, flashed to his mind the thought that his
imprisonment, if at all prolonged, was likely to be, not a joke, but the
most serious catastrophe of his life.

For Ruth Graham was going to leave the bungalow and Eastboro that very
day. He had begged to see her once more, and this day was his last
chance. He had written her, pleading to see her and receive his answer.
If he did not see her, if Seth did not return before long and he
remained where he was, a prisoner and invisible, the last chance was
gone. Ruth would believe he had repented of his declaration as embodied
in the fateful note, and had fled from her. She had intimated that he
was a coward in not seeing his fiancee and telling her the truth. She
did not like his writing that other girl and running away. Now she
would believe the cowardice was inherent, because he had written her,
also--and had run away. Horrible!

Through the knothole he sent a yell for rescue. Another and another.
They were unheard--at least, no one emerged from the bungalow. He sprang
to his feet and made another circle of the interior of the boathouse.
Then he sank down upon the heap of nets and again tried to think. He
must get out. He must--somehow!

The morning sunshine streamed through the little window and fell
directly upon the pile of newspapers he had brought from the kitchen and
thrown on the floor. His glance chanced to rest for an instant upon the
topmost paper of the pile. It was a New York journal which devotes two
of its inside pages to happenings in society. When he threw it down
it had unfolded so that one of these pages lay uppermost. Absently,
scarcely realizing that he was doing so, the substitute assistant read
as follows:


"Engagement in High Life Announced. Another American Girl to Wed a
Nobleman. Miss Ann Gardner Davidson to become the Baroness Hardacre."


With a shout he fell upon his knees, seized the paper and read on:


"Another contemplated matrimonial alliance between one of New York's
fairest daughters and a scion of the English nobility was made public
yesterday. Miss Ann Gardner Davidson, of this city, the breaking of
whose engagement to Russell Agnew Brooks, son of George Agnew Brooks,
the wealthy cotton broker, was the sensation of the early spring, is to
marry Herbert Ainsworth-Ainsworth, Baron Hardacre, of Hardacre Towers,
Surrey on Kent, England. It was said that the young lady broke off her
former engagement with Young Brooks because of--"


The prisoner in the boathouse read no further. Ruth Graham had said to
him the day before that, in her opinion, he had treated Ann Davidson
unfairly. He should have gone to her and told her of his quarrel with
his father. Although he did not care for Ann, she might care for him.
Might care enough to wait and . . . Wait? Why, she cared so little that,
within a few months, she was ready to marry another man. And, if he owed
her any debt of honor, no matter how farfetched and fantastic, it was
canceled now. He was absolutely free. And he had been right all the
time. He could prove it. He would show Ruth Graham that paper and . . .

His jaw set tight, and he rose from the heap of fish nets with the
folded paper clinched like a club in his hand. He was going to get out
of that boathouse if he had to butt a hole through its boards with his
head.

Once more he climbed to the window and made an attempt to squeeze
through. It was futile, of course, but this time it seemed to him that
the sill and the plank to which it was attached gave a little. He put
the paper between his teeth, seized the sill with both hands, braced
his feet against a beam below, and jerked with all his strength.
Once--twice--three times! It was giving! It was pulling loose! He landed
on his back upon the nets, sill and a foot of boarding in his hands.
In exactly five seconds, the folded newspaper jammed in his trousers
pocket, he swung through the opening and dropped to the narrow space
between the building and the end of the wharf.

The space was a bare six inches wide. As he struck, his ankle turned
under him, he staggered, tried wildly to regain his balance, and fell.
As he fell he caught a glimpse of a blue-clad figure at the top of the
bluff before the bungalow. Then he went under with a splash, and the
eager tide had him in its grasp.

When he came to the surface and shook the water from his eyes, he was
already some distance from the wharf. This, an indication of the force
of the tide, should have caused him to realize his danger instantly. But
it did not. His mind was intent upon the accomplishment of one thing,
namely, the proving to Ruth Graham, by means of the item in the paper,
that he was no longer under any possible obligation to the Davidson
girl. Therefore, his sole feeling, as he came sputtering to the top of
the water, was disgust at his own clumsiness. It was when he tried to
turn and swim back to the wharf that he grasped the situation as it was.
He could not swim against that tide.

There was no time to consider what was best to do. The breakers were
only five hundred yards off, and if he wished to live he must keep
out of their clutches. He began to swim diagonally across the current,
putting all his strength into each stroke. But for every foot of
progress toward the calmer water he was borne a yard toward the
breakers.

The tide bubbled and gurgled about him. Miniature whirlpools tugged
at his legs, pulling him under. He fought nobly, setting his teeth and
swearing inwardly that he would make it, he would not give up, he would
not drown. But the edge of the tide rip was a long way off, and he was
growing tired already. Another whirlpool sucked him down, and when he
rose he shouted for help. It was an instinctive, unreasoning appeal,
almost sure to be useless, for who could hear him?--but he shouted,
nevertheless.

And the shout was answered. From somewhere behind him--a long, long
distance, so it seemed to him--came the clear call in a woman's voice.

"All right! I'm coming. Keep on, just as you are."

He kept on, or tried to. He swam--and swam--and swam. He went under,
rose, went under again, fought his way up, and kept on swimming. Through
the gurgle and hiss of the water, sounding dully above the humming in
his ears and the roar of the blood in his tired brain, came the clear
voice again:

"Steady now! Just as you are! one more stroke! Now one more! Quick!
Quick! Now! Can you get aboard?"

The wet, red side of a dory's bow pushed past his laboring shoulder.
A hand clutched his shirt collar. He reached up and grasped the boat's
gunwale, hung on with all his weight, threw one leg over the edge, and
tumbled into the dory's bottom.

"Thanks," he panted, his eyes shut. "That--was--about the closest call
I--ever had. Hey? Why! RUTH!"

She was panting, also, but she was not looking at him. She was rowing
with all her might, and gazing fearfully over her shoulder. "Are you
strong enough to help me row?" she asked breathlessly. "We must head
her away from here, out of this tide. And I'm afraid that I can't do it
alone."

He raised his head and looked over the rail. The breakers were
alarmingly close. He scrambled to the thwart, pushed her aside and
seized the oars. She resisted.

"Only one," she gasped. "I can manage the other."

So, each with an oar, they fought the tide, and won--but by the
narrowest of margins. The dory edged into stiller and shoaler water,
crept out of the eddying channel over the flat where the depth was but
a scant four feet, turned almost by inches, and, at last, slid up on the
sandy beach below the bungalow. The girl sat bowed over the handle of
her oar, her breast heaving. She said nothing. Her companion likewise
said nothing. Staggering, he stepped over the side, walked a few feet up
the beach, and then tumbled in an unconscious heap on the sand.

He was not unconscious long, being a healthy and robust young fellow.
His first thought, upon opening his eyes, was that he must close them
again as quickly as possible because he wanted the dream to continue.
To lie with one's head in the lap of an angel, while that angel strokes
your forehead and cries over you and begs you for her sake not to die,
is too precious a delusion to lose. But the opening of one's eyes is a
mistake under such circumstances, and he had made it. The angel's next
remark was entirely unromantic and practical.

"Are you better?" she asked. "You're all right now, aren't you?"

Her patient's reply was also a question, and irrelevant.

"DO you care?" he asked faintly.

"Are you better?" she asked in return.

"Did you get my note? The note I put under the door?"

"Answer me. Are you all right again?"

"You answer ME. Did you get my note?"

"Yes. . . . Don't try to get up. You're not strong enough yet. You must
wait here while I go and get you some--"

"Don't go!" He almost shouted it. "If--if you do I'll--I'll--I think I'm
going to faint again."

"Oh, no, you're not. And I must go and get you some brandy or something.
Stay just where you are."

"Ruth Graham, if you go away now, I'll go with you, if I have to crawl.
Maybe I can't walk, but I swear I'll crawl after you on my hands and
knees unless you answer my question. DO you care enough for me to wait?"

She looked out at the little bay, at the narrow, wicked tide race, at
the breakers beyond. Then she looked down again at him.

"Yes," she said. . . . "OH, are you going to faint again? Don't! Please
don't!"

Russell Agnew Brooks, the late "John Brown," opened his eyes. "I am not
going to faint," he observed. "I was merely trying to realize that I was
fully conscious."


Some time after this--hours and minutes do not count in paradise--he
remembered the item in the paper.

"By George!" he exclaimed, "I had something to show you. I'm afraid I've
lost it. Oh, no I here it is."

He extracted from his trousers pocket the water soaked lump that
had been the New York newspaper. The page containing the sensational
announcement of the engagement in high life was quite undecipherable.
Being on the outside of the folded paper, it had rubbed to a pulpy blur.
However, he told her about it, and she agreed that his judgment of the
character of the future Baroness Hardacre had been absolutely correct.

"You were very wise," she said sagely.

"Not so wise as I've become since," he asserted with decision. Then he
added, with a rather rueful smile, "I'm afraid, dear, people won't say
as much for you, when they know."

"I'm satisfied."

"You may have to wait all those years--and years--you spoke of."

"I will."

But she did not have to. For, at that moment, the miracle of wisdom
beside her sat up and pointed to the wet newspaper lying on the sand at
her feet.

"Has my happiness affected my wits?" he demanded. "Or does salt water
bring on delusions? Aren't those my initials?"

He was pointing to a paragraph in the "Personals" column of the New York
paper. This, being on one of the inner pages, had remained comparatively
dry and could be read. The particular "Personal" to which he pointed was
this:


"R. A. B." Wherever you are. This is to certify that I hereby
acknowledge that you have been absolutely correct in the A. D. matter;
witness news elsewhere. I was a fool, and I apologize publicly.
Incidentally I need a head like yours in my business. Come back.
Partnership awaiting you. Come back; and marry anybody or nobody as you
see fit.

"FATHER."





CHAPTER XVII

WOMAN-HATERS


"But what," asked Ruth, as they entered the bungalow together, "has
happened to Mr. Atkins, do you think? You say he went away yesterday
noon and you haven't seen him or even heard from him since. I should
think he would be afraid to leave the lights for so long a time. Has he
ever done it before?"

"No. And I'm certain he would not have done it this time of his own
accord. If he could have gotten back last night he would, storm or no
storm."

"But last night was pretty bad. And," quite seriously, "of course he
knew that you were here, and so everything would be all right."

"Oh, certainly," with sarcasm, "he would know that, of course. So long
as I am on deck, why come back at all? I'm afraid Atkins doesn't share
your faith in my transcendent ability, dear."

"Well," Miss Graham tossed her head, "I imagine he knew he could trust
you to attend to his old lighthouses."

"Perhaps. If so, his faith has developed wonderfully. He never has
trusted me even to light the lanterns. No, I'm afraid something has
happened--some accident. If the telephone was in working order I could
soon find out. As it is, I can only wait and try not to worry. By the
way, is your housekeeper--Mrs. What's-her-name--all serene after her wet
afternoon? When did she return?"

"She hasn't returned. I expected her last evening--she said she would be
back before dark--but she didn't come. That didn't trouble me; the storm
was so severe that I suppose she stayed in the village overnight."

"So you were alone all through the gale. I wondered if you were; I was
tremendously anxious about you. And you weren't afraid? Did you sleep?"

"Not much. You see," she smiled oddly, "I received a letter before I
retired, and it was such an important--and surprising--communication
that I couldn't go to sleep at once."

"A letter? A letter last night? Who--What? You don't mean my letter? The
one I put under your door? You didn't get THAT last night!"

"Oh, yes, I did."

"But how? The bungalow was as dark as a tomb. There wasn't a light
anywhere. I made sure of that before I came over."

"I know. I put the light out, but I was sitting by the window in the
dark, looking out at the storm. Then I saw some one coming up the hill,
and it was you."

"Then you saw me push it under the door?"

"Yes. What made you stay on the step so long after you had pushed it
under?"

"Me? . . . Oh," hastily, "I wanted to make sure it was--er--under. And
you found it and read it--then?"

"Of course. I couldn't imagine what it could be, and I was curious,
naturally."

"Ruth!"

"I was."

"Nonsense! You knew what it must be. Surely you did. Now, truly, didn't
you? Didn't you, dear?"

"Why should I? . . . Oh, your sleeve is wet. You're soaking wet from
head to foot."

"Well, I presume that was to be expected. This water out here is
remarkably damp, you know, and I was in it for some time. I should have
been in it yet if it hadn't been for you."

"Don't!" with a shudder, "don't speak of it. When I saw you fall into
that tide I . . . But there! you mustn't stay here another moment. Go
home and put on dry things. Go at once!"

"Dry things be hanged! I'm going to stay right here--and look at you."

"You're not. Besides, I am wet, too. And I haven't had my breakfast."

"Haven't you? Neither have I." He forgot that he had attempted to have
one. "But I don't care," he added recklessly. Then, with a flash of
inspiration, "Why can't we breakfast together? Invite me, please."

"No, I shall not. At least, not until you go back and change your
clothes."

"To hear is to obey. 'I go, but I return,' as the fellow in the play
observes. I'll be back in just fifteen minutes."

He was back in twelve, and, as to make the long detour about the
marshes would, he felt then, be a wicked waste of time and the marshes
themselves were covered with puddles left by the tide, his "dry things"
were far from dry when he arrived. But she did not notice, and he was
too happy to care, so it was all right. They got breakfast together, and
if the coffee had boiled too long and the eggs not long enough, that was
all right, also.

They sat at opposite sides of the little table, and he needed frequent
reminding that eating was supposed to be the business on hand. They
talked of his father and of Ann Davidson--whom Ruth declared was to be
pitied--of the wonderful coincidence that that particular paper, the one
containing the "Personal" and the "Engagement in High Life" item, should
have been on top of the pile in the boathouse, and--of other things.
Occasionally the talk lapsed, and the substitute assistant merely
looked, looked and smiled vacuously. When this happened Miss Graham
smiled, also, and blushed. Neither of them thought of looking out of the
window.

If they had not been so preoccupied, if they had looked out of that
window, they would have seen a horse and buggy approaching over the
dunes. Seth and Mrs. Bascom were on the buggy seat, and the lightkeeper
was driving with one hand. The equipage had been hired at the Eastboro
livery stable. Joshua was undergoing repairs and enjoying a much-needed
rest at the blacksmith shop in the village.

As they drew near the lights, Seth sighed contentedly.

"Well, Emeline," he observed, "here we be, safe and sound. Home again!
Yes, sir, by jiminy crimps, HOME! And you ain't goin' to Boston to-day,
neither."

Mrs. Bascom, the practical, moved toward the edge of the seat.

"Take your arm away, Seth," she cautioned. "They'll see you."

"Who'll see me? What do I care who sees me? Ain't a man got a right to
put his arm around his own wife, I'd like to know?"

"Humph! Well, all right. I can stand it if you can. Only I cal'late your
young Brown man is in for somethin' of a shock, that's all. HE don't
know that I'm your wife."

Seth removed his arm. His expression changed.

"That's so," he admitted. "He will be set back three or four rows, won't
he?"

"I shouldn't wonder. He'll think your woman-hate has had a relapse, I
guess."

The lightkeeper looked troubled; then he nodded grimly.

"His ain't what you'd call a desp'rate case," he declared. "Judgin' by
what I've seen in the cove for the last month, he's gettin' better of
it fast. I ain't no worse than he is, by time! . . . Wonder where he is!
This place looks deader'n the doleful tombs."

He hitched the horse to the back fence and assisted his wife to alight
from the buggy. They entered the kitchen. No one was there, and Seth's
hurried search of the other rooms resulted in finding them untenanted
likewise.

"Maybe he's out in one of the lights," he said, "wait here, Emeline, and
I'll go see."

But she would not wait. "I'm goin' right over to the bungalow," she
said. "I'm worried about Miss Ruth. She was alone all last night, and
I sha'n't rest easy till I know nothin's happened to her. You can come
when you find your young man. You and me have got somethin' to tell 'em,
and we might as well get the tellin' done as soon as possible. Nothin's
ever gained by putting off a mean job. Unless, of course," she added,
looking at him out of the corners of her eyes, "you want to back out,
Seth. It ain't too late even now, you know."

He stared at her. "Back out!" he repeated; "back out! Emeline Bascom,
what are you talkin' about? You go to that bungalow and go in a hurry.
Don't stop to talk! go! Who's runnin' this craft? Who's the man in this
family--you or me?"

She laughed. "You seem to be, Seth," she answered, "just now."

"I am. I've been a consider'ble spell learnin' how to be, but I've
learned. You trot right along."

Brown was in neither of the light towers, and Seth began to be worried
about him. He descended to the yard and stood there, wondering what
on earth could have happened. Then, looking across the cove, he became
aware that his wife was standing on the edge of the bluff, making
signals with both hands.

He opened his mouth to shout a question, but she frantically signaled
for silence. Then she beckoned. He ran down the path at full speed. She
met him at the other side of the cove.

"Come here!" she whispered. "Don't say a word, but just come--and look."

He followed her, crept close to the bungalow window and peeped in. His
helper, "John Brown," and Miss Ruth Graham were seated at the table.
Also the substitute assistant was leaning across that table with the
young lady's hand in his; the pair were entirely oblivious of anything
in the world except each other.

A few moments later a thunderous knock shook the bungalow door. The
knock was not answered immediately; therefore, Seth opened the door
himself. Miss Graham and the lightkeeper's helper were standing some
distance apart; they gazed speechlessly at the couple who now entered
the room.

"Well," observed Seth, with sarcasm, "anybody got anything to say?
You," turning to the young man, "seems to me you ought to say SOMETHIN'.
Considerin' a little agreement you and me had, I should imagine I
was entitled to some triflin' explanation. What are you doin' over
here--with HER? Brown--"

The young gentleman came to himself with a start. He walked across to
where Miss Graham was standing, and once more took her hand.

"My name is not Brown," he said firmly. "It is Brooks; and this is the
young lady I am to marry."

He naturally expected his superior to be surprised. As a matter of
fact, he was the surprised party. Seth reached out, drew the bungalow
housekeeper toward him, and put his arm about her waist. Then he
smiled; and the smile was expressive of pride, triumph, and satisfaction
absolute.

"ATKINS!" gasped Brooks.

"My name ain't Atkins," was the astonishing reply; "it's Bascom. And
this," indicating by a tightening of his arm the blushing person at his
side, "is the lady I married over five year ago."


After the stories had been told, after both sides had told theirs and
explained and been exclaimed over and congratulated, after the very last
question had been asked and answered, Brown--or Brooks--asked one more.

"But this other fellow," he queried, "this brother-in-law--By George,
it is perfectly marvelous, this whole business!--where is he? What has
become of him?"

Seth chuckled. "Bennie D.?" he said. "Well, Bennie D. is leavin'
Eastboro on the noon train. I paid his fare and give him fifty dollars
to boot. He's goin' somewhere, but he ain't sartin where. If you asked
me, I should say that, in the end, he'd most likely have to go
where he's never been afore, so far's I ever heard--that's to work.
Now--seein' as the important business has been talked over and
settled--maybe you'll tell me about the lights, and how you got along
last night."

But the lighthouse subject was destined to be postponed for a few
minutes. The person in whose care the Lights had been left during the
past twenty hours or so looked at the speaker, then at the other persons
present, and suddenly began to laugh.

"What are you laughing at?" asked Miss Graham. "Why, Russell, what is
it?"

Russell Agnew Brooks, alias "John Brown," ex-substitute assistant at
Eastboro Twin-Lights, sank into a chair, shaking from head to heel.

"It is hysterics," cried Ruth, hastening to his side. "No wonder, poor
dear, considering what he has been through. Hush, Russell! don't, you
frighten me. What IS it?"

Her fiance waved a reassuring hand. "It--it's all right," he gasped.
"I was just laughing at . . . Oh," pointing an unsteady finger at the
lightkeeper, "ask him; he knows."

"Ask him?" repeated the bewildered young lady. "Why, Mr. Atkins--Bascom,
I mean--what. . . ."

And then Seth began to laugh. Leaning against the doorpost, he at first
chuckled and then roared.

"Seth!" cried his wife. "Seth, you old idiot! Why, I never see two such
loons in my life! Seth, answer me! What are you two laughin' at?"

Seth Atkins Bascom wiped the tears from his eyes. "I cal'late," he
panted, "I rather guess--Ho, ho!--I rather guess we're both laughin' at
woman-haters."

========================================
========================================

THE DEPOT MASTER

By Joseph C. Lincoln




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I.--   AT THE DEPOT

II.--  SUPPLY AND DEMAND

III.-- "STINGY GABE"

IV.--  THE MAJOR

V.--   A BABY AND A ROBBERY

VI.--  AVIATION AND AVARICE

VII.-- CAPTAIN SOL DECIDES TO MOVE

VIII.--THE OBLIGATIONS OF A GENTLEMAN

IX.--  THE WIDOW BASSETT

X.--   CAPTAIN JONADAB GOES

XI.--  THE GREAT METROPOLIS

XII.-- A VISION SENT

XIII.--DUSENBERRY'S BIRTHDAY

XIV.-- EFFIE'S FATE

XV.--  THE "HERO" AND THE COWBOY

XVI.-- THE CRUISE OF THE RED CAR

XVII.--ISSY'S REVENGE

XVIII. THE MOUNTAIN AND MAHOMET




THE DEPOT MASTER




CHAPTER I

AT THE DEPOT


Mr. Simeon Phinney emerged from the side door of his residence and
paused a moment to light his pipe in the lee of the lilac bushes. Mr.
Phinney was a man of various and sundry occupations, and his sign,
nailed to the big silver-leaf in the front yard, enumerated a few of
them. "Carpenter, Well Driver, Building Mover, Cranberry Bogs Seen to
with Care and Dispatch, etc., etc.," so read the sign. The house was
situated in "Phinney's Lane," the crooked little byway off "Cross
Street," between the "Shore Road" at the foot of the slope and the "Hill
Boulevard"--formerly "Higgins's Roost"--at the top. From the Phinney
gate the view was extensive and, for the most part, wet. The hill
descended sharply, past the "Shore Road," over the barren fields and
knolls covered with bayberry bushes and "poverty grass," to the yellow
sand of the beach and the gray, weather-beaten fish-houses scattered
along it. Beyond was the bay, a glimmer in the sunset light.

Mrs. Phinney, in the kitchen, was busy with the supper dishes. Her
husband, wheezing comfortably at his musical pipe, drew an ancient
silver watch from his pocket and looked at its dial. Quarter past six.
Time to be getting down to the depot and the post office. At least a
dozen male citizens of East Harniss were thinking that very thing at
that very moment. It was a community habit of long standing to see the
train come in and go after the mail. The facts that the train bore no
passengers in whom you were intimately interested, and that you expected
no mail made little difference. If you were a man of thirty or older,
you went to the depot or the "club," just as your wife or sisters went
to the sewing circle, for sociability and mild excitement. If you were
a single young man you went to the post office for the same reason that
you attended prayer meeting. If you were a single young lady you went
to the post office and prayer meeting to furnish a reason for the young
man.

Mr. Phinney, replacing his watch in his pocket, meandered to the
sidewalk and looked down the hill and along the length of the "Shore
Road." Beside the latter highway stood a little house, painted a
spotless white, its window blinds a vivid green. In that house dwelt,
and dwelt alone, Captain Solomon Berry, Sim Phinney's particular
friend. Captain Sol was the East Harniss depot master and, from long
acquaintance, Mr. Phinney knew that he should be through supper and
ready to return to the depot, by this time. The pair usually walked
thither together when the evening meal was over.

But, except for the smoke curling lazily from the kitchen chimney,
there was no sign of life about the Berry house. Either Captain Sol had
already gone, or he was not yet ready to go. So Mr. Phinney decided that
waiting was chancey, and set out alone.

He climbed Cross Street to where the "Hill Boulevard," abiding place of
East Harniss's summer aristocracy, bisected it, and there, standing on
the corner, and consciously patronizing the spot where he so stood, was
Mr. Ogden Hapworth Williams, no less.

Mr. Williams was the village millionaire, patron, and, in a gentlemanly
way, "boomer." His estate on the Boulevard was the finest in the county,
and he, more than any one else, was responsible for the "buying up"
by wealthy people from the city of the town's best building sites, the
spots commanding "fine marine sea views," to quote from Abner Payne,
local real estate and insurance agent. His own estate was fine enough to
be talked about from one end of the Cape to the other and he had bought
the empty lot opposite and made it into a miniature park, with flower
beds and gravel walks, though no one but he or his might pick the
flowers or tread the walks. He had brought on a wealthy friend from New
York and a cousin from Chicago, and they, too, had bought acres on the
Boulevard and erected palatial "cottages" where once were the houses of
country people. Local cynics suggested that the sign on the East Harniss
railroad station should be changed to read "Williamsburg." "He owns the
place, body and soul," said they.

As Sim Phinney climbed the hill the magnate, pompous, portly, and
imposing, held up a signaling finger. "Just as if he was hailin' a horse
car," described Simeon afterward.

"Phinney," he said, "come here, I want to speak to you."

The man of many trades obediently approached.

"Good evenin', Mr. Williams," he ventured.

"Phinney," went on the great man briskly, "I want you to give me your
figures on a house moving deal. I have bought a house on the Shore Road,
the one that used to belong to the--er--Smalleys, I believe."

Simeon was surprised. "What, the old Smalley house?" he exclaimed. "You
don't tell me!"

"Yes, it's a fine specimen--so my wife says--of the pure Colonial,
whatever that is, and I intend moving it to the Boulevard. I want your
figures for the job."

The building mover looked puzzled. "To the Boulevard?" he said. "Why, I
didn't know there was a vacant lot on the Boulevard, Mr. Williams."

"There isn't now, but there will be soon. I have got hold of the hundred
feet left from the old Seabury estate."

Mr. Phinney drew a long breath. "Why!" he stammered, "that's where Olive
Edwards--her that was Olive Seabury--lives, ain't it?"

"Yes," was the rather impatient answer. "She has been living there. But
the place was mortgaged up to the handle and--ahem--the mortgage is mine
now."

For an instant Simeon did not reply. He was gazing, not up the Boulevard
in the direction of the "Seabury place" but across the slope of the
hill toward the home of Captain Sol Berry, the depot master. There was a
troubled look on his face.

"Well?" inquired Williams briskly, "when can you give me the figures?
They must be low, mind. No country skin games, you understand."

"Hey?" Phinney came out of his momentary trance. "Yes, yes, Mr.
Williams. They'll be low enough. Times is kind of dull now and I'd
like a movin' job first-rate. I'll give 'em to you to-morrer. But--but
Olive'll have to move, won't she? And where's she goin'?"

"She'll have to move, sure. And the eyesore on that lot now will come
down."

The "eyesore" was the four room building, combined dwelling and shop of
Mrs. Olive Edwards, widow of "Bill Edwards," once a promising young man,
later town drunkard and ne'er-do-well, dead these five years, luckily
for himself and luckier--in a way--for the wife who had stuck by him
while he wasted her inheritance in a losing battle with John Barleycorn.
At his death the fine old Seabury place had dwindled to a lone hundred
feet of land, the little house, and a mortgage on both. Olive had opened
a "notion store" in her front parlor and had fought on, proudly refusing
aid and trying to earn a living. She had failed. Again Phinney stared
thoughtfully at the distant house of Captain Sol.

"But Olive," he said, slowly. "She ain't got no folks, has she? What'll
become of her? Where'll she move to?"

"That," said Mr. Williams, with a wave of a fat hand, "is not my
business. I am sorry for her, if she's hard up. But I can't be
responsible if men will drink up their wives' money. Look out for number
one; that's business. I sha'n't be unreasonable with her. She can stay
where she is until the new house I've bought is moved to that lot. Then
she must clear out. I've told her that. She knows all about it. Well,
good-by, Phinney. I shall expect your bid to-morrow. And, mind, don't
try to get the best of me, because you can't do it."

He turned and strutted back up the Boulevard. Sim Phinney, pondering
deeply and very grave, continued on his way, down Cross Street
to Main--naming the village roads was another of the Williams'
"improvements"--and along that to the crossing, East Harniss's business
and social center at train times.

The station--everyone called it "deepo," of course--was then a small red
building, old and out of date, but scrupulously neat because of Captain
Berry's rigid surveillance. Close beside it was the "Boston Grocery,
Dry Goods and General Store," Mr. Beriah Higgins, proprietor. Beriah
was postmaster and the post office was in his store. The male citizen
of middle age or over, seeking opportunity for companionship and chat,
usually went first to the depot, sat about in the waiting room until the
train came in, superintended that function, then sojourned to the post
office until the mail was sorted, returning later, if he happened to be
a particular friend of the depot master, to sit and smoke and yarn until
Captain Sol announced that it was time to "turn in."

When Mr. Phinney entered the little waiting room he found it already
tenanted. Captain Sol had not yet arrived, but official authority was
represented by "Issy" McKay--his full name was Issachar Ulysses Grant
McKay--a long-legged, freckled-faced, tow-headed youth of twenty, who,
as usual, was sprawled along the settee by the wall, engrossed in
a paper covered dime novel. "Issy" was a lover of certain kinds of
literature and reveled in lurid fiction. As a youngster he had, at
the age of thirteen, after a course of reading in the "Deadwood Dick
Library," started on a pedestrian journey to the Far West, where,
being armed with home-made tomahawk and scalping knife, he contemplated
extermination of the noble red man. A wrathful pursuing parent had
collared the exterminator at the Bayport station, to the huge delight of
East Harniss, young and old. Since this adventure Issy had been famous,
in a way.

He was Captain Sol Berry's assistant at the depot. Why an assistant
was needed was a much discussed question. Why Captain Sol, a retired
seafaring man with money in the bank, should care to be depot master
at ten dollars a week was another. The Captain himself said he took the
place because he wanted to do something that was "half way between a
loaf and a job." He employed an assistant at his own expense because
he "might want to stretch the loafin' half." And he hired Issy
because--well, because "most folks in East Harniss are alike and you can
always tell about what they'll say or do. Now Issy's different. The Lord
only knows what HE'S likely to do, and that makes him interestin' as a
conundrum, to guess at. He kind of keeps my sense of responsibility from
gettin' mossy, Issy does."

"Issy," hailed Mr. Phinney, "has the Cap'n got here yet?"

Issy answered not. The villainous floorwalker had just proffered
matrimony or summary discharge to "Flora, the Beautiful Shop Girl," and
pending her answer, the McKay mind had no room for trifles.

"Issy!" shouted Simeon. "I say, Is', Wake up, you foolhead! Has Cap'n
Sol--"

"No, he ain't, Sim," volunteered Ed Crocker. He and his chum, Cornelius
Rowe, were seated in two of the waiting room chairs, their feet on two
others. "He ain't got here yet. We was just talkin' about him. You've
heard about Olive Edwards, I s'pose likely, ain't you?"

Phinney nodded gloomily.

"Yes," he said, "I've heard."

"Well, it's too bad," continued Crocker. "But, after all, it's Olive's
own fault. She'd ought to have married Sol Berry when she had the
chance. What she ever gave him the go-by for, after the years they was
keepin' comp'ny, is more'n I can understand."

Cornelius Rowe shook his head, with an air of wisdom. Captain Sol,
himself, remarked once: "I wonder sometimes the Almighty ain't jealous
of Cornelius, he knows so much and is so responsible for the runnin' of
all creation."

"Humph!" grunted Mr. Rowe. "There's more to that business than you folks
think. Olive didn't notice Bill Edwards till Sol went off to sea and
stayed two years and over. How do you know she shook Sol? You might just
as well say he shook her. He always was stubborn as an off ox and cranky
as a windlass. I wonder how he feels now, when she's lost her last red
and is goin' to be drove out of house and home. And all on account of
that fool 'mountain and Mahomet' business."

"WHICH?" asked Mr. Crocker.

"Never mind that, Cornelius," put in Phinney, sharply. "Why don't you
let other folks' affairs alone? That was a secret that Olive told your
sister and you've got no right to go blabbin'."

"Aw, hush up, Sim! I ain't tellin' no secrets to anybody but Ed here,
and he ain't lived in East Harniss long or he'd know it already. The
mountain and Mahomet? Why, them was the last words Sol and Olive had.
'Twas Sol's stubbornness that was most to blame. That was his one bad
fault. He would have his own way and he wouldn't change. Olive had set
her heart on goin' to Washin'ton for their weddin' tower. Sol wanted
to go to Niagara. They argued a long time, and finally Olive says, 'No,
Solomon, I'm not goin' to give in this time. I have all the others, but
it's not fair and it's not right, and no married life can be happy where
one does all the sacrificin'. If you care for me you'll do as I want
now.'

"And he laughs and says, 'All right, I'll sacrifice after this, but you
and me must see Niagara.' And she was sot and he was sotter, and at last
they quarreled. He marches out of the door and says: 'Very good. When
you're ready to be sensible and change your mind, you can come to me.
And says Olive, pretty white but firm: 'No, Solomon, I'm right and
you're not. I'm afraid this time the mountain must come to Mahomet.'
That ended it. He went away and never come back, and after a long spell
she give in to her dad and married Bill Edwards. Foolish? 'Well, now,
WA'N'T it!"

"Humph!" grunted Crocker. "She must have been a born gump to let a smart
man like him get away just for that."

"There's a good many born gumps not so far from here as her house,"
interjected Phinney. "You remember that next time you look in the glass,
Ed Crocker. And--and--well, there's no better friend of Sol Berry's on
earth than I am, but, so fur as their quarrel was concerned, if you ask
me I'd have to say Olive was pretty nigh right."

"Maybe--maybe," declared the allwise Cornelius, "but just the same if I
was Sol Berry, and knew my old girl was likely to go to the poorhouse,
I'll bet my conscience--"

"S-ssh!" hissed Crocker, frantically. Cornelius stopped in the middle
of his sentence, whirled in his chair, and looked up. Behind him in the
doorway of the station stood Captain Sol himself. The blue cap he always
wore was set back on his head, a cigar tipped upward from the corner
of his mouth, and there was a grim look in his eye and about the smooth
shaven lips above the short, grayish-brown beard.

"Issy" sprang from his settee and jammed the paper novel into his
pocket. Ed Crocker's sunburned face turned redder yet. Sim Phinney
grinned at Mr. Rowe, who was very much embarrassed.

"Er--er--evenin', Cap'n Sol," he stammered. "Nice, seasonable weather,
ain't it? Been a nice day."

"Um," grunted the depot master, knocking the ashes from his cigar.

"Just right for workin' outdoor," continued Cornelius.

"I guess it must be. I saw your wife rakin' the yard this mornin'."

Phinney doubled up with a chuckle. Mr. Rowe swallowed hard. "I--I TOLD
her I'd rake it myself soon's I got time," he sputtered.

"Um. Well, I s'pose she realized your time was precious. Evenin', Sim,
glad to see you."

He held out his hand and Phinney grasped it.

"Issy," said Captain Sol, "you'd better get busy with the broom, hadn't
you. It's standin' over in that corner and I wouldn't wonder if it
needed exercise. Sim, the train ain't due for twenty minutes yet. That
gives us at least three quarters of an hour afore it gets here. Come
outside a spell. I want to talk to you."

He led the way to the platform, around the corner of the station, and
seated himself on the baggage truck. That side of the building, being
furthest from the street, was out of view from the post office and
"general store."

"What was it you wanted to talk about, Sol?" asked Simeon, sitting down
beside his friend on the truck.

The Captain smoked in silence for a moment. Then he asked a question in
return.

"Sim," he said, "have you heard anything about Williams buying the
Smalley house? Is it true?"

Phinney nodded. "Yup," he answered, "it's true. Williams was just
talkin' to me and I know all about his buyin' it and where it's goin'."

He repeated the conversation with the great man. Captain Sol did
not interrupt. He smoked on, and a frown gathered and deepened as he
listened.

"Humph!" he said, when his friend had concluded. "Humph! Sim, do you
have any idea what--what Olive Seabury will do when she has to go?"

Phinney glanced at him. It was the first time in twenty years that he
had heard Solomon Berry mention the name of his former sweetheart. And
even now he did not call her by her married name, the name of her late
husband.

"No," replied Simeon. "No, Sol, I ain't got the least idea. Poor thing!"

Another interval. Then: "Well, Sim, find out if you can, and let me
know. And," turning his head and speaking quietly but firmly, "don't let
anybody ELSE know I asked."

"Course I won't, Sol, you know that. But don't it seem awful mean
turnin' her out so? I wouldn't think Mr. Williams would do such a
thing."

His companion smiled grimly; "I would," he said. "'Business is
business,' that's his motto. That and 'Look out for number one.'"

"Yes, he said somethin' to me about lookin' out for number one."

"Did he? Humph!" The Captain's smile lost a little of its bitterness
and broadened. He seemed to be thinking and to find amusement in the
process.

"What you grinnin' at?" demanded Phinney.

"Oh, I was just rememberin' how he looked out for number one the
first--no, the second time I met him. I don't believe he's forgot it.
Maybe that's why he ain't quite so high and mighty to me as he is to the
rest of you fellers. Ha! ha! He tried to patronize me when I first came
back here and took this depot and I just smiled and asked him what the
market price of johnny-cake was these days. He got red clear up to the
brim of his tall hat. Humph! 'TWAS funny."

"The market price of JOHNNY-CAKE! He must have thought you was loony."

"No. I'm the last man he'd think was loony. You see I met him a fore he
came here to live at all."

"You did? Where?"

"Oh, over to Wellmouth. 'Twas the year afore I come back to East
Harniss, myself, after my long stretch away from it. I never intended to
see the Cape again, but I couldn't stay away somehow. I've told you
that much--how I went over to Wellmouth and boarded a spell, got sick
of that, and, just to be doin' somethin' and not for the money, bought
a catboat and took out sailin' parties from Wixon and Wingate's summer
hotel."

"And you met Mr. Williams? Well, I snum! Was he at the hotel?"

"No, not exactly. I met him sort of casual this second time."

"SECOND time? Had you met him afore that?"

"Don't get ahead of the yarn, Sim. It happened this way: You see, I was
comin' along the road between East Wellmouth and the Center when I run
afoul of him. He was fat and shiny, and drivin' a skittish horse hitched
to a fancy buggy. When he sighted me he hove to and hailed.

"'Here you!' says he, in a voice as fat as the rest of him. 'Your name's
Berry, ain't it.'

"'Yup,' says I.

"'Methusalum Berry or Jehoshaphat Berry or Sheba Berry, or somethin'
like that? Hey?' he says.

"'Well,' says I, 'the last shot you fired comes nighest the bull's eye.
They christened me Solomon, but 'twa'n't my fault; I was young at the
time and they took advantage.'

"He grinned a kind of lopsided grin, like he had a lemon in his mouth,
and commenced to cuss the horse for tryin' to climb a pine tree.

"'I knew 'twas some Bible outrage or other,' he says. 'There's more
Bible names in this forsaken sand heap than there is Christians, a good
sight. When I meet a man with a Bible name and chin whiskers I hang on
to my watch. The feller that sets out to do me has got to have a better
make up than that, you bet your life. 'Well, see here, King Sol; can you
run a gasoline launch?'

"'Why, yes, I guess I can run 'most any of the everyday kinds,' says
I, pullin' thoughtful at my own chin whiskers. This fat man had got me
interested. He was so polite and folksy in his remarks. Didn't seem to
stand on no ceremony, as you might say. Likewise there was a kind of
familiar somethin' about his face. I knew mighty well I'd never met him
afore, and yet I seemed to have a floatin' memory of him, same as a chap
remembers the taste of the senna and salts his ma made him take when he
was little.

"'All right,' says he, sharp. 'Then you come around to my landin'
to-morrer mornin' at eight o'clock prompt and take me out in my launch
to the cod-fishin' grounds. I'll give you ten dollars to take me out
there and back.'

"'Well,' says I, 'ten dollars is a good price enough. Do I furnish--'

"'You furnish nothin' except your grub,' he interrupts. 'The launch'll
be ready and the lines and hooks and bait'll be ready. My own man was to
do the job, but he and I had a heart-to-heart talk just now and I told
him where he could go and go quick. No smart Alec gets the best of me,
even if he has got a month's contract. You run that launch and put me on
the fishin' grounds. I pay you for that and bringin' me back again. And
I furnish my own extras and you can furnish yours. I don't want any of
your Yankee bargainin'. See?'

"I saw. There wa'n't no real reason why I couldn't take the job. 'Twas
well along into September; the hotel was closed for the season; and
about all I had on my hands just then was time.

"'All right,' says I, 'it's a deal. If you'll guarantee to have your
launch ready, I--'

"'That's my business,' he says. 'It'll be ready. If it ain't you'll get
your pay just the same. To-morrer mornin' at eight o'clock. And don't
you forget and be late. Gid-dap, you blackguard!' says he to the horse.

"'Hold on, just a minute,' I hollers, runnin' after him. 'I don't want
to be curious nor nosey, you understand, but seems 's if it might help
me to be on time if I knew where your launch was goin' to be and what
your name was.'

"He pulled up then. 'Humph!' he says, 'if you don't know my name and
more about my private affairs than I do myself, you're the only one in
this county that don't. My name's Williams, and I live in what you folks
call the Lathrop place over here toward Trumet. The launch is at my
landin' down in front of the house.'

"He drove off then and I walked along thinkin'. I knew who he was
now, of course. There was consider'ble talk when the Lathrop place was
rented, and I gathered that the feller who hired it answered to the hail
of Williams and was a retired banker, sufferin' from an enlarged income
and the diseases that go along with it. He lived alone up there in the
big house, except for a cranky housekeeper and two or three servants.
This was afore he got married, Sim; his wife's tamed him a little. Then
the yarns about his temper and language would have filled a log book.

"But all this was way to one side of the mark-buoy, so fur as I was
concerned. I'd cruised with cranks afore and I thought I could stand
this one--ten dollars' worth of him, anyhow. Bluster and big talk may
scare some folks, but to me they're like Aunt Hepsy Parker's false
teeth, the further off you be from 'em the more real they look. So the
next mornin' I was up bright and early and on my way over to the Lathrop
landin'.

"The launch was there, made fast alongside the little wharf. Nice,
slick-lookin' craft she was, too, all varnish and gilt gorgeousness. I'd
liked her better if she'd carried a sail, for it's my experience that
canvas is a handy thing to have aboard in case of need; but she looked
seaworthy enough and built for speed.

"While I was standin' on the pier lookin' down at her I heard footsteps
and brisk remarks from behind the bushes on the bank, and here comes
Williams, puffin' and blowin', followed by a sulky-lookin' hired man
totin' a deckload of sweaters and ileskins, with a lunch basket on top.
Williams himself wan't carryin' anything but his temper, but he hadn't
forgot none of that.

"'Hello, Berry,' says he to me. 'You are on time, ain't you. Blessed if
it ain't a comfort to find somebody who'll do what I tell 'em. Now you,'
he says to the servant, 'put them things aboard and clear out as quick
as you've a mind to. You and I are through; understand? Don't let me
find you hangin' around the place when I get back. Cast off, Sol.'

"The man dumped the dunnage into the launch, pretty average ugly, and me
and the boss climbed aboard. I cast off.

"'Mr. Williams,' says the man, kind of pleadin', 'ain't you goin' to pay
me the rest of my month's wages?'

"Williams told him he wa'n't, and added trimmin's to make it emphatic.

"I started the engine and we moved out at a good clip. All at once that
hired man runs to the end of the wharf and calls after us.

"'All right for you, you fat-head!' he yells. 'You'll be sorry for what
you done to me.'

"I cal'late the boss would have liked to go back and lick him, but I
was hired to go a-fishin', not to watch a one-sided prize fight, and I
thought 'twas high time we started.

"The name of that launch was the Shootin' Star, and she certainly
lived up to it. 'Twas one of them slick, greasy days, with no sea worth
mentionin' and we biled along fine. We had to, because the cod ledge is
a good many mile away, 'round Sandy P'int out to sea, and, judgin' by
what I'd seen of Fatty so fur, I wa'n't hankerin' to spend more time
with him than was necessary. More'n that, there was fog signs showin'.

"'When was you figgerin' on gettin' back, Mr. Williams?' I asked him.

"'When I've caught as many fish as I want to,' he says. 'I told that
housekeeper of mine that I'd be back when I got good and ready; it might
be to-night and it might be ten days from now. "If I ain't back in a
week you can hunt me up," I told her; "but not before. And that goes."
I've got HER trained all right. She knows me. It's a pity if a man can't
be independent of females.'

"I knew consider'ble many men that was subjects for pity, 'cordin' to
that rule. But I wa'n't in for no week's cruise, and I told him so. He
said of course not; we'd be home that evenin'.

"The Shootin' Star kept slippin' along. 'Twas a beautiful mornin' and,
after a spell, it had its effect, even on a crippled disposition like
that banker man's. He lit up a cigar and begun to get more sociable, in
his way. Commenced to ask me questions about myself.

"By and by he says: 'Berry, I suppose you figger that it's a smart thing
to get ten dollars out of me for a trip like this, hey?'

"'Not if it's to last a week, I don't,' says I.

"'It's your lookout if it does,' he says prompt. 'You get ten for takin'
me out and back. If you ain't back on time 'tain't my fault.'

"'Unless this craft breaks down,' I says.

"''Twon't break down. I looked after that. My motto is to look out for
number one every time, and it's a mighty good motto. At any rate, it's
made my money for me.'

"He went on, preachin' about business shrewdness and how it paid, and
how mean and tricky in little deals we Rubes was, and yet we didn't
appreciate how to manage big things, till I got kind of sick of it.

"'Look here, Mr. Williams,' says I, 'you know how I make my money--what
little I do make--or you say you do. Now, if it ain't a sassy question,
how did you make yours?'

"Well, he made his by bein' shrewd and careful and always lookin' out
for number one. 'Number one' was his hobby. I gathered that the heft of
his spare change had come from dickers in stocks and bonds.

"'Humph!' says I. 'Well, speakin' of tricks and meanness, I've allers
heard tell that there was some of them things hitched to the tail of
the stock market. What makes the stock market price of--well, of wheat,
we'll say?'

"That was regulated, so he said, by the law of supply and demand. If a
feller had all the wheat there was and another chap had to have some or
starve, why, the first one had a right to gouge t'other chap's last cent
away from him afore he let it go.

"'That's legitimate,' he says. 'That's cornerin' the market. Law of
supply and demand exemplified.'

"''Cordin' to that law,' says I, 'when you was so set on fishin' to-day
and hunted me up to run your boat here--'cause I was about the only chap
who could run it and wa'n't otherwise busy--I'd ought to have charged
you twenty dollars instead of ten.'

"'Sure you had,' he says, grinnin'. 'But you weren't shrewd enough to
grasp the situation and do it. Now the deal's closed and it's too late.'

"He went on talkin' about 'pools' and deals' and such. How prices of
this stock and that was shoved up a-purpose till a lot of folks had
put their money in it and then was smashed flat so's all hands but the
'poolers' would be what he called 'squeezed out,' and the gang would get
their cash. That was legitimate, too--'high finance,' he said.

"'But how about the poor folks that had their savin's in them stocks,'
I asks, 'and don't know high financin'? Where's the law of supply and
demand come in for them?'

"He laughed. 'They supply the suckers and the demand for money,' says
he.

"By eleven we was well out toward the fishin' grounds. 'Twas the bad
season now; the big fish had struck off still further and there wa'n't
another boat in sight. The land was just a yeller and green smooch along
the sky line and the waves was runnin' bigger. The Shootin' Star was
seaworthy, though, and I wa'n't worried about her. The only thing that
troubled me was the fog, and that was pilin' up to wind'ard. I'd called
Fatty's attention to it when we fust started, but he said he didn't care
a red for fog. Well, I didn't much care nuther, for we had a compass
aboard and the engine was runnin' fine. What wind there was was blowin'
offshore.

"And then, all to once, the engine STOPPED runnin'. I give the wheel a
whirl, but she only coughed, consumptive-like, and quit again. I went
for'ard to inspect, and, if you'll believe it, there wa'n't a drop of
gasoline left in the tank. The spare cans had ought to have been full,
and they was--but 'twas water they was filled with.

"'Is THIS the way you have your boat ready for me?' I remarks,
sarcastic.

"'That--that man of mine told me he had everything filled,' he stammers,
lookin' scart.

"'Yes,' says I, 'and I heard him hint likewise that he was goin' to make
you sorry. I guess he's done it.'

"Well, sir! the brimstone names that Fatty called that man was somethin'
surprisin' to hear. When he'd used up all he had in stock he invented
new ones. When the praise service was over he turns to me and says: 'But
what are we goin' to do?'

"'Do?' says I. 'That's easy. We're goin' to drift.'

"And that's what we done. I tried to anchor, but we wa'n't over the
ledge and the iron wouldn't reach bottom by a mile, more or less. I
rigged up a sail out of the oar and the canvas spray shield, but there
wa'n't wind enough to give us steerageway. So we drifted and drifted,
out to sea. And by and by the fog come down and shut us in, and that
fixed what little hope I had of bein' seen by the life patrol on shore.

"The breeze died out flat about three o'clock. In one way this was a
good thing. In another it wa'n't, because we was well out in deep water,
and when the wind did come it was likely to come harder'n we needed.
However, there wa'n't nothin' to do but wait and hope for the best, as
the feller said when his wife's mother was sick.

"It was gettin' pretty well along toward the edge of the evenin' when
I smelt the wind a-comin'. It came in puffs at fust, and every puff was
healthier than the one previous. Inside of ten minutes it was blowin'
hard, and the seas were beginnin' to kick up. I got up my jury rig--the
oar and the spray shield--and took the helm. There wa'n't nothin' to
do but run afore it, and the land knows where we would fetch up. At any
rate, if the compass was right, we was drivin' back into the bay again,
for the wind had hauled clear around.

"The Shootin' Star jumped and sloshed. Fatty had on all the ileskins and
sweaters, but he was shakin' like a custard pie.

"'Oh, oh, heavens!' he chatters. 'What will we do? Will we drown?'

"'Don't know,' says I, tuggin' at the wheel and tryin' to sight the
compass. 'You've got the best chance of the two of us, if it's true that
fat floats.'

"I thought that might cheer him up some, but it didn't. A big wave
heeled us over then and a keg or two of salt water poured over the
gunwale. He give a yell and jumped up.

"'My Lord!' he screams. 'We're sinkin'. Help! help!'

"'Set down!' I roared. 'Thought you knew how to act in a boat. Set down!
d'you hear me? SET DOWN AND SET STILL!'

"He set. Likewise he shivered and groaned. It got darker all the time
and the wind freshened every minute. I expected to see that jury mast go
by the board at any time. Lucky for us it held.

"No use tellin' about the next couple of hours. 'Cordin' to my reckonin'
they was years and we'd ought to have sailed plumb through the broadside
of the Cape, and be makin' a quick run for Africy. But at last we got
into smoother water, and then, right acrost our bows, showed up a white
strip. The fog had pretty well blowed clear and I could see it.

"'Land, ho!' I yells. 'Stand by! WE'RE goin' to bump.'"

Captain Sol stopped short and listened. Mr. Phinney grasped his arm.

"For the dear land sakes, Sol," he exclaimed, "don't leave me hangin' in
them breakers no longer'n you can help! Heave ahead! DID you bump?"

The depot master chuckled.

"DID we?" he repeated. "Well, I'll tell you that by and by. Here comes
the train and I better take charge of the ship. Anything so responsible
as seein' the cars come in without me to help would give Issy the
jumpin' heart disease."

He sprang from the truck and hastened toward the door of the station.
Phinney, rising to follow him, saw, over the dark green of the swamp
cedars at the head of the track, an advancing column of smoke. A whistle
sounded. The train was coming in.




CHAPTER II

SUPPLY AND DEMAND


And now life in East Harniss became temporarily fevered. Issy McKay
dashed out of the station and rushed importantly up and down the
platform. Ed Crocker and Cornelius Rowe emerged and draped themselves
in statuesque attitudes against the side of the building. Obed Gott came
hurrying from his paint and oil shop, which was next to the "general
store." Mr. Higgins, proprietor of the latter, sauntered easily across
to receive, in his official capacity as postmaster, the mail bag. Ten or
more citizens, of both sexes, and of various ages, gathered in groups to
inspect and supervise.

The locomotive pulled its string of cars, a "baggage," a "smoker,"
and two "passengers," alongside the platform. The sliding door of the
baggage car was pushed back and the baggage master appeared in the
opening. "Hi! Cap'n!" he shouted. "Hi, Cap'n Sol! Here's some express
for you."

But unfortunately the Captain was in conversation with the conductor at
the other end of the train. Issy, willing and officious, sprang forward.
"I'll take it, Bill," he volunteered. "Here, give it to me."

The baggage master handed down the package, a good sized one marked
"Glass. With Care." Issy received it, clutched it to his bosom, turned
and saw Gertie Higgins, pretty daughter of Beriah Higgins, stepping from
the first car to the platform. Gertie had been staying with an aunt in
Trumet and was now returning home for a day or two.

Issy stopped short and gazed at her. He saw her meet and kiss her
father, and the sight roused turbulent emotions in his bosom. He saw her
nod and smile at acquaintances whom she passed. She approached, noticed
him, and--oh, rapture!--said laughingly, "Hello, Is." Before he could
recover his senses and remember to do more than grin she had disappeared
around the corner of the station. Therefore he did not see the young man
who stepped forward to shake her hand and whisper in her ear. This young
man was Sam Bartlett, and, as a "city dude," Issy loathed and hated him.

No, Issy did not see the hurried and brief meeting between Bartlett and
Gertie Higgins, but he had seen enough to cause forgetfulness of mundane
things. For an instant he stared after the vanished vision. Then he
stepped blindly forward, tripped over something--"his off hind leg," so
Captain Sol afterwards vowed--and fell sprawling, the express package
beneath him.

The crash of glass reached the ears of the depot master. He broke away
from the conductor and ran toward his prostrate "assistant." Pushing
aside the delighted and uproarious bystanders, he forcibly helped the
young man to rise.

"What in time?" he demanded.

Issy agonizingly held the package to his ear and shook it.

"I--I'm afraid somethin's cracked," he faltered.

The crowd set up a whoop. Ed Crocker appeared to be in danger of
strangling.

"Cracked!" repeated Captain Sol. "Cracked!" he smiled, in spite of
himself. "Yes, somethin's cracked. It's that head of yours, Issy. Here,
let's see!"

He snatched the package from the McKay hands and inspected it.

"Smashed to thunder!" he declared. "Who's the lucky one it belongs to?
Humph!" He read the inscription aloud, "Major Cuthbertson S. Hardee. The
Major, hey! . . . Well, Is, you take the remains inside and you and I'll
hold services over it later."

"I--I didn't go to do it," protested the frightened Issy.

"Course you didn't. If you had you wouldn't. You're like the feller
in Scriptur', you leave undone the things you ought to do and do them
that--All right, Jim! Let her go! Cast off!"

The conductor waved his hand, the engine puffed, the bell rang, and
the train moved onward. For another twelve hours East Harniss was left
marooned by the outside world.

Beriah Higgins and the mail bag were already in the post office. Thither
went the crowd to await the sorting and ultimate distribution. A short,
fat little man lingered and, walking up to the depot master, extended
his hand.

"Hello, Sol!" he said, smiling. "Thought I'd stop long enough to say
'Howdy,' anyhow."

"Why, Bailey Stitt!" cried the Captain. "How are you? Glad to see you.
Thought you was down to South Orham, takin' out seasick parties for the
Ocean House, same kind of a job I used to have in Wellmouth."

"I am," replied Captain Stitt. "That is, I was. Just now I've run over
here to see about contractin' for a supply of clams and quahaugs for our
boarders. You never see such a gang to eat as them summer folks, in your
life. Barzilla Wingate, he says the same about his crowd. He's comin' on
the mornin' train from Wellmouth."

"You don't tell me. I ain't seen Barzilla for a long spell. Where you
stoppin'? Come up to the house, won't you?"

"Can't. I'm goin' to put up over to Obed Gott's. His sister, Polena
Ginn, is a relation of mine by marriage. So long! Obed's gone on ahead
to tell Polena to put the kettle on. Maybe Obed and I'll be back again
after I've had supper."

"Do. I'll be round here for two or three hours yet."

He entered the depot. Except the forlorn Issy, who sat in a corner,
holding the express package in his lap, Simeon Phinney was the only
person in the waiting room.

"Come on now, Sol!" pleaded Sim. "I want to hear the rest of that about
you and Williams. You left off in the most ticklish place possible,
out of spite, I do believe. I'm hangin' on to that boat in the breakers
until I declare I believe I'm catchin' cold just from imagination."

"Wait a minute, Sim," said the depot master. Then he turned to his
assistant.

"Issy," he said, "this is about the nineteenth time you've done just
this sort of thing. You're no earthly use and I ought to give you your
clearance papers. But I can't, you're too--well--ornamental. You've
got to be punished somehow and I guess the best way will be to send you
right up to Major Hardee's and let you give him the remnants. He'll
want to know how it happened, and you tell him the truth. The TRUTH,
understand? If you invent any fairy tales out of those novels of yours
I'll know it by and by and--well, YOU'LL know I know. No remarks,
please. Git!"

Issy hesitated, seemed about to speak, thought better of it, took up
package and cap, and "got."

"Let's see," said the Captain, sitting down in one of the station chairs
and lighting a fresh cigar; "where was Williams and I in that yarn of
mine? Oh, yes, I could see land and cal'lated we was goin' to bump.
Well, we did. Steerin' anyways but dead ahead was out of the question,
and all I could do was set my teeth and trust in my bein' a member
of the church. The Shootin' Star hit that beach like she was the real
article. Overboard went oar and canvas and grub pails, and everything
else that wa'n't nailed down, includin' Fatty and me. I grabbed him by
the collar and wallowed ashore.

"'Awk! hawk!' he gasps, chokin', 'I'm drownded.'

"I let him BE drownded, for the minute. I had the launch to think of,
and somehow or 'nother I got hold of her rodin' and hauled the anchor up
above tide mark. Then I attended to my passenger.

"'Where are we?' he asks.

"I looked around. Close by was nothin' but beach-grass and seaweed and
sand. A little ways off was a clump of scrub pines and bayberry bushes
that looked sort of familiar. And back of them was a little board shanty
that looked more familiar still. I rubbed the salt out of my eyes.

"'WELL!' says I. 'I swan to man!'

"'What is it?' he says. 'Do you know where we are? Whose house is that?'

"I looked hard at the shanty.

"'Humph!' I grunted. 'I do declare! Talk about a feller's comin' back to
his own. Whose shanty is that? Well, it's mine, if you want to know.
The power that looks out for the lame and the lazy has hove us ashore on
Woodchuck Island, and that's a piece of real estate I own.'

"It sounds crazy enough, that's a fact; but it was true. Woodchuck
Island is a little mite of a sand heap off in the bay, two mile from
shore and ten from the nighest town. I'd bought it and put up a shanty
for a gunnin' shack; took city gunners down there, once in a while,
the fall before. That summer I'd leased it to a friend of mine, name of
Darius Baker, who used it while he was lobsterin'. The gale had driven
us straight in from sea, 'way past Sandy P'int and on to the island.
'Twas like hittin' a nail head in a board fence, but we'd done it. Shows
what Providence can do when it sets out.

"I explained some of this to Williams as we waded through the sand to
the shanty.

"'But is this Baker chap here now?' he asks.

"'I'm afraid not,' says I. 'The lobster season's about over, and he was
goin' South on a yacht this week. Still, he wa'n't to go till Saturday
and perhaps--'

"But the shanty was empty when we got there. I fumbled around in the tin
matchbox and lit the kerosene lamp in the bracket on the wall. Then I
turned to Williams.

"'Well,' says I, 'we're lucky for once in--'

"Then I stopped. When he went overboard the water had washed off
his hat. Likewise it had washed off his long black hair--which was a
wig--and his head was all round and shiny and bald, like a gull's egg
out in a rain storm."

"I knew he wore a wig," interrupted Phinney.

"Of course you do. Everybody does now. But he wa'n't such a prophet in
Israel then as he's come to be since, and folks wa'n't acquainted with
his personal beauties.

"'What are you starin' at?' he asks.

"I fetched a long breath. 'Nothin',' says I. 'Nothin'.'

"But for the rest of that next ha'f hour I went around in a kind of
daze, as if MY wig had gone and part of my head with it. When a feller
has been doin' a puzzle it kind of satisfies him to find out the answer.
And I'd done my puzzle.

"I knew where I'd met Mr. Williams afore."

"You did?" cried Simeon.

"Um-hm. Wait a while. Well, Fatty went to bed, in one of the hay bunks,
pretty soon after that. He stripped to his underclothes and turned in
under the patchwork comforters. He was too beat out to want any supper,
even if there'd been any in sight. I built a fire in the rusty cook
stove and dried his duds and mine. Then I set down in the busted chair
and begun to think. After a spell I got up and took account of stock, as
you might say, of the eatables in the shanty. Darius had carted off his
own grub and what there was on hand was mine, left over from the gunnin'
season--a hunk of salt pork in the pickle tub, some corn meal in a tin
pail, some musty white flour in another pail, a little coffee, a little
sugar and salt, and a can of condensed milk. I took these things out of
the locker they was in, looked 'em over, put 'em back again and sprung
the padlock. Then I put the key into my pocket and went back to my chair
to do some more thinkin'.

"Next mornin' I was up early and when the banker turned out I was fryin'
a couple of slices of the pork and had some coffee b'ilin'. Likewise
there was a pan of johnnycake in the oven. The wind had gone down
consider'ble, but 'twas foggy and thick again, which was a pleasin'
state of things for yours truly.

"Williams smelt the cookin' almost afore he got his eyes open.

"'Hurry up with that breakfast,' he says to me. 'I'm hungry as a wolf.'

"I didn't say nothin' then; just went ahead with my cookin'. He got into
his clothes and went outdoor. Pretty soon he comes back, cussin' the
weather.

"'See here, Mr. Williams,' says I, 'how about them orders to your
housekeeper? Are they straight? Won't she have you hunted up for a
week?'

"He colored pretty red, but from what he said I made out that she
wouldn't. I gathered that him and the old lady wa'n't real chummy. She
give him his grub and her services, and he give her the Old Harry and
her wages. She wouldn't hunt for him, not until she was ordered to.
She'd be only too glad to have him out of the way.

"'Humph!' says I. 'Then I cal'late we'll enjoy the scenery on this
garden spot of creation until the week's up.'

"'What do you mean?' says he.

"'Well,' I says, 'the launch is out of commission, unless it should
rain gasoline, and at this time of year there ain't likely to be a boat
within hailin' distance of this island; 'specially if the weather holds
bad.'

"He swore a blue streak, payin' partic'lar attention to the housekeeper
for her general stupidness and to me because I'd got him, so he said,
into this scrape. I didn't say nothin'; set the table, with one plate
and one cup and sasser and knife and fork, hauled up a chair and set
down to my breakfast. He hauled up a box and set down, too.

"'Pass me that corn bread,' says he. 'And why didn't you fry more pork?'

"He was reachin' out for the johnnycake, but I pulled it out of his way.

"'Wait a minute, Mr. Williams,' says I. 'While you was snoozin' last
night I made out a kind of manifest of the vittles aboard this shanty.
'Cordin' to my figgerin' here's scursely enough to last one husky man
a week, let along two husky ones. I paid consider'ble attention to your
preachin' yesterday and the text seemed to be to look out for number
one. Now in this case I'm the one and I've got to look out for myself.
This is my shanty, my island, and my grub. So please keep your hands off
that johnnycake.'

"For a minute or so he set still and stared at me. Didn't seem to sense
the situation, as you might say. Then the red biled up in his face and
over his bald head like a Fundy tide.

"'Why, you dummed villain!' he shouts. 'Do you mean to starve me?'

"'You won't starve in a week,' says I, helpin' myself to pork. 'A feller
named Tanner, that I read about years ago, lived for forty days on cold
water and nothin' else. There's the pump right over in the corner. It's
my pump, but I'll stretch a p'int and not charge for it this time.'

"'You--you--' he stammers, shakin' all over, he was so mad. 'Didn't I
hire you--'

"'You hired me to take you out to the fishin' grounds and back, provided
the launch was made ready by YOU. It wa'n't ready, so THAT contract's
busted. And you was to furnish your extrys and I was to furnish mine.
Here they be and I need 'em. It's as legitimate a deal as ever I see;
perfect case of supply and demand--supply for one and demand for two. As
I said afore, I'm the one.'

"'By thunder!' he growls, standin' up, 'I'll show you--'

"I stood up, too. He was fat and flabby and I was thin and wiry. We
looked each other over.

"'I wouldn't,' says I. 'You're under the doctor's care, you know.'

"So he set down again, not havin' strength even to swear, and watched me
eat my breakfast. And I ate it slow.

"'Say,' he says, finally, 'you think you're mighty smart, don't you.
Well, I'm It, I guess, for this time. I suppose you'll have no objection
to SELLIN' me a breakfast?'

"'No--o,' says I, 'not a mite of objection. I'll sell you a couple of
slices of pork for five dollars a slice and--'

"'FIVE DOLLARS a--!' His mouth dropped open like a main hatch.

"'Sartin,' I says. 'And two slabs of johnnycake at five dollars a slab.
And a cup of coffee at five dollars a cup. And--'

"'You're crazy!' he sputters, jumpin' up.

"'Not much, I ain't. I've been settin' at your feet larnin' high
finance, that's all. You don't seem to be onto the real inwardness of
this deal. I've got the grub market cornered, that's all. The market
price of necessaries is five dollars each now; it's likely to rise at
any time, but now it's five.'

"He looked at me steady for at least two more minutes. Then he got up
and banged out of that shanty. A little later I see him down at the end
of the sand spit starin' out into the fog; lookin' for a sail, I presume
likely.

"I finished my breakfast and washed up the dishes. He come in by and by.
He hadn't had no dinner nor supper, you see, and the salt air gives most
folks an almighty appetite.

"'Say,' he says, 'I've been thinkin'. It's usual in the stock and
provision market to deal on a margin. Suppose I pay you a one per cent
margin now and--'

"'All right,' says I, cheerful. 'Then I'll give you a slip of paper
sayin' that you've bought such and such slices of pork and hunks of
johnnycake and I'm carryin' 'em for you on a margin. Of course there
ain't no delivery of the goods now because--'

"'Humph!' he interrupts, sour. 'You seem to know more'n I thought you
did. Now are you goin' to be decent and make me a fair price or ain't
you?'

"'Can't sell under the latest quotations,' says I. 'That's five now; and
spot cash.'

"'But hang it all!' he says, 'I haven't got money enough with me. Think
I carry a national bank around in my clothes?'

"'You carry a Wellmouth Bank check book,' says I, 'because I see it in
your jacket pocket last night when I was dryin' your duds. I'll take a
check.'

"He started to say somethin' and then stopped. After a spell he seemed
to give in all to once.

"'Very good,' he says. 'You get my breakfast ready and I'll make out the
check.'

"That breakfast cost him twenty-five dollars; thirty really, because he
added another five for an extry cup of coffee. I told him to make the
check payable to 'Bearer,' as 'twas quicker to write than 'Solomon.'

"He had two more meals that day and at bedtime I had his checks
amountin' to ninety-five dollars. The fog stayed with us all the time
and nobody come to pick us up. And the next mornin's outlook was just as
bad, bein' a drizzlin' rain and a high wind. The mainland beach was in
sight but that's all except salt water and rain.

"He was surprisin'ly cheerful all that day, eatin' like a horse
and givin' up his meal checks without a whimper. If things had been
different from what they was I'd have felt like a mean sneak thief.
BEIN' as they was, I counted up the hundred and ten I'd made that day
without a pinch of conscience.

"This was a Wednesday. On Thursday, the third day of our Robinson
Crusoe business, the weather was still thick, though there was signs of
clearin'. Fatty come to me after breakfast--which cost him thirty-five,
payable, as usual, to 'Bearer'--with almost a grin on his big face.

"'Berry,' he says, 'I owe you an apology. I thought you was a green
Rube, like the rest down here, but you're as sharp as they make 'em. I
ain't the man to squeal when I get let in on a bad deal, and the chap
who can work me for a sucker is entitled to all he can make. But this
pay-as-you-go business is too slow and troublesome. What'll you take for
the rest of the grub in the locker there, spot cash? Be white, and make
a fair price.'

"I'd been expectin' somethin' like this, and I was ready for him.

"'Two hundred and sixty-five dollars,' says I, prompt.

"He done a little figgerin'. 'Well, allowin' that I have to put up on
this heap of desolation for the better part of four days more, that's
cheap, accordin' to your former rates,' he says. 'I'll go you. But why
not make it two fifty, even?'

"'Two hundred and sixty-five's my price,' says I. So he handed over
another 'Bearer' check, and his board bill was paid for a week.

"Friday was a fine day, clear as a bell. Me and Williams had a real
picnicky, sociable time. Livin' outdoor this way had made him forget his
diseases and the doctor, and he showed signs of bein' ha'fway decent. We
loafed around and talked and dug clams to help out the pork--that is, I
dug 'em and Fatty superintended. We see no less'n three sailin' craft
go by down the bay and tried our best to signal 'em, but they didn't pay
attention--thought we was gunners or somethin', I presume likely.

"At breakfast on Saturday, Williams begun to ask questions again.

"'Sol,' says he, 'it surprised me to find that you knew what a "margin"
was. You didn't get that from anything I said. Where did you get it?'

"I leaned back on my box seat.

"'Mr. Williams,' says I, 'I cal'late I'll tell you a little story, if
you want to hear it. 'Tain't much of a yarn, as yarns go, but maybe
it'll interest you. The start of it goes back to consider'ble many year
ago, when I was poorer'n I be now, and a mighty sight younger. At that
time me and another feller, a partner of mine, had a fish weir out in
the bay here. The mackerel struck in and we done well, unusual well.
At the end of the season, not countin' what we'd spent for livin' and
expenses, we had a balance owin' us at our fish dealer's up to Boston
of five hundred dollars--two fifty apiece. My partner was goin' to
be married in the spring and was cal'latin' to use his share to buy
furniture for the new house with. So we decided we'd take a trip up
to Boston and collect the money, stick it into some savin's bank where
'twould draw interest until spring and then haul it out and use it.
'Twas about every cent we had in the world.

"'So to Boston we went, collected our money, got the address of a safe
bank and started out to find it. But on the way my partner's hat blowed
off and the bank address, which was on a slip of paper inside of it, got
lost. So we see a sign on a buildin', along with a lot of others, that
kind of suggested bankin', and so we stepped into the buildin' and went
upstairs to ask the way again.

"'The place wa'n't very big, but 'twas fixed up fancy and there was a
kind of blackboard along the end of the room where a boy was markin' up
figgers in chalk. A nice, smilin' lookin' man met us and, when we told
him what we wanted, he asked us to set down. Then, afore we knowed it
almost, we'd told him the whole story--about the five hundred and all.
The feller said to hold on a spell and he'd go along with us and show us
where the savin's bank was himself.

"'So we waited and all the time the figgers kept goin' up on the board,
under signs of "Pork" and "Wheat" and "Cotton" and such, and we'd hear
how so and so's account was makin' a thousand a day, and the like of
that. After a while the nice man, who it turned out was one of the
bosses of the concern, told us what it meant. Seemed there was a big
"rise" in the market and them that bought now was bound to get rich
quick. Consequent we said we wished we could buy and get rich, too. And
the smilin' chap says, "Let's go have some lunch."'

"Williams laughed. 'Ho, ho!' says he. 'Expensive lunch, was it?'

"'Most extravagant meal of vittles ever I got away with,' I says. 'Cost
me and my partner two hundred and fifty apiece, that lunch did. We
stayed in Boston two days, and on the afternoon of the second day we
was on our way back totin' a couple of neat but expensive slips of paper
signifyin' that we'd bought December and May wheat on a one per cent
margin. We was a hundred ahead already, 'cordin' to the blackboard, and
was figgerin' what sort of palaces we'd build when we cashed in.'

"'Ain't no use preachin' a long sermon over the remains. 'Twas a simple
funeral and nobody sent flowers. Inside of a month we was cleaned
out and the wheat place had gone out of business--failed, busted, you
understand. Our fish dealer friend asked some questions, and found out
the shebang wa'n't a real stock dealer's at all. 'Twas what they call
a "bucket shop," and we'd bought nothin' but air, and paid a commission
for buyin' it. And the smilin', nice man that run the swindle had been
hangin' on the edge of bust for a long while and knowed 'twas comin'.
Our five hundred had helped pay his way to a healthier climate, that's
all.'

"'Hold on a minute,' says Fatty, lookin' more interested. 'What was the
name of the firm that took you greenhorns in?'

"''Twas the Empire Bond, Stock and Grain Exchange,' says I. 'And 'twas
on Derbyshire Street.'

"He give a little jump. Then he says, slow, Hu-u-m! I--see.'

"'Yes,' says I. 'I thought you would. You had a mustache then and your
name was diff'rent, but you seemed familiar just the same. When your
false hair got washed off I knew you right away.'

"He took out his pocket pen and his check book and done a little
figgerin'.

"'Humph!' he says, again. 'You lost five hundred and I've paid you five
hundred and five. What's the five for?'

"'That's my commission on the sales,' I says.

"And just then comes a hail from outside the shanty. Out we bolted
and there was Sam Davis, just steppin' ashore from his power boat.
Williams's housekeeper had strained a p'int and had shaded her orders by
a couple of days.

"Williams and Sam started for home right off. I followed in the Shootin'
Star, havin' borrered gasoline enough for the run. I reached the dock
ha'f an hour after they did, and there was Fatty waitin' for me.

"'Berry,' says he, 'I've got a word or two to say to you. I ain't
kickin' at your givin' me tit for tat, or tryin' to. Turn about's fair
play, if you can call the turn. But it's against my principles to allow
anybody to beat me on a business deal. Do you suppose,' he says, 'that
I'd have paid your robber's prices without a word if I hadn't had
somethin' up my sleeve? Why, man,' says he, 'I gave you my CHECKS, not
cash. And I've just telephoned to the Wellmouth Bank to stop payment
on those checks. They're no earthly use to you; see? There's one or two
things about high finance that you don't know even yet. Ho, ho!'

"And he rocked back and forth on his heels and laughed.

"I held up my hand. 'Wait a jiffy, Mr. Williams,' says I. 'I guess these
checks are all right. When we fust landed on Woodchuck, I judged by the
looks of the shanty that Baker hadn't left it for good. I cal'lated
he'd be back. And sure enough he come back, in his catboat, on Thursday
evenin', after you'd turned in. Them checks was payable to "Bearer,"
you remember, so I give 'em to him. He was to cash 'em in the fust thing
Friday mornin', and I guess you'll find he's done it.'"

"Well, I swan to MAN!" interrupted the astonished and delighted Phinney.
"So you had him after all! And I was scart you'd lost every cent."

Captain Sol chuckled. "Yes," he went on, "I had him, and his eyes and
mouth opened together.

"'WHAT?' he bellers. 'Do you mean to say that a boat stopped at that
dummed island and DIDN'T TAKE US OFF?'

"'Oh,' says I, 'Darius didn't feel called on to take you off, not after
I told him who you was. You see, Mr. Williams,' I says, 'Darius Baker
was my partner in that wheat speculation I was tellin' you about.'"

The Captain drew a long breath and re-lit his cigar, which had gone out.
His friend pounded the settee ecstatically.

"There!" he cried. "I knew the name 'Darius Baker' wa'n't so strange to
me. When was you and him in partners, Sol?"

"Oh, 'way back in the old days, afore I went to sea at all, and afore
mother died. You wouldn't remember much about it. Mother and I was
livin' in Trumet then and our house here was shut up. I was only a kid,
or not much more, and Williams was young, too."

"And that's the way he made his money! HIM! Why, he's the most respected
man in this neighborhood, and goes to church, and--"

"Yes. Well, if you make money ENOUGH you can always be respected--by
some kinds of people--and find some church that'll take you in. Ain't
that so, Bailey?"

Captain Stitt and his cousin, Obed Gott, the paint dealer, were standing
in the doorway of the station. They now entered.

"I guess it's so," replied Stitt, pulling up a chair, "though I don't
know what you was talkin' about. However, it's a pretty average safe bet
that what you say is so, Sol, 'most any time. What's the special 'so,'
this time?"

"We was talkin' about Mr. Williams," began Phinney.

"The Grand Panjandrum of East Harniss," broke in the depot master. "East
Harniss is blessed with a great man, Bailey, and, like consider'ble many
blessin's he ain't entirely unmixed."

Obed and Simeon looked puzzled, but Captain Stitt bounced in his chair
like a good-natured rubber ball. "Ho! ho!" he chuckled, "you don't
surprise me, Sol. We had a great man over to South Orham three years ago
and he begun by blessin's and ended with--with t'other thing. Ho! ho!"

"What do you mean?" demanded Sim.

"Why, I mean Stingy Gabe. You've heard of Stingy Gabe, ain't you?"

"I guess we've all heard somethin' about him," laughed Captain Sol; "but
we're willin' to hear more. He was a reformer, wa'n't he?"

"He sartin was! Ho! ho!"

"For the land sakes, tell it, Bailey," demanded Mr. Gott impatiently.
"Don't sit there bouncin' and gurglin' and gettin' purple in the face.
Tell it, or you'll bust tryin' to keep it in."

"Oh, it's a great, long--" began Captain Bailey protestingly.

"Go on," urged Phinney. "We've got more time than anything else, the
most of us. Who was this Stingy Gabe?"

"Yes," urged Gott, "and what did he reform?"

Captain Stitt held up a compelling hand. "It's all of a piece," he
interrupted. "It takes in everything, like an eatin'-house stew. And,
as usual in them cases, the feller that ordered it didn't know what was
comin' to him.

"Stingy Gabe was that feller. His Sunday name was Gabriel Atkinson
Holway, and his dad used to peddle fish from Orham to Denboro and back.
The old man was christened Gabriel, likewise. He owed 'most everybody,
and, besides, was so mean that he kept the scales and trimmin's of the
fish he sold to make chowder for himself and family. All hands called
him 'Stingy Gabe,' and the boy inherited the name along with the
fifteen hundred dollars that the old man left when he died. He cleared
out--young Gabe did--soon as the will was settled and afore the
outstandin' debts was, and nobody in this latitude see hide nor hair of
him till three years ago this comin' spring.

"Then, lo and behold you! he drops off the parlor car at the Orham
station and cruises down to South Orham, bald-headed and bay-windowed,
sufferin' from pomp and prosperity. Seems he'd been spendin' his life
cornerin' copper out West and then copperin' the corners in Wall Street.
The folks in his State couldn't put him in jail, so they sent him to
Congress. Now, as the Honorable Atkinson Holway, he'd come back to the
Cape to rest his wrist, which had writer's cramp from signin' stock
certificates, and to ease his eyes with a sight of the dear old home of
his boyhood.

"Bill Nickerson comes postin' down to me with the news.

"'Bailey,' says he, 'what do you think's happened? Stingy Gabe's struck
the town.'

"'For how much?' I asks, anxious. 'Don't let him have it, whatever
'tis.'

"Then he went on to explain. Gabe was rich as all get out, and 'twas
his intention to buy back his old man's house and fix it up for a summer
home. He was delighted to find how little change there was in South
Orham.

"'No matter if 'tain't but fifteen cents he'll get it, if the s'lectmen
don't watch him,' I says; and the bills, too. I know HIS tribe.'

"'You don't understand,' says Nickerson. 'He ain't no thief. He's rich,
I tell you, and he's cal'latin' to do the town good.'

"'Course he is,' I says. 'It runs in the family. His dad done it good,
too--good as 'twas ever done, I guess.'

"But next day Gabe himself happens along, and I see right off that I'd
made a mistake in my reckonin'. The Honorable Atkinson Holway wa'n't
figgerin' to borrow nothin'. When a chap has been skinnin' halibut,
minnows are too small for him to bother with. Gabe was full of fried
clams and philanthropy.

"'By Jove! Stitt,' he says, 'livin' here has been the dream of my life.'

"'You'll be glad to wake up, won't you?' says I. 'I wish I could.'

"'I tell you,' he says, 'this little old village is all right! All it
needs is a public-spirited resident to help it along. I propose to be
the P. S. R.'

"And on that program he started right in. Fust off he bought his dad's
old place, built it over into the eight-sided palace that's there now,
fetched down a small army of servants skippered by an old housekeeper,
and commenced to live simple but complicated. Then, havin' provided
the needful charity for himself, he's ready to scatter manna for the
starvin' native.

"He had a dozen schemes laid out. One was to build a free but expensive
library; another was to pave the main road with brick; third was to give
stained-glass windows and velvet cushions to the meetin' house, so's
the congregation could sleep comfortable in a subdued light. The
stained-glass idee put him in close touch with the minister, Reverend
Edwin Fisher, and the minister suggested the men's club. And he took to
that men's club scheme like an old maid to strong tea; the rest of the
improvements went into dry dock to refit while Admiral Gabe got his
men's club off the ways.

"'Twas the billiard room that made the minister hanker for a men's club.
That billiard room was the worry of his life. Old man Jotham Gale run
it and had run it sence the Concord fight, in a way of speakin'. You
remember his sign, maybe: 'Jotham W. Gale. Billiard, Pool, and Sipio
Saloon. Cigars and Tobacco. Tonics and Pipes. Minors under Ten Years of
Age not Admitted.' Jotham's customers was called, by the outsiders, 'the
billiard-room gang.'

"The billiard room gang wa'n't the best folks in town, I'll own right up
to that. Still, they wa'n't so turrible wicked. Jotham never sold rum,
and he'd never allow no rows in his place. But, just the same, his
saloon was reckoned a bad influence. Young men hadn't ought to go
there--most of us said that. If there was a nicer place TO go, argues
the minister, 'twould help the moral tone of the community consider'ble.
'Why not,' says he to Stingy Gabe, 'start a free club for men that'll
make the billiard room look like the tail boat in a race?' And says
Gabe: 'Bully! I'll do it.'"

Captain Stitt paused long enough to enjoy a chuckle all by himself.
Before he had quite finished his laugh, slow and reluctant steps were
heard on the back platform and Issy appeared on the threshold. He was
without the package, but did not look happy.

"Well, Is," inquired the depot master, "did you give the remains to the
Major?"

"Yes, sir," answered Issy.

"Did you tell him how the shockin' fatality happened? How the thing got
broken?"

"Yes, sir, I told him."

"What did he say? Didn't let his angry passions rise, did he?"

"No-o; no, sir, he didn't rise nothin'. He didn't get mad neither. But
you could see he felt pretty bad. Talked about 'old family glass' and
'priceless airloons' or some such. Said much as he regretted to, he
should feel it no more'n justice to have somebody pay damages."

"Humph!" Captain Sol looked very grave. "Issy, I can see your finish.
You'll have to pay for somethin' that's priceless, and how are you goin'
to do that? 'Old family glass,' hey? Hum! And I thought I saw the label
of a Boston store on that package."

Obed Gott leaned forward eagerly.

"Is that Major Hardee you're talkin' about?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. He's the only Major we've got. Cap'ns are plenty as June
bugs, but Majors and Gen'rals are scarce. Why?"

"Oh, nothin'. Only--" Mr. Gott muttered the remainder of the sentence
under his breath. However, the depot master heard it and his eye
twinkled.

"You're glad of it!" he exclaimed. "Why, Obed! Major Cuthbertson Scott
Hardee! I'm surprised. Better not let the women folks hear you say
that."

"Look here!" cried Captain Stitt, rather tartly, "am I goin' to finish
that yarn of mine or don't you want to hear it?"

"BEG your pardon, Bailey. Go on. The last thing you said was what Stingy
Gabe said, and that was--"




CHAPTER III

"STINGY GABE"


"And that," said Captain Bailey, mollified by the renewed interest of
his listeners, "was, 'Bully! I'll do it!'

"So he calls a meetin' of everybody interested, at his new house. About
every respectable man in town was there, includin' me. Most of the
billiard-room gang was there, likewise. Jotham, of course, wa'n't
invited.

"Gabe calls the meetin' to order and the minister makes a speech tellin'
about the scheme. 'Our generous and public-spirited citizen, Honorable
Atkinson Holway,' had offered to build a suitable clubhouse, fix it up,
and donate it to the club, them and their heirs forever, Amen. 'Twas to
belong to the members to do what they pleased with--no strings tied to
it at all. Dues would be merely nominal, a dollar a year or some such
matter. Now, who favored such a club as that?

"Well, 'most everybody did. Daniel Bassett, chronic politician, justice
of the peace, and head of the 'Conservatives' at town meetin', he made
a talk, and in comes him and his crew. Gaius Ellis, another chronic, who
is postmaster and skipper of the 'Progressives,' had been fidgetin'
in his seat, and now up he bobs and says he's for it; then every
'Progressive' jines immediate. But the billiard-roomers; they didn't
jine. They looked sort of sheepish, and set still. When Mr. Fisher begun
to hint p'inted in their direction, they got up and slid outdoor. And
right then I'd ought to have smelt trouble, but I didn't; had a cold in
my head, I guess likely.

"Next thing was to build the new clubhouse, and Gabe went at it hammer
and tongs. He had a big passel of carpenters down from the city, and
inside of three months the buildin' was up, and she was a daisy, now I
tell you. There was a readin' room and a meetin' room and an 'amusement
room.' The amusements was crokinole and parchesi and checkers and the
like of that. Also there was a gymnasium and a place where you could
play the pianner and sing--till the sufferin' got acute and somebody
come along and abated you.

"When I fust went inside that clubhouse I see 'twas bound to be
'Good-by, Bill,' for Jotham. His customers would shake his ratty old
shanty for sartin, soon's they see them elegant new rooms. I swan, if I
didn't feel sorry for the old reprobate, and, thinks I, I'll drop around
and sympathize a little. Sympathy don't cost nothin', and Jotham's
pretty good company.

"I found him settin' alongside the peanut roaster, watchin' a couple of
patients cruelize the pool table.

"'Hello, Bailey!' says he. 'You surprise me. Ain't you 'fraid of
catchin' somethin' in this ha'nt of sin? Have a chair, anyhow. And a
cigar, won't you?'

"I took the chair, but I steered off from the cigar, havin' had
experience. Told him I guessed I'd use my pipe. He chuckled.

"'Fur be it from me to find fault with your judgment,' he says.
'Terbacker does smoke better'n anything else, don't it.'

"We set there and puffed for five minutes or so. Then he sort of jumped.

"'What's up?' says I.

"'Oh, nothin'!' he says. 'Bije Simmons got a ball in the pocket, that's
all. Don't do that too often, Bije; I got a weak heart. Well, Bailey,'
he adds, turnin' to me, 'Gabe's club's fixed up pretty fine, ain't it?'

"'Why, yes,' I says; ''tis.'

"'Finest ever I see,' says he. 'I told him so when I was in there.'

"'What?' says I. 'You don't mean to say YOU'VE been in that clubroom?'

"'Sartin. Why not? I want to take in all the shows there is--'specially
the free ones. Make a good billiard room, that clubhouse would.'

"I whistled. 'Whew!' says I. 'Didn't tell Gabe THAT, did you?'

"He nodded. 'Yup,' says he. 'I told him.'

"I whistled again. 'What answer did he make?' I asked.

"'Oh, he wa'n't enthusiastic. Seemed to cal'late I'd better shut up my
head and my shop along with it, afore he knocked off one and his club
knocked out t'other.'

"I pitied the old rascal; I couldn't help it.

"'Jotham,' says I, 'I ain't the wust friend you've got in South Orham,
even if I don't play pool much. If I was you I'd clear out of here and
start somewheres else. You can't fight all the best folks in town.'

"He didn't make no answer. Just kept on a-puffin'. I got up to go. Then
he laid his hand on my sleeve.

"'Bailey,' says he, 'when Betsy Mayo was ailin', her sister's tribe was
all for the Faith Cure and her husband's relations was high for patent
medicine. When the Faith Curists got to workin', in would come some of
the patent mediciners and give 'em the bounce. And when THEY went home
for the night, the Faithers would smash all the bottles. Finally they
got so busy fightin' 'mong themselves that Betsy see she was gettin' no
better fast, and sent for the reg'lar doctor. HE done the curin', and
got the pay.'

"'Well,' says I, 'what of it?'

"'Nothin',' says he. 'Only I've been practisin' a considerable spell. So
long. Come in again some time when it's dark and the respectable element
can't see you.'

"I went away thinkin' hard. And next mornin' I hunted up Gabe, and says
I:

"'Mr. Holway,' I says, 'what puzzles me is how you're goin' to elect the
officers for the new club. Put up a Conservative and the Progressives
resign. H'ist the Progressive ensign and the Conservatives'll mutiny. As
for the billiard-roomers--providin' any jine--they've never been known
to vote for anybody but themselves. I can't see no light yet--nothin'
but fog.'

"He winks, sly and profound. 'That's all right,' says he. 'Fisher and I
have planned that. You watch!'

"Sure enough, they had. The minister was mighty popular, so, when 'twas
out that he was candidate to be fust president of the club, all hands
was satisfied. Two vice presidents was named--one bein' Bassett and
t'other Ellis. Secretary was a leadin' Conservative; treasurer a head
Progressive. Officers and crew was happy and mutiny sunk ten fathoms.
ONLY none of the billiard-room gang had jined, and they was the fish we
was really tryin' for.

"'Twas next March afore one of 'em did come into the net, though we'd
have on all kinds of bait--suppers and free ice cream Saturday nights,
and the like of that. And meantime things had been happenin'.

"The fust thing of importance was Gabe's leavin' town. Our Cape winter
weather was what fixed him. He stood the no'theasters and Scotch
drizzles till January, and then he heads for Key West and comfort.
Said his heart still beat warm for his native village, but his feet was
froze--or words similar. He cal'lated to be back in the spring. Then
the Reverend Fisher got a call to somewheres in York State, and felt
he couldn't afford not to hear it. Nobody blamed him; the salary paid
a minister in South Orham is enough to make any feller buy patent ear
drums. But that left our men's club without either skipper or pilot, as
you might say.

"One week after the farewell sermon, Daniel Bassett drops in casual on
me. He was passin' around smoking material lavish and regardless.

"'Stitt,' says he, 'you've always voted for Conservatism in our local
affairs, haven't you?'

"'Well,' says I, 'I didn't vote to roof the town hall with a new
mortgage, if that's what you mean.'

"'Exactly,' he says. 'Now, our men's club, while not as yet the success
we hoped for, has come to be a power for good in our community. It needs
for its president a conservative, thoughtful man. Bailey,' he says, 'it
has come to my ears that Gaius Ellis intends to run for that office. You
know him. As a taxpayer, as a sober, thoughtful citizen, my gorge rises
at such insolence. I protest, sir! I protest against--'

"He was standin' up, makin' gestures with both arms, and he had his
town-meetin' voice iled and runnin'. I was too busy to hanker for a
stump speech, so I cut across his bows.

"'All right, all right,' says I. 'I'll vote for you, Dan.'

"He fetched a long breath. 'Thank you,' says he. 'Thank you. That makes
ten. Ellis can count on no more than nine. My election is assured.'

"Seein' that there wa'n't but nineteen reg'lar voters who come to the
club meetin's, if Bassett had ten of 'em it sartin did look as if he'd
get in. But on election night what does Gaius Ellis do but send a wagon
after old man Solomon Peavey, who'd been dry docked with rheumatiz
for three months, and Sol's vote evened her up. 'Twas ten to ten, a
deadlock, and the election was postponed for another week.

"This was of a Tuesday. On Wednesday I met Bije Simmons, the chap who
was playin' pool at Jotham's.

"'Hey, Bailey!' says he. 'Shake hands with a brother. I'm goin' to jine
the men's club.'

"'You BE?' says I, surprised enough, for Simmons was a billiard-roomer
from 'way back.

"'Yup,' he says. 'I'll be voted in at next meetin', sure. I'm studyin'
up on parchesi now.'

"'Hum!' I says, thinkin'. 'How you goin to vote?'

"'Me?' says he. 'Me? Why, man, I wonder at you! Can't you see the
fires of Conservatism blazin' in my eyes? I'm Conservative bred and
Conservative born, and when I'm dead there'll be a Conservative gone.
By, by. See you Tuesday night.'

"He went off, stoppin' everybody he met to tell 'em the news. And on
Thursday Ed Barnes dropped in to pay me the seventy-five cents he'd
borrowed two years ago come Fourth of July. When I'd got over the
fust shock and had counted the money three times, I commenced to ask
questions.

"'Somebody die and will you a million, Ed?' I wanted to know.

"'No,' says he. 'It's the reward of virtue. I'm goin' to be a better
man. I'm jinin' the men's club.'

"'NO!' says I, for Ed was as strong a billiard-roomer as Bije.

"'Sure!' he answers. 'I'm filled full of desires for crokinole and
progressiveness. See you Tuesday night at the meetin'.'

"And, would you b'lieve it, at that meetin' no less'n six confirmed
members of the billiard-room gang was voted into the men's club. 'Twas
a hallelujah gatherin'. I couldn't help thinkin' how glad and proud
Gabe and Mr. Fisher would have been to see their dreams comin' true.
But Bassett and Ellis looked more worried than glad, and when the votin'
took place I understood the reason. Them new members had divided even,
and the ballots stood Bassett thirteen and Ellis thirteen. The tie was
still on and the election was put off for another week.

"In that week, surprisin' as it may seem, two more billiard-roomers seen
a light and jined with us. However, one was for Bassett and t'other for
Ellis, so the deadlock wa'n't broken. Jotham had only a couple of his
reg'lars left, and I swan to man if THEY didn't catch the disease inside
of the follerin' fortni't and hand in their names. The 'Billiard, Pool,
and Sipio Saloon,' from bein' the liveliest place in town, was now the
deadest. Through the window you could see poor Jotham mopin' lonesome
among his peanuts and cigars. The sayin' concernin' the hardness of
the transgressor's sleddin' was workin' out for HIM, all right. But the
conversions had come so sudden that I couldn't understand it, though I
did have some suspicions.

"'Look here, Dan,' says I to Bassett, 'are you goin' to keep this up
till judgment? There ain't but thirty votin' names in this place--except
the chaps off fishin', and they won't be back till fall. Fifteen is for
you and fifteen for Gaius. Most astonishin' agreement of difference ever
I see. We'll never have a president, at this rate.'

"He winked. 'Won't, hey?' he says. 'Sure you've counted right? I make it
thirty-one.'

"'I don't see how,' says I, puzzled. 'Nobody's left outside the club but
Jotham himself, and he--'

"'That's all right,' he interrupts, winkin' again. 'You be on hand next
Tuesday night. You can't always tell, maybe somethin'll happen.'

"I was on hand, all right, and somethin' did happen, two somethin's, in
fact. We hadn't much more'n got in our seats afore the door opened,
and in walked Gaius Ellis, arm in arm with a man; and the man was the
Honorable Stingy Gabe Atkinson Holway.

"'Gentlemen,' sings out Gaius, bubblin' over with joy, 'I propose three
cheers for our founder, who has returned to us after his long absence.'

"We give the cheers--that is, some of the folks did. Bassett and our
gang wa'n't cheerin' much; they looked as if somebody had passed 'em
a counterfeit note. You see, Gabe Holway was one of the hide-boundest
Progressives afloat, and a blind man could see who'd got him back again
and which way he'd vote. It sartinly looked bad for Bassett now.

"Gaius proposes that, out of compliment, as founder of the club, Mr.
Holway be asked to preside. So he was asked, though the Conservatives
wa'n't very enthusiastic. Gabe took the chair, preached a little sermon
about bein' glad to see his native home once more, and raps for order.

"'If there's no other business afore the meetin',' says he, 'we will
proceed to ballot for president.'

"But it turned out that there was other business. Dan Bassett riz to his
feet and commenced one of the most feelin' addresses ever I listened to.

"Fust he congratulated all hands upon the success of Mr. Holway's
philanthropic scheme for the betterment of South Orham's male citizens.
Jeered at at fust by the unregenerate, it had gone on, winnin' its way
into the hearts of the people, until one by one the said unregenerate
had regenerated, and now the club numbered thirty souls and the
Honorable Atkinson.

"'But,' says Dan, wavin' his arms, 'one man yet remains outside. One
lone man! The chief sinner, you say? Yes, I admit it. But, gentlemen,
a repentant sinner. Alone he sits amid the wreck of his business--a
business wrecked by us, gentlemen--without a customer, without a friend.
Shall it be said that the free and open-handed men's club of South Orham
turned its back upon one man, merely because he HAS been what he was?
Gentlemen, I have talked with Jotham Gale; he is old, he is friendless,
he no longer has a means of livelihood--we have taken it from him. We
have turned his followers' steps to better paths. Shall we not turn
his, also? Gentlemen and friends, Jotham Gale is repentant, he feels
his ostrichism'--whatever he meant by that--'he desires to become
self-respecting, and he asks us to help him. He wishes to join this
club. Gentlemen, I propose for membership in our association the name of
Jotham W. Gale.'

"He set down and mopped his face. And the powwow that broke loose was
somethin' tremendous. Of course 'twas plain enough what Dan's game was.
This was the 'somethin'' that was goin' to happen.

"Ellis see the way the land lay, and he bounces up to protest. 'Twas
an outrage; a scandal; ridiculous; and so forth, and so on. Poor Gabe
didn't know what to do, and so he didn't do nothin'. A head Conservative
seconds Jotham's nomination. 'Twas put to a vote and carried easy. Dan's
speech had had its effect and a good many folks voted out of sympathy.
How did I vote? I'LL never tell you.

"And then Bassett gets up, smilin', goes to the outside door, opens it,
and leads in the new member. He'd been waitin' on the steps, it turned
out. Jotham looked mighty quiet and meek. I pitied the poor old codger
more'n ever. Snaked in, he was, out of the wet, like a yeller dog, by
the club that had kicked him out of his own shop.

"Chairman Gabe pounds for order, and suggests that the votin' can go on.
But Ellis jumps up, and says he:

"'What's the sense of votin' now?' he asks sarcastic. 'Will the lost
lamb we've just yanked into the fold have the face to stand up and bleat
that he hasn't promised to vote Conservative? Dan Bassett, of all the
contemptible tricks that ever--'

"Bassett's face was redder'n a ripe tomatter. He shakes his fist in
Gaius's face and yells opinions and comments.

"'Don't you talk to me about tricks, you ward-heeler!' he hollers.
'Why did you fetch Mr. Holway back home? Why did you, hey? That was the
trickiest trick that I--'

"Gabe pretty nigh broke his mallet thumpin'.

"'Gentlemen! gentlemen!' says he. 'This is most unseemly. Sit down,
if you PLEASE. Mr. Ellis, when the purpose of this association is
considered, it seems to me very wrong to find fault because the chief of
our former antagonists has seen the error of his ways and become one of
us. Mr. Bassett, I do not understand your intimation concernin' myself.
I shall adjourn this meetin' until next Friday evenin', gentlemen.
Meanwhile, let us remember that we ARE gentlemen.'

"He thumped the desk once, and parades out of the buildin', dignified
as Julius Caesar. The rest of us toddled along after him, all talkin' at
once. Bassett and Ellis glowered at each other and hove out hints about
what would happen afore they got through. 'Twas half-past ten afore I
got to bed that night, and Sarah J.--that's Mrs. Stitt--kept me awake
another hour explainin' whys and wherefores.

"For the next three days nobody done anything but knock off work and
talk club politics. You'd see 'em on the corners and in the post office
and camped on the meetin'-house steps, arguin' and jawin'. Dan and Gaius
was hurryin' around, moppin' their foreheads and lookin' worried. On
Thursday there was all sorts of rumors afloat. Finally they all simmered
down to one, and that one was what made me stop Stingy Gabe on the
street and ask for my bearin's.

"'Mr. Holway,' says I, 'is it true that Dan and Gaius have resigned and
agreed to vote for somebody else?'

"He nodded, grand and complacent.

"'Then who's the somebody?' says I. 'For the land sakes! tell me. It's
as big a miracle as the prodigal son.'

"I remember now that the prodigal son ain't a miracle, but I was excited
then.

"'Stitt,' says he, 'I am the "somebody," as you call it. I have decided
to let my own wishes and inclinations count for nothin' in this affair,
and to accept the office of president myself. It will be announced at
the meetin'.'

"I whistled. 'By gum!' says I. 'You've got a great head, Mr. Holway, and
I give you public credit for it. It's the only course that ain't full of
breakers. Did you think of it yourself?'

"He colored up a little. 'Why, no, not exactly,' he says. 'The fact is,
the credit belongs to our new member, Mr. Gale.'

"'To JOTHAM?' says I, astonished.

"'Yes. He suggested my candidacy, as a compromise. Said that he, for
one, would be proud to vote for me. Mr. Gale seems thoroughly repentant,
a changed man. I am counting on him for great things in the future.'

"So the fuss seemed settled, thanks to the last person on earth you'd
expect would be peacemaker. But that afternoon I met Darius Tompkins,
Bassett's right-hand man.

"'Bailey,' says he, 'you're a Conservative, ain't you? You're for Dan
through thick and thin?'

"'Why!' says I, 'I understand Dan and Gaius are both out of it now, and
it's settled on Holway. Dan's promised to vote for him.'

"'HE has,' says Tompkins, with a wink, 'but the rest of us ain't. We
pledged our votes to Dan Bassett, and we ain't the kind to go back on
our word. Dan himself'll vote for Gabe; so'll Gaius and his reg'lar
tribe. That'll make twelve, countin' Holway's own.'

"'Make seventeen, you mean,' says I. 'Gaius and his crowd's fifteen and
Dan's sixteen and Gabe's seven--'

"He winked again, and interrupted me. 'You're countin' wrong, my boy,'
says he. 'Five of Gaius's folks come from the old billiard-room gang.
Just suppose somethin' happened to make that five vote, on the quiet,
for Bassett. Then--'

"A customer come in then, and Tompkins had to leave; but afore he went
he got me to one side and whispers:

"'Keep mum, old man, and vote straight for Dan. We'll show old Holway
that we can't be led around by the nose.'

"'Tompkins,' says I, 'I know your head well enough to be sartin that it
didn't work this out by itself. And why are you so sure of the billiard
roomers? Who put you up to this?'

"He rapped the side of his nose. 'The smartest politician in this
town,' says he, 'and the oldest--J. W. Gale, Esq.! S-s-sh-h! Don't say
nothin'.'

"I didn't say nothin'. I was past talk. And that evenin' as I went past
the billiard room on my way home, who should come out of it but Gaius
Ellis, and HE looked as happy as Tompkins had.

"Friday night that clubroom was filled. Every member was there, and most
of 'em had fetched their wives and families along to see the fun. There
was whisperin' and secrecy everywheres. Honorable Gabe took the chair
and makes announcements that the shebang is open for business.

"Up gets Dave Bassett and all but sheds tears. He says that he made up
his mind to vote, not for himself, but for the founder and patron of
the club, the Honorable Atkinson Holway. He spread it over Gabe thick
as sugar on a youngster's cake. And when he set down all hands applauded
like fury. But I noticed that he hadn't spoke for nary Conservative but
himself.

"Then Gaius Ellis rises and sobs similar. He's stopped votin' for
himself, too. His ballot is for that grand and good man, Gabriel
Atkinson Holway, Esq. More applause and hurrahs.

"And then who should get up but Jotham Gale. He talks humble, like a
has-been that knows he's a back number, but he says it's his privilege
to cast his fust vote in that club for Mr. Holway, South Orham's pride.
Nobody was expectin' him to say anything, and the cheers pretty nigh
broke the winders.

"Gabe was turrible affected by the soft soap, you could see that. He
fairly sobbed as he sprinkled gratitude and acceptances. When the agony
was over, he says the votin' can begin.

"I cal'lated he expected somebody'd move to make it unanimous, but they
didn't. So the blank ballots was handed around, and the pencils got
busy. Gabe app'ints three tellers, Bassett and Ellis, of course, for
two--and the third, Jotham Gale.

"'As a compliment to our newest member,' says the chairman, smilin'
philanthropic.

"When the votes was in the hat, the tellers retired to the amusement
room to count up. It took a long time. I see the Conservatives and
Progressives nudgin' each other and winkin' back and forth. Five
minutes, then ten, then fifteen.

"And all of a sudden the biggest row bu'st loose in that amusement room
that ever you heard. Rattlety--bang! Biff! Smash! The door flew open,
and in rolled Bassett and Ellis, all legs and arms. Gabe and some of the
rest hauled 'em apart and held 'em so, but the language them two hove at
each other was enough to bring down a judgment.

"'Gentlemen! gentlemen!' hollers poor Gabe. 'What in the world? I am
astounded! I--'

"'You miserable traitor!' shrieks Gaius, wavin' a fist at Dan.

"'You low-down hound!' whoops Dan back at him.

"'Silence!' bellers Gabe, poundin' thunder storms on the desk. 'Will
some one explain why these maniacs are--Ah, Mr. Gale--thank goodness,
YOU at least are sane!'

"Jotham walks to the front of the platform. He was holdin' the hat and a
slip of paper with the result set down on it.

"'Ladies and feller members,' says he, 'there's been some surprisin'
votin' done in this election. Things ain't gone as we cal'lated they
would, somehow. Mr. Holway, your election wa'n't unanimous, after all.'

"The way he said it made most everybody think Gabe was elected, anyhow,
and I guess Holway thought so himself, for he smiled forgivin' and says:

"'Never mind, Mr. Gale,' says he. 'A unanimous vote was perhaps too much
to expect. Go on.'

"'Yes,' says Jotham. 'Well, here's the way it stands. I'll read it to
you.'

"He fixes his specs and reads like this:

"'Number of votes cast, 32.'

"'Honorable Atkinson Holway has 4.'

"'WHAT?' gasps Stingy Gabe, fallin' into his chair.

"'Yes, sir,' says Jotham. 'It's a shame, I know, but it looks as nobody
voted for you, Mr. Holway, but yourself and me and Dan and Gaius. To
proceed:

"'Daniel Bassett has 9.'

"The Conservatives and their women folks fairly groaned out loud.
Tompkins jumped to his feet, but Jotham held up a hand.

"'Just a moment, D'rius,' he says. 'I ain't through yet.'

"'Gaius Ellis has 9.'

"Then 'twas the Progressives' turn to groan. The racket and hubbub was
gettin' louder all the time.

"'There's ten votes left,' goes on Jotham, 'and they bear the name
of Jotham W. Gale. I can't understand it, but it does appear that I'm
elected president of this 'ere club. Gentlemen, I thank you for the
honor, which is as great as 'tis unexpected.'

"Gabe and the Progressives and the Conservatives set and looked at each
other. And up jumps 'Bije Simmons, and calls for three cheers for the
new president.

"Nobody jined in them cheers but the old billiard room gang; they did,
though, every one of 'em, and Jotham smiled fatherly down on his flock.

"I s'pose there ain't no need of explainin'. Jotham had worked it all,
from the very fust. When the tie business begun and Gaius and Dan was
bribin' the billiard roomers to jine the club, 'twas him that fixed how
they should vote so's to keep the deadlock goin'. 'Twas him that put
Bassett up to proposin' him as a member. 'Twas him that suggested Gabe's
comin' back to Gaius. 'Twas him that--But what's the use? 'Twas him all
along. He was IT.

"That night everybody but the billiard-room gang sent in their
resignation to that club. We refused to be bossed by such people. Gabe
resigned, too. He was disgusted with East Harniss and all hands in it.
He'd have took back the clubhouse, but he couldn't, as the deed of gift
was free and clear. But he swore he'd never give it another cent.

"Folks thought that would end the thing, because it wouldn't be
self-supportin', but Jotham had different idees. He simply moved his
pool tables and truck up from the old shop, and now he's got the finest
place of the kind on the Cape, rent free.

"'I told you 'twould make a good billiard saloon, didn't I, Bailey?' he
says, chucklin'.

"'Jotham,' says I, 'of your kind you're a perfect wonder.'

"'Well,' says he, 'I diagnosed that men's club as sufferin' from acute
politics. I've been doctorin' that disease for a long time. The trouble
with you reformers,' he adds, solemn, 'is that, when it comes to
political doin's, you ain't practical.'

"As for Stingy Gabe, he shut up his fine house and moved to New York.
Said he was through with helpin' the moral tone.

"'When I die,' he says to me, 'if I go to the bad place I may start in
reformin' that. It don't need it no more'n South Orham does, but 'twill
be enough sight easier job.'

"And," concluded Captain Stitt, as soon as he could be heard above the
"Haw! haws!" caused by the Honorable Holway's final summing-up of his
native town, "I ain't so sure that he was greatly mistook. What do you
think, Sol?"

The depot master shook his head. "Don't know, Bailey," he answered,
dryly. "I'll have to visit both places 'fore I give an opinion. I HAVE
been to South Orham, but the neighborhood that your friend Gabe compared
it to I ain't seen--yet. I put on that 'yet,'" he added, with a wink,
"'cause I knew Sim Phinney would if I didn't."

Captain Bailey rose and covered a yawn with a plump hand.

"I believe I'll go over to Obed's and turn in," he said. "I'm sleepy as
a minister's horse tonight. You don't mind, do you, Obed?"

"No-o," replied Mr. Gott, slowly. "No, I don't, 'special. I kind of
thought I'd run into the club a few minutes and see some of the other
fellers. But it ain't important--not very."

The "club" was one of the rooms over Mr. Higgins's store and post
office. It had been recently fitted up with chairs and tables from
its members' garrets and, when the depot and store were closed, was a
favorite gathering place of those reckless ones who cared to "set up
late"--that is, until eleven o'clock. Most of the men in town belonged,
but many, Captain Berry among them, visited the room but seldom.

"Checkers," said the depot master, referring to the "club's" favorite
game, "is too deliberately excitin' for me. To watch Beriah Higgins and
Ezra Weeks fightin' out a game of checkers is like gettin' your feet
froze in January and waitin' for spring to come and thaw 'em out. It's a
numbin' kind of dissipation."

But Obed Gott was a regular attendant at the "club," and to-night he
had a particular reason for wishing to be there. His cousin noticed his
hesitation and made haste to relieve his mind.

"That's all right, Obed," he said, "go to the club, by all means. I
ain't such a stranger at your house that I can't find my way to bed
without help. Good-night, Sim. Good-night, Issy. Cheer up; maybe the
Major's glassware IS priceless. So long, Cap'n Sol. See you again some
time tomorrer."

He and Mr. Gott departed. The depot master rose from his chair. "Issy,"
he commanded, "shut up shop."

Issy obeyed, closing the windows and locking the front door. Captain
Sol himself locked the ticket case and put the cash till into the small
safe.

"That'll do, Is," said the Captain. "Good-night. Don't worry too much
over the Major's glass. I'll talk with him, myself. You dream about
pleasanter things--your girl, if you've got one."

That was a chance shot, but it struck Issy in the heart. Even during
his melancholy progress to and from Major Hardee's, the vision of Gertie
Higgins had danced before his greenish-blue eyes. His freckles were
engulfed in a surge of blushes as, with a stammered "Night, Cap'n
Berry," he hurried out into the moonlight.

The depot master blew out the lamps. "Come on, Sim," he said, briefly.
"Goin' to walk up with me, or was YOU goin' to the club?"

"Cal'late I'll trot along with you, if you don't mind. I'd just as soon
get home early and wrastle with the figures on that Williams movin'
job."

They left the depot, locked and dark, passed the "general store," where
Mr. Higgins was putting out his lights prior to adjournment to the
"club" overhead, walked up Main Street to Cross Street, turned and began
climbing the hill. Simeon spoke several times but his friend did not
answer. A sudden change had come over him. The good spirits with which
he told of his adventure with Williams and which had remained during
Phinney's stay at the depot, were gone, apparently. His face, in the
moonlight, was grave and he strode on, his hands in his pockets.

At the crest of the hill he stopped.

"Good-night, Sim," he said, shortly, and, turning, walked off.

The building mover gazed after him in surprise. The nearest way to the
Berry home was straight down Cross Street, on the other side of the
hill, to the Shore Road, and thence along that road for an eighth of
a mile. The Captain's usual course was just that. But to-night he had
taken the long route, the Hill Boulevard, which made a wide curve before
it descended to the road below.

Sim, who had had a shrewd suspicion concerning his friend's silence and
evident mental disturbance, stood still, looking and wondering. Olive
Edwards, Captain Berry's old sweetheart, lived on the Boulevard. She
was in trouble and the Captain knew it. He had asked, that very evening,
what she was going to do when forced to move. Phinney could not tell
him. Had he gone to find out for himself? Was the mountain at last
coming to Mohammed?

For some minutes Simeon remained where he was, thinking and surmising.
Then he, too, turned and walked cautiously up the Boulevard. He
passed the Williams mansion, its library windows ablaze. He passed
the twenty-five room "cottage" of the gentleman from Chicago. Then
he halted. Opposite him was the little Edwards dwelling and shop. The
curtains were up and there was a lamp burning on the small counter.
Beside the lamp, in a rocking chair, sat Olive Edwards, the widow,
sewing. As he gazed she dropped the sewing in her lap, and raised her
head.

Phinney saw how worn and sad she looked. And yet, how young, considering
her forty years and all she had endured and must endure. She put her
hand over her eyes, then removed it wearily. A lump came in Simeon's
throat. If he might only help her; if SOME ONE might help her in her
lonely misery.

And then, from where he stood in the shadow of the Chicago gentleman's
hedge, he saw a figure step from the shadows fifty feet farther on.
It was Captain Solomon Berry. He walked to the middle of the road
and halted, looking in at Olive. Phinney's heart gave a jump. Was the
Captain going into that house, going to HER, after all these years? WAS
the mountain--

But no. For a full minute the depot master stood, looking in at the
woman by the lamp. Then he jammed his hands into his pockets, wheeled,
and tramped rapidly off toward his home. Simeon Phinney went home, also,
but it was with a heavy heart that he sat down to figure the cost of
moving the Williams "pure Colonial" to its destined location.




CHAPTER IV

THE MAJOR


The depot master and his friend, Mr. Phinney, were not the only ones
whose souls were troubled that evening. Obed Gott, as he stood at the
foot of the stairs leading to the meeting place of the "club," was vexed
and worried. His cousin, Captain Stitt, had gone into the house and up
to his room, and Obed, after seeing him safely on his way, had returned
to the club. But, instead of entering immediately, he stood in the
Higgins doorway, thinking, and frowning as he thought. And the subject
of his thought was the idol of feminine East Harniss, the "old-school
gentleman," Major Cuthbertson Scott Hardee.

The Major first came to East Harniss one balmy morning in March--came,
and created an immediate sensation. "Redny" Blount, who drives the
"depot wagon," was wrestling with a sample trunk belonging to the
traveling representative of Messrs. Braid & Gimp, of Boston, when he
heard a voice--and such a voice--saying:

"Pardon me, my dear sir, but may I trouble you for one moment?"

Now "Redny" was not used to being addressed as "my dear sir." He turned
wonderingly, and saw the Major, in all his glory, standing beside him.
"Redny's" gaze took in the tall, slim figure in the frock coat tightly
buttoned; took in the white hair, worn just long enough to touch
the collar of the frock coat; the long, drooping white mustache and
imperial; the old-fashioned stock and open collar; the black and white
checked trousers; the gaiters; and, last of all, the flat brimmed,
carefully brushed, old-fashioned silk hat. Mr. Blount gasped.

"Huh?" he said.

"Pardon me, my dear sir," repeated the Major, blandly, smoothly, and
with an air of--well, not condescension, but gracious familiarity. "Will
you be so extremely kind as to inform me concerning the most direct
route to the hotel or boarding house?"

The word "hotel" was the only part of this speech that struck home to
"Redny's" awed mind.

"Hotel?" he repeated, slowly. "Why, yes, sir. I'm goin' right that way.
If you'll git right into my barge I'll fetch you there in ten minutes."

There was enough in this reply, and the manner in which it was
delivered, to have furnished the station idlers, in the ordinary course
of events, with matter for gossip and discussion for a week. Mr. Blount
had not addressed a person as "sir" since he went to school. But no
one thought of this; all were too much overcome by the splendor of the
Major's presence.

"Thank you," replied the Major. "Thank you. I am obliged to you, sir.
Augustus, you may place the baggage in this gentleman's conveyance."

Augustus was an elderly negro, very black as to face and a trifle shabby
as to clothes, but with a shadow of his master's gentility, like a
reflected luster, pervading his person. He bowed low, departed, and
returned dragging a large, old style trunk, and carrying a plump valise.

"Augustus," said the Major, "you may sit upon the seat with the driver.
That is," he added, courteously, "if Mr.--Mr.--"

"Blount," prompted the gratified "Redny."

"If Mr. Blount will be good enough to permit you to do so."

"Why, sartin. Jump right up. Giddap, you!"

There was but one passenger, besides the Major and Augustus, in the
"depot wagon" that morning. This passenger was Mrs. Polena Ginn, who had
been to Brockton on a visit. To Mrs. Polena the Major, raising his hat
in a manner that no native of East Harniss could acquire by a lifetime
of teaching, observed that it was a beautiful morning. The flustered
widow replied that it "was so." This was the beginning of a conversation
that lasted until the "Central House" was reached, a conversation that
left Polena impressed with the idea that her new acquaintance was as
near the pink of perfection as mortal could be.

"It wa'n't his clothes, nuther," she told her brother, Obed Gott, as
they sat at the dinner table. "I don't know what 'twas, but you could
jest see that he was a gentleman all over. I wouldn't wonder if he was
one of them New York millionaires, like Mr. Williams--but SO different.
'Redny' Blount says he see his name onto the hotel register and 'twas
'Cuthbertson Scott Hardee.' Ain't that a tony name for you? And his
darky man called him 'Major.' I never see sech manners on a livin' soul!
Obed, I DO wish you'd stop eatin' pie with a knife."

Under these pleasing circumstances did Major Cuthbertson Scott Hardee
make his first appearance in East Harniss, and the reputation spread
abroad by Mr. Blount and Mrs. Ginn was confirmed as other prominent
citizens met him, and fell under the spell. In two short weeks he
was the most popular and respected man in the village. The Methodist
minister said, at the Thursday evening sociable, that "Major Hardee is
a true type of the old-school gentleman," whereupon Beriah Higgins, who
was running for selectman, and therefore felt obliged to be interested
in all educational matters, asked whereabouts that school was located,
and who was teaching it now.

It was a treat to see the Major stroll down Main Street to the post
office every pleasant spring morning. Coat buttoned tight, silk hat the
veriest trifle on one side, one glove on and its mate carried with
the cane in the other hand, and the buttonhole bouquet--always the
bouquet--as fresh and bright and jaunty as its wearer himself.

It seemed that every housekeeper whose dwelling happened to be situated
along that portion of the main road had business in the front yard at
the time of the Major's passing. There were steps to be swept, or rugs
to be shaken, or doorknobs to be polished just at that particular time.
Dialogues like the following interrupted the triumphal progress at three
minute intervals:

"Good-morning, Mrs. Sogberry. GOOD-morning. A delightful morning. Busy
as the proverbial bee once more, I see. I can never cease to admire the
industry and model neatness of the Massachusetts housekeeper. And how is
your charming daughter this morning? Better, I trust?"

"Well, now, Major Hardee, I don't know. Abbie ain't so well's I wish she
was. She set up a spell yesterday, but the doctor says she ain't gittin'
along the way she'd ought to. I says to him, s'I, 'Abbie ain't never
what you'd call a reel hearty eater, but, my land! when she don't eat
NOTHIN',' I says--"

And so on and so on, with the Major always willing to listen, always
sympathetic, and always so charmingly courteous.

The Central House, East Harniss's sole hotel, and a very small one at
that, closed its doors on April 10th. Mr. Godfrey, its proprietor,
had come to the country for his health. He had been inveigled, by an
advertisement in a Boston paper, into buying the Central House at East
Harniss. It would afford him, so he reasoned, light employment and a
living. The employment was light enough, but the living was lighter. He
kept the Central House for a year. Then he gave it up as a bad job and
returned to the city. "I might keep my health if I stayed," he admitted,
in explaining his position to Captain Berry, "but if I want to keep
to what little money I have left, I'd better go. Might as well die of
disease as starvation."

Everyone expected that the "gentleman of the old school" would go also,
but one evening Abner Payne, whose business is "real estate, fire and
life insurance, justice of the peace, and houses to let and for sale,"
rushed into the post office to announce that the Major had leased the
"Gorham place," furnished, and intended to make East Harniss his home.

"He likes the village so well he's goin' to stay here always," explained
Abner. "Says he's been all 'round the world, but he never see a place he
liked so well's he does East Harniss. How's that for high, hey? And you
callin' it a one-horse town, Obed Gott!"

The Major moved into the "Gorham place" the next morning. It--the
"place"--was an old-fashioned house on the hill, though not on Mr.
Williams' "Boulevard." It had been one of the finest mansions in town
once on a time, but had deteriorated rapidly since old Captain Elijah
Gorham died. Augustus carried the Major's baggage from the hotel to
the house. This was done very early and none of the natives saw the
transfer. There was some speculation as to how the darky managed to
carry the big trunk single-handed; one of two persons asked Augustus
this very question, but they received no satisfactory answer. Augustus
was habitually close-mouthed. Mr. Godfrey left town that same morning on
the first train.

The Major christened his new home "Silver-leaf Hall," because of two
great "silver-leaf" trees that stood by the front door. He had some
repairing, paper hanging and painting done, ordered a big stock of
groceries from the local dealer, and showed by his every action that
his stay in East Harniss was to be a lengthy one. He hired a pew in the
Methodist church, and joined the "club." Augustus did the marketing for
"Silver-leaf Hall," and had evidently been promoted to the position of
housekeeper.

The Major moved in April. It was now the third week in June and
his popularity was, if possible, more pronounced than ever. On this
particular, the evening of Captain Bailey Stitt's unexpected arrival,
Obed had been sitting by the tea table in his dining room after supper,
going over the account books of his paint, paper, and oil store. His
sister, Mrs. Polena Ginn, was washing dishes in the kitchen.

"Wat's that letter you're readin', Obed?" she called from her post by
the sink.

"Nothin'," said her brother, gruffly, crumpling up the sheet of note
paper and jamming it into his pocket.

"My sakes! you're shorter'n pie crust to-night. What's the matter?
Anything gone wrong at the store?"

"No."

Silence again, only broken by the clatter of dishes. Then Polena said:

"Obed, when are you goin' to take me up to the clubroom so's I can see
that picture of Major Hardee that he presented the club with? Everybody
says it's just lovely. Sarah T. says it's perfectly elegant, only not
quite so handsome as the Major reelly is. She says it don't flatter him
none."

"Humph! Anybody'd think Hardee was some kind of a wonder, the way you
women folks go on 'bout him. How do you know but what he might be a
reg'lar fraud? Looks ain't everything."

"Well, I never! Obed Gott, I should think you'd be 'shamed of yourself,
talkin' that way. I shan't speak another word to you to-night. I never
see you act so unlikely. An old fraud! The idea! That grand, noble man!"

Obed tried to make some sort of half-hearted apology, but his sister
wouldn't listen to it. Polena's dignity was touched. She was a woman of
consequence in East Harniss, was Polena. Her husband had, at his death,
left her ten thousand dollars in her own right, and she owned bonds
and had money in the Wellmouth Bank. Nobody, not even her brother, was
allowed to talk to her in that fashion.

To tell the truth, Obed was sorry he had offended his sister. He had
been throwing out hints of late as to the necessity of building an
addition to the paint and oil store, and had cast a longing look upon
a portion of Polena's ten thousand. The lady had not promised to extend
the financial aid, but she had gone so far as to say she would think
about it. So Obed regretted his insinuations against the Major's
integrity.

After a while he threw the account books upon the top of the chest of
drawers, put on his hat and coat and announced that he was going over
to the depot for a "spell." Polena did not deign to reply, so, after
repeating the observation, he went out and slammed the door.

Now, two hours later, as he stood in the doorway of the club, he was
debating what he should do in a certain matter. That matter concerned
Major Hardee and was, therefore, an extremely delicate one. At length
Mr. Gott climbed the narrow stairs and entered the clubroom. It was blue
with tobacco smoke.

The six or eight members present hailed him absently and went on with
their games of checkers or "seven-up." He attempted a game of checkers
and lost, which did not tend to make his temper any sweeter. His ill
nature was so apparent that Beriah Higgins, who suffered from dyspepsia
and consequent ill temper, finally commented upon it.

"What's the matter with you, Obed?" he asked tartly. "Too much of
P'lena's mince pie?"

"No," grunted Mr. Gott shortly.

"What is it, then? Ain't paint sellin' well?"

"Sellin' well 'nough. I could sell a hundred ton of paint to-morrow,
more'n likely, but when it come to gittin' the money for it, that would
be another story. If folks would pay their bills there wouldn't be no
trouble."

"Who's stuck you now?"

"I don't s'pose anybody has, but it's just as bad when they don't
pay up. I've got to have money to keep a-goin' with. It don't make
no diff'rence if it's as good a customer as Major Hardee; he ought to
remember that we ain't all rich like him and--"

A general movement among all the club members interrupted him. The
checker players left their boards and came over; the "seven-up" devotees
dropped their cards and joined the circle.

"What was that you said?" asked Higgins, uneasily. "The Major owin' you
money, was it?"

"Oh, course I know he's all right and a fine man and all that,"
protested Obed, feeling himself put on the defensive. "But that ain't
it. What's a feller goin' to do when he needs the money and gets a
letter like that?"

He drew the crumpled sheet of note paper from his pocket, and threw it
on the table. Higgins picked it up and read it aloud, as follows:


SILVERLEAF HALL, June 20th.

MY DEAR MR. GOTT: I am in receipt of your courteous communication of
recent date. I make it an unvarying rule to keep little ready money here
in East Harniss, preferring rather to let it remain at interest in the
financial institutions of the cities. Another rule of mine, peculiar,
I dare say--even eccentric, if you like--is never to pay by check. I am
expecting remittances from my attorneys, however, and will then bear you
in mind. Again thanking you for your courtesy, and begging you to extend
to your sister my kindest regards, I remain, my dear sir,

Yours very respectfully,

CUTHBERTSON SCOTT HARDEE.

P. S.--I shall be delighted to have the pleasure of entertaining your
sister and yourself at dinner at the hall on any date agreeable to you.
Kindly let me hear from you regarding this at your earliest convenience.
I must insist upon this privilege, so do not disappoint me, I beg.


The reception accorded this most gentlemanly epistle was peculiar. Mr.
Higgins laid it upon the table and put his hand into his own pocket. So
did Ezra Weeks, the butcher; Caleb Small, the dry goods dealer; "Hen"
Leadbetter, the livery stable keeper; "Bash" Taylor, the milkman, and
three or four others. And, wonder of wonders, each produced a sheet of
note paper exactly like Obed's.

They spread them out on the table. The dates were, of course, different,
and they differed in other minor particulars, but in the main they were
exactly alike. And each one of them ended with an invitation to dinner.

The members of the club looked at each other in amazement. Higgins was
the first to speak.

"Godfrey mighty!" he exclaimed. "Say, this is funny, ain't it? It's
more'n funny; it's queer! By jimmy, it's more'n that--it's serious! Look
here, fellers; is there anybody in this crowd that the Major's paid for
anything any time?"

They waited. No one spoke. Then, with one impulse, every face swung
about and looked up to where, upon the wall, hung the life-size
photograph of the Major, dignified, gracious, and gilt-framed. It
had been presented to the club two months before by Cuthbertson Scott
Hardee, himself.

"Ike--Ike Peters," said Higgins. "Say, Ike--has he ever paid you for
havin' that took?"

Mr. Peters, who was the town photographer, reddened, hesitated, and then
stammered, "Why, no, he ain't, yet."

"Humph!" grunted Higgins. No one else said anything. One or two took
out pocket memorandum books and went over some figures entered therein.
Judging by their faces the results of these calculations were not
pleasing. Obed was the first to break the painful silence:

"Well!" he exclaimed, sarcastically; "ain't nobody got nothin' to say?
If they ain't, I have. Or, at any rate, I've got somethin' to do." And
he rose and started to put on his coat.

"Hi! hold on a minute, Obed, you loon!" cried Higgins. "Where are you
goin'?"

"I'm goin' to put my bill in Squire Baker's hands for c'lection, and I'm
goin' to do it tonight, too."

He was on his way to the door, but two or three ran to stop him.

"Don't be a fool, Obed," said Higgins. "Don't go off ha'f cocked. Maybe
we're gittin' scared about nothin'. We don't know but we'll get every
cent that's owed us."

"Don't KNOW! Well, I ain't goin' to wait to find out. What makes me
b'ilin' is to think how we've set still and let a man that we never saw
afore last March, and don't know one blessed thing about, run up bills
and RUN 'em up. How we come to be such everlastin' fools I don't see!
What did we let him have the stuff for? Why didn't we make him pay? I--"

"Now see here, Obed Gott," broke in Weeks, the butcher, "you know why
just as well as we do. Why, blast it!" he added earnestly, "if he was to
come into my shop to-morrow and tip that old high hat of his, and smile
and say 'twas a fine mornin and 'How's the good lady to-day?' and all
that, he'd get ha'f the meat there was in the place, and I wouldn't say
'Boo'! I jest couldn't, that's all."

This frank statement was received with approving nods and a chorus of
muttered "That's so's."

"It looks to me this way," declared Higgins. "If the Major's all right,
he's a mighty good customer for all of us. If he ain't all right, we've
got to find it out, but we're in too deep to run resks of gettin' him
mad 'fore we know for sure. Let's think it over for a week. Inside of
that time some of us'll hint to him, polite but firm, you understand,
that we've got to have something on account. A week from to-night we'll
meet in the back room of my store, talk it over and decide what to do.
What do you say?"

Everybody but Obed agreed. He declared that he had lost money enough
and wasn't going to be a fool any longer. The others argued with him
patiently for a while and then Leadbetter, the livery stable keeper,
said sharply:

"See here, Obe! You ain't the only one in this. How much does the Major
owe you?"

"Pretty nigh twenty dollars."

"Humph! You're lucky. He owes me over thirty, and I guess Higgins is
worse off than any of us. Ain't that so, Beriah?"

"About seventy, even money," answered the grocer, shortly. "No use,
Obed, we've got to hang together. Wait a week and then see. And,
fellers," he added, "don't tell a soul about this business, 'specially
the women folks. There ain't a woman nor girl in this town that don't
think Major Hardee's an A1, gold-plated saint, and twouldn't be safe to
break the spell on a guess."

Obed reached home even more disgruntled than when he left it. He sat up
until after twelve, thinking and smoking, and when he went to bed he had
a brilliant idea. The next morning he wrote a letter and posted it.




CHAPTER V

A BABY AND A ROBBERY


The morning train for Boston, at that season of the year, reached East
Harniss at five minutes to six, an "ungodly hour," according to the
irascible Mr. Ogden Williams, who, in company with some of his wealthy
friends, the summer residents, was petitioning the railroad company for
a change in the time-table. When Captain Sol Berry, the depot master,
walked briskly down Main Street the morning following Mr. Gott's
eventful evening at the club, the hands of the clock on the Methodist
church tower indicated that the time was twenty minutes to six.

Issy McKay was already at the depot, the doors of which were open.
Captain Sol entered the waiting room and unlocked the ticket rack and
the little safe. Issy, languidly toying with the broom on the front
platform, paused in his pretense of sweeping and awaited permission to
go home for breakfast. It came, in characteristic fashion.

"How's the salt air affectin' your appetite, Is?" asked the Captain,
casually.

Issy, who, being intensely serious by nature, was uneasy when he
suspected the presence of a joke, confusedly stammered that he cal'lated
his appetite was all right.

"Payin' for the Major's glass ain't kept you awake worryin', has it?"

"No-o, sir. I--"

"P'r'aps you thought he was the one to 'do the worryin', hey?"

"I--I don't know."

"Well, what's your folks goin' to have to eat this mornin'?"

Issy admitted his belief that fried clams were to be the breakfast.

"So? Clams? Is, did you ever read the soap advertisement about not bein'
a clam?"

"I--I don't know's I ever did. No, sir."

"All right; I only called your attention to it as a warnin', that's all.
When anybody eats as many clams as you do there's a fair chance of his
turnin' into one. Now clear out, and don't stay so long at breakfast
that you can't get back in time for dinner. Trot!"

Issy trotted. The depot master seated himself by the door of the ticket
office and fell into a reverie. It was interrupted by the entrance of
Hiram Baker. Captain Hiram was an ex-fishing skipper, fifty-five years
of age, who, with his wife, Sophronia, and their infant son, Hiram Joash
Baker, lived in a small, old-fashioned house at the other end of the
village, near the shore. Captain Hiram, having retired from the sea, got
his living, such as it was, from his string of fish traps, or "weirs."

The depot master hailed the new arrival heartily.

"Hello, there, Hiram!" he cried, rising from his chair. "Glad to see you
once in a while. Ain't goin' to leave us, are you? Not goin' abroad for
your health, or anything of that kind, hey?"

Captain Baker laughed.

"No," he answered. "No further abroad than Hyannis. And I'll be back
from there tonight, if the Lord's willin' and the cars don't get off the
track. Give me a round trip ticket, will you, Sol?"

The depot master retired to the office, returning with the desired
ticket. Captain Hiram counted out the price from a confused mass of
coppers and silver, emptied into his hand from a blackened leather
purse, tied with a string.

"How's Sophrony?" asked the depot master. "Pretty smart, I hope."

"Yup, she's smart. Has to be to keep up with the rest of the
family--'specially the youngest."

He chuckled. His friend laughed in sympathy.

"The youngest is the most important of all, I s'pose," he observed. "How
IS the junior partner of H. Baker and Son?"

"He ain't a silent partner, I'll swear to that. Honest, Sol, I b'lieve
my 'Dusenberry' is the cutest young one outside of a show. I said so
only yesterday to Mr. Hilton, the minister. I did, and I meant it."

"Well, we're all gettin' ready to celebrate his birthday. Ho, ho!"

This was a standard joke and was so recognized and honored. A baby born
on the Fourth of July is sure of a national celebration of his birthday.
And to Captain Baker and his wife, no celebration, however widespread,
could do justice to the importance of the occasion. When, to answer the
heart longings of the child-loving couple married many years, the baby
came, he was accepted as a special dispensation of Providence and valued
accordingly.

"He's got a real nice voice, Hiram," said Sophronia, gazing proudly
at the prodigy, who, clutched gingerly in his father's big hands, was
screaming his little red face black. "I shouldn't wonder if he grew up
to sing in the choir."

"That's the kind of voice to make a fo'mast hand step lively!" declared
Hiram. "You'll see this boy on the quarter deck of a clipper one of
these days."

Naming him was a portentous proceeding and one not to be lightly gone
about. Sophronia, who was a Methodist by descent and early confirmation,
was of the opinion that the child should have a Bible name.

The Captain respected his wife's wishes, but put in an ardent plea for
his own name, Hiram.

"There's been a Hiram Baker in our family ever since Noah h'isted
the main-r'yal on the ark," he declared. "I'd kinder like to keep the
procession a-goin'."

They compromised by agreeing to make the baby's Christian name Hiram and
to add a middle name selected at random from the Scriptures. The big,
rickety family Bible was taken from the center table and opened with
shaking fingers by Mrs. Baker. She read aloud the first sentence that
met her eye: "The son of Joash."

"Joash!" sneered her husband. "You ain't goin' to cruelize him with that
name, be you?"

"Hiram Baker, do you dare to fly in the face of Scriptur'?"

"All right! Have it your own way. Go to sleep now, Hiram Joash, while I
sing 'Storm along, John,' to you."

Little Hiram Joash punched the minister's face with his fat fist when he
was christened, to the great scandal of his mother and the ill-concealed
delight of his father.

"Can't blame the child none," declared the Captain. "I'd punch anybody
that christened a middle name like that onto me."

But, in spite of his name, the baby grew and prospered. He fell out of
his crib, of course, the moment that he was able, and barked his shins
over the big shells by the what-not in the parlor the first time that
he essayed to creep. He teethed with more or less tribulation, and once
upset the household by an attack of the croup.

They gave up calling him by his first name, because of the Captain's
invariably answering when the baby was wanted and not answering when he
himself was wanted. Sophronia would have liked to call him Joash, but
her husband wouldn't hear of it. At length the father took to calling
him "Dusenberry," and this nickname was adopted under protest.

Captain Hiram sang the baby to sleep every night. There were three songs
in the Captain's repertoire. The first was a chanty with a chorus of

     John, storm along, storm along, John,
     Ain't I glad my day's work's done.

The second was the "Bowline Song."

     Haul on the bowline, the 'Phrony is a-rollin',
     Haul on the bowline! the bowline HAUL!

At the "haul!" the Captain's foot would come down with a thump. Almost
the first word little Hiram Joash learned was "haul!" He used to shout
it and kick his father vigorously in the vest.

These were fair-weather songs. Captain Hiram sang them when everything
was going smoothly. The "Bowline Song" indicated that he was feeling
particularly jubilant. He had another that he sang when he was worried.
It was a lugubrious ditty, with a refrain beginning:

     Oh, sailor boy, sailor boy, 'neath the wild billow,
     Thy grave is yawnin' and waitin' for thee.

He sang this during the worst of the teething period, and, later, when
the junior partner wrestled with the whooping cough. You could always
tell the state of the baby's health by the Captain's choice of songs.

Meanwhile Dusenberry grew and prospered. He learned to walk and to talk,
after his own peculiar fashion, and, at the mature age of two years and
six months, formally shipped as first mate aboard his father's dory. His
duties in this responsible position were to sit in the stern, securely
fastened by a strap, while the Captain and his two assistants rowed out
over the bar to haul the nets of the deep water fish weir.

The first mate gave the orders, "All hands on deck! 'Tand by to det ship
under way!" There was no "sogerin'" aboard the Hiram Junior--that was
the dory's name--while the first officer had command.

Captain Hiram, always ready to talk of the wonderful baby, told the
depot master of the youngster's latest achievement, which was to get the
cover off the butter firkin in the pantry and cover himself with butter
from head to heel.

"Ho, ho, ho!" he roared, delightedly, "when Sophrony caught him at it,
what do you s'pose he said? Said he was playin' he was a slice of bread
and was spreadin' himself. Haw! haw!"

Captain Sol laughed in sympathy.

"But he didn't mean no harm by it," explained the proud father. "He's
got the tenderest little heart in the world. When he found his ma felt
bad he bust out cryin' and said he'd scrape it all off again and when it
come prayer time he'd tell God who did it, so He'd know 'twa'n't mother
that wasted the nice butter. What do you think of that?"

"No use talkin', Hiram," said the depot master, "that's the kind of boy
to have."

"You bet you! Hello! here's the train. On time, for a wonder. See you
later, Sol. You take my advice, get married and have a boy of your own.
Nothin' like one for solid comfort."

The train was coming and they went out to meet it. The only passenger
to alight was Mr. Barzilla Wingate, whose arrival had been foretold
by Bailey Stitt the previous evening. Barzilla was part owner of a
good-sized summer hotel at Wellmouth Neck. He and the depot master were
old friends.

After the train had gone Wingate and Captain Sol entered the station
together. The Captain had insisted that his friend come home with him to
breakfast, instead of going to the hotel. After some persuasion Barzilla
agreed. So they sat down to await Issy's arrival. The depot master could
not leave the station until the "assistant" arrived.

"Well, Barzilla," asked Captain Sol, "what's the newest craze over to
the hotel?"

"The newest," said Wingate, with a grin, "is automobiles."

"Automobiles? Why, I thought 'twas baseball."

"Baseball was last summer. We had a championship team then. Yes, sir, we
won out, though for a spell it looked pretty dubious. But baseball's an
old story. We've had football since, and now--"

"Wait a minute! Football? Why, now I do remember. You had a football
team there and--and wa'n't there somethin' queer, some sort of a--a
robbery, or stealin', or swindlin' connected with it? Seems's if I'd
heard somethin' like that."

Mr. Wingate looked his friend over, winked, and asked a question.

"Sol," he said, "you ain't forgot how to keep a secret?"

The depot master smiled. "I guess not," he said.

"Well, then, I'm goin' to trust you with one. I'm goin' to tell you the
whole business about that robbin'. It's all mixed up with football and
millionaires and things--and it's a dead secret, the truth of it. So
when I tell you it mustn't go no further.

"You see," he went on, "it was late into August when Peter T. was took
down with the inspiration. Not that there was anything 'specially new
in his bein' took. He was subject to them seizures, Peter was, and every
time they broke out in a fresh place. The Old Home House itself was one
of his inspirations, so was the hirin' of college waiters, the openin'
of the two 'Annex' cottages, the South Shore Weather Bureau, and a whole
lot more. Sometimes, as in the weather-bureau foolishness, the disease
left him and t'other two patients--meanin' me and Cap'n Jonadab--pretty
weak in the courage, and wasted in the pocketbook; but gen'rally they
turned out good, and our systems and bank accounts was more healthy than
normal. One of Peter T.'s inspirations was consider'ble like typhoid
fever--if you did get over it, you felt better for havin' had it.

"This time the attack was in the shape of a 'supplementary season.'
'Twas Peter's idea that shuttin' up the Old Home the fust week in
September was altogether too soon.

"'What's the use of quittin',' says he, 'while there's bait left and the
fish are bitin'? Why not keep her goin' through September and October?
Two or three ads--MY ads--in the papers, hintin' that the ducks and wild
geese are beginnin' to keep the boarders awake by roostin' in the
back yard and hollerin' at night--two or three of them, and we'll have
gunners here by the regiment. Other summer hotels do it, the Wapatomac
House and the rest, so why not us? It hurts my conscience to see good
money gettin' past the door 'count of the "Not at Home" sign hung on the
knob. What d'you say, partners?' says he.

"Well, we had consider'ble to say, partic'lar Cap'n Jonadab. 'Twas
too risky and too expensive. Gunnin' was all right except for one
thing--that is, that there wa'n't none wuth mentionin'.

"'Ducks are scurser round here than Democrats in a Vermont
town-meetin',' growled the Cap'n. 'And as for geese! How long has it
been since you see a goose, Barzilla?'

"'Land knows!' says I. 'I can remember as fur back as the fust time
Washy Sparrow left off workin', but I can't--'

"Brown told us to shut up. Did we cal'late he didn't know what he was
talkin' about?

"'I can see two geese right now,' he snaps; 'but they're so old and
leather-headed you couldn't shoot an idea into their brains with a
cannon. Gunnin' ain't the whole thing. My makin' a noise like a duck is
only to get the would-be Teddy Roosevelts headed for this neck of the
woods. After they get here, it's up to us to keep 'em. And I can think
of as many ways to do that as the Cap'n can of savin' a quarter. Our
baseball team's been a success, ain't it? Sure thing! Then why not a
football team? Parker says he'll get it together, and coach and cap'n
it, too. And Robinson and his daughter have agreed to stay till October
fifteenth. So there's a start, anyhow.'

"'Twas a start, and a pretty good one. The Robinsons had come to the Old
Home about the fust of August, and they was our star boarders. 'G. W.
Robinson' was the old man's name as entered on the hotel log, and his
daughter answered to the hail of 'Grace'--that is, when she took
a notion to answer at all. The Robinsons was what Peter T. called
'exclusive.' They didn't mix much with the rest of the bunch, but
kept to themselves in their rooms, partic'lar when a fresh net full of
boarders was hauled aboard. Then they seemed to take an observation of
every arrival afore they mingled; questioned the pedigree and statistics
of all hands, and acted mighty suspicious.

"The only thing that really stirred Papa Robinson up and got him excited
and friendly was baseball and boat racin'. He was an old sport, that was
plain, the only real plain thing about him; the rest was mystery. As
for Grace, she wa'n't plain by a good sight, bein' what Brown called
a 'peach.' She could have had every single male in tow if she'd wanted
'em. Apparently she didn't want em, preferrin' to be lonesome and sad
and interestin'. Yes, sir, there was a mystery about them Robinsons, and
even Peter T. give in to that.

"'If 'twas anybody else,' says he, 'I'd say the old man was a crook,
down here hidin' from the police. But he's too rich for that, and always
has been. He ain't any fly-by-night. I can tell the real article without
lookin' for the "sterlin'" mark on the handle. But I'll bet all the
cold-storage eggs in the hotel against the henyard--and that's big
odds--that he wa'n't christened Robinson. And his face is familiar to
me. I've seen it somewhere, either in print or in person. I wish I knew
where.'

"So if the Robinsons had agreed to stay--them and their two
servants--that was a big help, as Brown said. And Parker would help,
too, though we agreed there wa'n't no mystery about him. He was a big,
broad-shouldered young feller just out of college somewheres, who had
drifted our way the fortni't after the Robinsons came, with a reputation
for athletics and a leanin' toward cigarettes and Miss Grace. She leaned
a little, too, but hers wa'n't so much of a bend as his was. He was dead
gone on her, and if she'd have decided to stay under water, he'd
have ducked likewise. 'Twas easy enough to see why HE believed in a
'supplementary season.'

"Me and Jonadab argued it out with Peter, and finally we met halfway,
so's to speak. We wouldn't keep the whole shebang open, but we'd shut
up everything but one Annex cottage, and advertise that as a Gunner's
Retreat. So we done it.

"And it worked. Heavens to Betsy--yes! It worked so well that by the
second week in September we had to open t'other Annex. The gunnin' was
bad, but Peter's ads fetched the would-be's, and his 'excursions' and
picnics and the football team held 'em. The football team especial.
Parker cap'ned that, and, from the gunnin' crew and the waiters and some
fishermen in the village, he dug up an eleven that showed symptoms of
playin' the game. We played the Trumet High School, and beat it, thanks
to Parker, and that tickled Pa Robinson so that he bought a two-handled
silver soup tureen--'lovin' cup,' he called it--and agreed to give it to
the team round about that won the most of the series. So the series was
arranged, the Old Home House crowd and the Wapatomac House eleven and
three high-school gangs bein' in it. And 'twas practice, practice,
practice, from then on.

"When we opened the second Annex, the question of help got serious. Most
of our college waiters had gone back to school, and we was pretty shy
of servants. So we put some extry advertisin' in the Cape weeklies, and
trusted in Providence.

"The evenin' followin' the ad in the weeklies, I was settin' smokin' on
the back piazza of the shut-up main hotel, when I heard the gate click
and somebody crunchin' along the clam-shell path. I sung out: 'Ahoy,
there!' and the cruncher, whoever he was, come my way. Then I made out
that he was a tall young chap, with his hands in his pockets.

"'Good evenin',' says he. 'Is this Mr. Brown?'

"'Thankin' you for the compliment, it ain't,' I says. 'My name's
Wingate.'

"'Oh!' says he. 'Is that so? I've heard father speak of you, Mr.
Wingate. He is Solomon Bearse, of West Ostable. I think you know him
slightly.'

"Know him? Everybody on the Cape knows Sol Bearse; by reputation,
anyhow. He's the richest, meanest old cranberry grower and
coastin'-fleet owner in these parts.

"'Is Sol Bearse your dad?' I asks, astonished. 'Why, then, you must be
Gus?'

"'No,' he says. 'I'm the other one--Fred.'

"'Oh, the college one. The one who's goin' to be a lawyer.'

"'Well, yes--and no,' says he. 'I WAS the college one, as you call it,
but I'm not goin' to be a lawyer. Father and I have had some talk on
that subject, and I think we've settled it. I--well, just at present,
I'm not sure what I'm goin' to be. That's what I've come to you for. I
saw your ad in the Item, and--I want a job.'

"I was set all aback, and left with my canvas flappin', as you might
say. Sol Bearse's boy huntin' a job in a hotel kitchen! Soon's I could
fetch a whole breath, I wanted partic'lars. He give 'em to me.

"Seems he'd been sent out to one of the colleges in the Middle West by
his dad, who was dead set on havin' a lawyer in the family. But the more
he studied, the less he hankered for law. What he wanted to be was a
literature--a book-agent or a poet, or some such foolishness. Old Sol,
havin' no more use for a poet than he had for a poor relation, was red
hot in a minute. Was this what he'd been droppin' good money in the
education collection box for? Was this--etcetery and so on. He'd
be--what the church folks say he will be--if Fred don't go in for law.
Fred, he comes back that he'll be the same if he does. So they disowned
each other by mutual consent, as the Irishman said, and the boy marches
out of the front door, bag and baggage. And, as the poetry market seemed
to be sort of overly supplied at the present time, he decided he must
do somethin' to earn a dollar, and, seein' our ad, he comes to Wellmouth
Port and the Old Home.

"'But look here,' says I, 'we ain't got no job for a literary. We need
fellers to pass pie and wash dishes. And THAT ain't no poem.'

"Well, he thought perhaps he could help make up advertisin'.

"'You can't,' I told him. 'One time, when Peter T. Brown was away, me
and Cap'n Jonadab cal'lated that a poetry advertisement would be a good
idee and we managed to shake out ten lines or so. It begun:

     "When you're feelin' tired and pale
     To the Old Home House you ought to come without fail."

"'We thought 'twas pretty slick, but we never got but one answer, and
that was a circular from one of them correspondence schools of authors,
sayin' they'd let us in on a course at cut rates. And the next thing we
knew we see that poem in the joke page of a Boston paper. I never--'

"He laughed, quiet and sorrowful. He had the quietest way of speakin',
anyhow, and his voice was a lovely tenor. To hear it purrin' out of his
big, tall body was as unexpected as a hymn tune in a cent-in-the-slot
talkin' machine.

"'Too bad,' he says. 'As a waiter, I'm afraid--'

"Just then the door of one of the Annex houses opened sudden, and there
stood Grace Robinson. The light behind her showed her up plain as could
be. I heard Fred Bearse make a kind of gaspin' noise in his throat.

"'What a lovely night!' she says, half to herself. Then she calls:
'Papa, dear, you really ought to see the stars.'

"Old man Robinson, who I judged was in the settin' room, snarled out
somethin' which wa'n't no compliment to the stars. Then he ordered
her to come in afore she catched cold. She sighed and obeyed orders,
shuttin' the door astern of her. Next thing I knew that literary tenor
grabbed my arm--'twa'n't no canary-bird grip, neither.

"'Who was that?' he whispers, eager.

"I told him. 'That's the name they give,' says I, 'but we have doubts
about its bein' the real one. You see, there's some mystery about them
Robinsons, and--'

"'I'll take that waiter's place,' he says, quick. 'Shall I go right in
and begin now? Don't stop to argue, man; I say I'll take it.'

"And he did take it by main strength, pretty nigh. Every time I'd open
my mouth he'd shut it up, and at last I give in, and showed him where he
could sleep.

"'You turn out at five sharp,' I told him. 'And you needn't bother to
write no poems while you're dressin', neither.'

"'Good night,' he answers, brisk. 'Go, will you, please? I want to
think.'

"I went. 'Tain't until an hour later that I remembered he hadn't asked
one word concernin' the wages. And next mornin' he comes to me and
suggests that perhaps 'twould be as well if I didn't tell his real name.
He was pretty sure he'd been away schoolin' so long that he wouldn't be
recognized. 'And incognitos seem to be fashionable here,' he purrs, soft
and gentle.

"I wouldn't know an incognito if I stepped on one, but the tenor voice
of him kind of made me sick.

"'All right,' I snaps, sarcastic. 'Suppose I call you "Willie." How'll
that do?'

"'Do as well as anything, I guess,' he says. Didn't make no odds to him.
If I'd have called him 'Maud,' he'd have been satisfied.

"He waited in Annex Number Two, which was skippered by Cap'n Jonadab.
And, for a poet, he done pretty well, so the Cap'n said.

"'But say, Barzilla,' asks Jonadab, 'does that Willie thing know the
Robinsons?'

"'Guess not,' I says. But, thinkin' of the way he'd acted when the girl
come to the door: 'Why?'

"'Oh, nothin' much. Only when he come in with the doughnuts the fust
mornin' at breakfast, I thought Grace sort of jumped and looked funny.
Anyhow, she didn't eat nothin' after that. P'r'aps that was on account
of her bein' out sailin' the day afore, though.'

"I said I cal'lated that was it, but all the same I was interested.
And when, a day or so later, I see Grace and Willie talkin' together
earnest, out back of the kitchen, I was more so. But I never said
nothin'. I've been seafarin' long enough to know when to keep my main
hatch closed.

"The supplementary season dragged along, but it wa'n't quite the success
it looked like at the start. The gunnin' that year was even worse than
usual, and excursions and picnics in late September ain't all joy, by
no manner of means. We shut up the second Annex at the end of the month,
and transferred the help to Number One. Precious few new boarders come,
and a good many of the old ones quit. Them that did stay, stayed on
account of the football. We was edgin' up toward the end of the series,
and our team and the Wapatomac crowd was neck and neck. It looked as if
the final game between them and us, over on their grounds, would settle
who'd have the soup tureen.

"Pa Robinson and Parker had been quite interested in Willie when he
fust come. They thought he might play with the eleven, you see. But he
wouldn't. Set his foot right down.

"'I don't care for athletics,' he says, mild but firm. 'They used to
interest me somewhat, but not now.'

"The old man was crazy. He'd heard about Willie's literature leanin's,
and he give out that he'd never see a writer yet that wa'n't a 'sissy.'
Wanted us to fire Bearse right off, but we kept him, thanks to me. If
he'd seen the 'sissy' kick the ball once, same as I did, it might have
changed his mind some. He was passin' along the end of the field when
the gang was practicin', and the ball come his way. He caught it on the
fly, and sent it back with his toe. It went a mile, seemed so, whirlin'
and whizzin'. Willie never even looked to see where it went; just kept
on his course for the kitchen.

"The big sensation hit us on the fifth of October, right after supper.
Me and Peter T. and Jonadab was in the office, when down comes Henry,
old Robinson's man servant, white as a sheet and wringin' his hands
distracted.

"'Oh, I say, Mr. Brown!' says he, shakin' all over like a quicksand.
'Oh, Mr. Brown, sir! Will you come right up to Mr. Sterz--I mean Mr.
Robinson's room, please, sir! 'E wants to see you gentlemen special.
'Urry, please! 'Urry!'

"So we ''urried,' wonderin' what on earth was the matter. And when we
got to the Robinson rooms, there was Grace, lookin' awful pale, and the
old man himself ragin' up and down like a horse mack'rel in a fish weir.

"Soon as papa sees us, he jumped up in the air, so's to speak, and when
he lit 'twas right on our necks. His daughter, who seemed to be the
sanest one in the lot, run and shut the door.

"'Look here, you!' raved the old gent, shakin' both fists under Peter
T.'s nose. 'Didn't you tell me this was a respectable hotel? And ain't
we payin' for respectability?'

"Peter admitted it, bein' too much set back to argue, I cal'late.

"'Yes!' rages Robinson. 'We pay enough for all the respectability in
this state. And yet, by the livin' Moses! I can't go out of my room
to spoil my digestion with your cussed dried-apple pie, but what I'm
robbed!'

"'Robbed!' the three of us gurgles in chorus.

"'Yes, sir! Robbed! Robbed! ROBBED! What do you think I came here for?
And why do I stay here all this time? 'Cause I LIKE it? 'Cause I can't
afford a better place? No, sir! By the great horn spoon! I come here
because I thought in this forsaken hole I could get lost and be safe.
And now--'

"He tore around like a water spout, Grace trying to calm him, and
Henry and Suzette, the maid, groanin' and sobbin' accompaniments in the
corner. I looked at the dresser. There was silver-backed brushes and all
sorts of expensive doodads spread out loose, and Miss Robinson's watch
and a di'mond ring, and a few other knickknacks. I couldn't imagine a
thief's leavin' all that truck, and I said so.

"'Them?' sputters Pa, frantic. 'What the brimstone blazes do you think
I care for them? I could buy that sort of stuff by the car-load, if I
wanted to. But what's been stole is--Oh, get out and leave me alone!
You're no good, the lot of you!'

"'Father has had a valuable paper stolen from him,' explains Grace. 'A
very valuable paper.'

"'Valuable!' howls her dad. 'VALUABLE! Why, if Gordon and his gang get
that paper, they've got ME, that's all. Their suit's as good as won, and
I know it. And to think that I've kept it safe up to within a month
of the trial, and now--Grace Sterzer, you stop pattin' my head. I'm no
pussy-cat! By the--' And so on, indefinite.

"When he called his daughter Sterzer, instead of Robinson, I cal'lated
he was loony, sure enough. But Peter T. slapped his leg.

"'Oh!' he says, as if he'd seen a light all to once. 'Ah, NOW I begin
to get wise. I knew your face was--See here, Mr. Sterzer--Mr. Gabriel
Sterzer--don't you think we'd better have a real, plain talk on this
matter? Let's get down to tacks. Was the paper you lost something to do
with the Sterzer-Gordon lawsuit? The Aluminum Trust case, you know?'

"The old man stopped dancin', stared at him hard, and then set down and
wiped his forehead.

"'Something to DO with it?' he groans. 'Why, you idiot, it was IT!
If Gordon's lawyers get that paper--and they've been after it for a
year--then the fat's all in the fire. There's nothin' left for me to do
but compromise.'

"When Peter T. mentioned the name of Gabriel Sterzer, me and Jonadab
begun to see a light, too. 'Course you remember the bust-up of the
Aluminum Trust--everybody does. The papers was full of it. There'd
been a row among the two leadin' stockholders, Gabe Sterzer and 'Major'
Gordon. Them two double-back-action millionaires practically owned the
trust, and the state 'twas in, and the politics of that state, and all
the politicians. Each of 'em run three or four banks of their own, and
a couple of newspapers, and other things, till you couldn't rest. Then
they had the row, and Gabe had took his playthings and gone home, as
you might say. Among the playthings was a majority of the stock, and the
Major had sued for it. The suit, with pictures of the leadin'
characters and the lawyers and all, had been spread-eagled in the papers
everywheres. No wonder 'Robinson's' face was familiar.

"But it seemed that Sterzer had held the trump card in the shape of the
original agreement between him and Gordon. And he hung on to it like
the Old Scratch to a fiddler. Gordon and his crowd had done everything,
short of murder, to get it; hired folks to steal it, and so on, because,
once they DID get it, Gabe hadn't a leg to stand on--he'd have to divide
equal, which wa'n't his desires, by a good sight. The Sterzer lawyers
had wanted him to leave it in their charge, but no--he knew too much for
that. The pig-headed old fool had carted it with him wherever he went,
and him and his daughter had come to the Old Home House because he
figgered nobody would think of their bein' in such an out-of-the-way
place as that. But they HAD thought of it. Anyhow, the paper was gone.

"'But Mr. Robinzer--Sterson, I mean--' cut in Cap'n Jonadab, 'you could
have 'em took up for stealin', couldn't you? They wouldn't dare--'

"''Course they'd dare! S'pose they don't know I wouldn't have that
agreement get in the papers? Dare! They'd dare anything. If they get
away with it, by hook or crook, all I can do is haul in my horns and
compromise. If they've got that paper, the suit never comes to trial.'

"'Well, they ain't got it yet,' says Peter, decided. 'Whoever stole the
thing is right here in this boardin'-house, and it's up to us to see
that they stay here. Barzilla, you take care of the mail. No letters
must go out to-night. Jonadab, you set up and watch all hands, help and
all. Nobody must leave this place, if we have to tie em. And I'll keep a
gen'ral overseein' of the whole thing, till we get a detective. And--if
you'll stand the waybill, Mr. Sterzer--we'll have the best Pinkerton in
Boston down here in three hours by special train. By the way, are you
sure the thing IS lifted? Where was it?'

"Old Gabe kind of colored up, and give in that 'twas under his pillow.
He always kept it there after the beds was made.

"'Humph!' grunts Brown. 'Why didn't you hang it on the door-knob? Under
the pillow! If I was a sneak thief, the first place I'd look would be
under the pillow; after that I'd tackle the jewelry box and the safe.'

"There was consider'ble more talk. Seems the Sterzers had left Henry on
guard, same as they always done, when they went to supper. They could
trust him and Suzette absolute, they said. But Henry had gone down
the hall after a drink of water, and when he had got back everything
apparently was all right. 'Twa'n't till Gabe himself come up that he
found the paper gone. I judged he'd made it interestin' for Henry; the
poor critter looked that way.

"All hands agreed to keep mum for the present and to watch. Peter
hustled to the office and called up the Pinkertons over the long
distance."

Mr. Wingate paused. Captain Sol was impatient.

"Go on," he said. "Don't stop now, I'm gettin' anxious."

Barzilla rose to his feet. "Here's your McKay man back again," he said.
"Let's go up to your house and have breakfast. We can talk while we're
eatin'. I'm empty as a poorhouse boarder's pocketbook."




CHAPTER VI

AVIATION AND AVARICE


Breakfast at Capt. Sol Berry's was a bountiful meal. The depot master
employed a middle-aged woman who came in each day, cooked his meals and
did the housework, returning to her own home at night. After Mr. Wingate
had mowed a clean swath through ham and eggs, cornbread and coffee,
and had reached the cooky and doughnut stage, he condescended to speak
further concerning the stolen paper.

"Well," he said, "Brown give me and Jonadab a serious talkin' to when he
got us alone."

"'Now, fellers,' he says, 'we know what we've got to do. Nothin'll be
too good for this shebang and us if we get that agreement back. Fust
place, the thing was done a few minutes after the supper-bell rung.
That is, unless that 'Enry is in on the deal, which ain't unlikely,
considerin' the price he could get from the Gordon gang. Was anybody
late at the tables?'

"Why, yes; there were quite a few late. Two of the 'gunners,' who'd been
on a forlorn-hope duck hunt; and a minister and his wife, out walkin'
for their health; and Parker and two fellers from the football team,
who'd been practicin'.

"'Any of the waiters or the chambermaids?' asked Peter.

"I'd been expectin' he'd ask that, and I hated to answer.

"'One of the waiters was a little late,' says I. 'Willie wa'n't on hand
immediate. Said he went to wash his hands.'

"Now the help gen'rally washed in the fo'castle--the servants'
quarters, I mean--but there was a wash room on the floor where the
Sterzer-Robinsons roomed. Peter looked at Jonadab, and the two of 'em at
me. And I had to own up that Willie had come downstairs from that wash
room a few minutes after the bell rung.

"'Hum!' says Peter T. 'Hum!' he says. 'Look here, Barzilla, didn't you
tell me you knew that feller's real name, and that he had been studying
law?'

"'No,' says I, emphatic. 'I said 'twas law he was tryin' to get away
from. His tastes run large to literation and poetry.'

"'Hum!' says Peter again. 'All papers are more or less literary--even
trust agreements. Hum!'

"'All the same,' says I, 'I'll bet my Sunday beaver that HE never took
it.'

"They didn't answer, but looked solemn. Then the three of us went on
watch.

"Nobody made a move to go out that evenin'. I kept whatever mail was
handed in, but there was nothin' that looked like any agreements,
and nothin' addressed to Gordon or his lawyers. At twelve or so, the
detective come. Peter drove up to the depot to meet the special. He told
the whole yarn on the way down.

"The detective was a nice enough chap, and we agreed he should be 'Mr.
Snow,' of New York, gunnin' for health and ducks. He said the watch must
be kept up all night, and in the mornin' he'd make his fust move. So
said, so done.

"And afore breakfast that next mornin' we called everybody into the
dinin' room, boarders, help, stable hands, every last one. And Peter
made a little speech. He said that a very valuable paper had been taken
out of Mr. Robinson's room, and 'twas plain that it must be on the
premises somewhere. 'Course, nobody was suspicioned, but, speakin'
for himself, he'd feel better if his clothes and his room was searched
through. How'd the rest feel about it?

"Well, they felt diff'rent ways, but Parker spoke up like a brick, and
said he wouldn't rest easy till HIS belongin's was pawed over, and then
the rest fell in line. We went through everybody and every room on the
place. Found nothin', of course. Snow--the detective--said he didn't
expect to. But I tell you there was some talkin' goin' on, just the
same. The minister, he hinted that he had some doubts about them
dissipated gunners; and the gunners cal'lated they never see a parson
yet wouldn't bear watchin'. As for me, I felt like a pickpocket, and,
judgin' from Jonadab's face, he felt the same.

"The detective man swooped around quiet, bobbin' up in unexpected
places, like a porpoise, and askin' questions once in a while. He asked
about most everybody, but about Willie, especial. I judged Peter T. had
dropped a hint to him and to Gabe. Anyhow, the old critter give out
that he wouldn't trust a poet with the silver handles on his grandmarm's
coffin. As for Grace, she acted dreadful nervous and worried. Once I
caught her swabbin' her eyes, as if she'd been cryin'; but I'd never
seen her and Willie together but the one time I told you of.

"Four days and nights crawled by. No symptoms yet. The Pinkertons was
watchin' the Gordon lawyers' office in New York, and they reported
that nothin' like that agreement had reached there. And our own
man--Snow--said he'd go bail it hadn't been smuggled off the premises
sense HE struck port. So 'twas safe so far; but where was it, and who
had it?

"The final football game, the one with Wapatomac, was to be played over
on their grounds on the afternoon of the fifth day. Parker, cap'n of the
eleven, give out that, considerin' everything, he didn't know but we'd
better call it off. Old Robinson--Sterzer, of course--wouldn't hear of
it.

"'Not much,' says he. 'I wouldn't chance your losin' that game for forty
papers. You sail in and lick 'em!' or words to that effect.

"So the eleven was to cruise across the bay in the Greased Lightnin',
Peter's little motor launch, and the rooters was to go by train later
on. 'Twas Parker's idee, goin' in the launch. 'Twould be more quiet,
less strain on the nerves of his men, and they could talk over plays and
signals on the v'yage.

"So at nine o'clock in the forenoon they was ready, the whole
team--three waiters, two fishermen, one carpenter from up to Wellmouth
Center, a stable hand, and Parker and three reg'lar boarders. These last
three was friends of Parker's that he'd had come down some time afore.
He knew they could play football, he said, and they'd come to oblige
him.

"The eleven gathered on the front porch, all in togs and sweaters,
principally provided and paid for by Sterzer. Cap'n Parker had the ball
under his arm, and the launch was waitin' ready at the landin'. All the
boarders--except Grace, who was upstairs in her room--and most of the
help was standin' round to say good luck and good-by.

"Snow, the detective, was there, and I whispered in his ear.

"'Say,' I says, 'do you realize that for the fust time since the robbery
here's a lot of folks leavin' the house? How do you know but what--'

"He winked and nodded brisk. 'I'll attend to that,' he says.

"But he didn't have to. Parker spoke fust, and took the wind out of his
sails.

"'Gentlemen,' says he, 'I don't know how the rest of you feel, but, as
for me, I don't start without clear skirts. I suggest that Mr. Brown and
Mr. Wingate here search each one of us, thoroughly. Who knows,' says he,
laughin', 'but what I've got that precious stolen paper tucked inside my
sweater? Ha! ha! Come on, fellers! I'll be first.'

"He tossed the ball into a chair and marched into the office, the
rest of the players after him, takin' it as a big joke. And there the
searchin' was done, and done thorough, 'cause Peter asked Mr. Snow to
help, and he knew how. One thing was sure; Pa Gabe's agreement wa'n't
hid about the persons of that football team. Everybody laughed--that is,
all but the old man and the detective. Seemed to me that Snow was kind
of disappointed, and I couldn't see why. 'Twa'n't likely any of THEM was
thieves.

"Cap'n Parker picked up his football and started off for the launch.
He'd got about ha'fway to the shore when Willie--who'd been stand-in'
with the rest of the help, lookin' on--stepped for'ard pretty brisk and
whispered in the ear of the Pinkerton man. The detective jumped, sort
of, and looked surprised and mighty interested.

"'By George!' says he. 'I never thought of that.' Then he run to the
edge of the piazza and called.

"'Mr. Parker!' he sings out. 'Oh, Mr. Parker!'

"Parker was at the top of the little rise that slopes away down to the
landin'. The rest of the eleven was scattered from the shore to the
hotel steps. He turns, without stoppin', and answers.

"'What is it?' he sings out, kind of impatient.

"'There's just one thing we forgot to look at,' shouts Snow. 'Merely a
matter of form, but just bring that--Hey! Stop him! Stop him!'

"For Parker, instead of comin' back, had turned and was leggin' it for
the launch as fast as he could, and that was some.

"'Stop!' roars the Pinkerton man, jumpin' down the steps. 'Stop, or--'

"'Hold him, Jim!' screeched Parker, over his shoulder. One of the
biggest men on the eleven--one of the three 'friends' who'd been so
obligin' as to come down on purpose to play football--made a dive,
caught the detective around the waist, and threw him flat.

"'Go on, Ed!' he shouts. 'I've got him, all right.'

"Ed--meanin' Parker--was goin' on, and goin' fast. All hands seemed
to be frozen stiff, me and Jonadab and Peter T. included. As for me, I
couldn't make head nor tail of the doin's; things was comin' too quick
for MY understandin'.

"But there was one on that piazza who wa'n't froze. Fur from it! Willie,
the poet waiter, made a jump, swung his long legs over the porch-rail,
hit the ground, and took after that Parker man like a cat after a field
mouse.

"Run! I never see such runnin'! He fairly flashed across that lawn and
over the rise. Parker was almost to the landin'; two more jumps and he'd
been aboard the launch. If he'd once got aboard, a turn of the switch
and that electric craft would have had him out of danger in a shake. But
them two jumps was two too many. Willie riz off the ground like a flyin'
machine, turned his feet up and his head down, and lapped his arms
around Parker's knees. Down the pair of 'em went 'Ker-wallop!' and the
football flew out of Parker's arms.

"In an eyewink that poet was up, grabs the ball, and comes tearin' back
toward us.

"'Stop him!' shrieks Parker from astern.

"'Head him off! Tackle him!' bellers the big chap who was hangin' onto
the detective.

"They tell me that discipline and obeyin' orders is as much in football
as 'tis aboard ship. If that's so, every one of the Old Home House
eleven was onto their jobs. There was five men between Willie and the
hotel, and they all bore down on him like bats on a June bug.

"'Get him!' howls Parker, racin' to help.

"'Down him!' chimes in big Jim, his knee in poor Snow's back.

"'Run, Bearse! Run!' whoops the Pinkerton man, liftin' his mouth out of
the sand.

"He run--don't you worry about that! Likewise he dodged. One chap
swooped at him, and he ducked under his arms. Another made a dive, and
he jumped over him. The third one he pushed one side with his hand.
'Pushed!' did I say? 'Knocked' would be better, for the feller--the
carpenter 'twas--went over and over like a barrel rollin' down hill. But
there was two more left, and one of 'em was bound to have him.

"Then a window upstairs banged open.

"'Oh, Mr. Bearse!' screamed a voice--Grace Sterzer's voice. 'Don't let
them get you!'

"We all heard her, in spite of the shoutin' and racket. Willie heard
her, too. The two fellers, one at each side, was almost on him, when
he stopped, looked up, jumped back, and, as cool as a rain barrel in
January, he dropped that ball and kicked it.

"I can see that picture now, like a tableau at a church sociable. The
fellers that was runnin', the others on the ground, and that literary
pie passer with his foot swung up to his chin.

"And the ball! It sailed up and up in a long curve, began to drop,
passed over the piazza roof, and out of sight.

"'Lock your door, Miss Sterzer,' sung out Fred Bearse--'Willie' for
short. 'Lock your door and keep that ball. I think your father's paper
is inside it.'

"As sure as my name is Barzilla Wingate, he had kicked that football
straight through the open window into old Gabe's room."

The depot master whooped and slapped his knee. Mr. Wingate grinned
delightedly and continued:

"There!" he went on, "the cat's out of the bag, and there ain't much
more to tell. Everybody made a bolt for the room, old Gabe and Peter
T. in the lead. Grace let her dad in, and the ball was ripped open in a
hurry. Sure enough! Inside, between the leather and the rubber, was
the missin' agreement. Among the jubilations and praise services nobody
thought of much else until Snow, the Pinkerton man, come upstairs, his
clothes tore and his eyes and nose full of sand.

"'Humph!' says he. 'You've got it, hey? Good! Well, you haven't got
friend Parker. Look!'

"Such of us as could looked out of the window. There was the launch,
with Parker and his three 'friends' in it, headin' two-forty for blue
water.

"'Let 'em go,' says old Gabe, contented. 'I wouldn't arrest 'em if I
could. This is no police-station job.'

"It come out afterwards that Parker was a young chap just from law
school, who had gone to work for the firm of shysters who was attendin'
to the Gordon interests. They had tracked Sterzer to the Old Home House,
and had put their new hand on the job of gettin' that agreement. Fust
he'd tried to shine up to Grace, but the shine--her part of it--had wore
off. Then he decided to steal it; and he done it, just how nobody knows.
Snow, the detective, says he cal'lates Henry, the servant, is wiser'n
most folks thinks, fur's that's concerned.

"Snow had found out about Parker inside of two days. Soon's he got the
report as to who he was, he was morally sartin that he was the thief.
He'd looked up Willie's record, too, and that was clear. In fact, Willie
helped him consider'ble. 'Twas him that recognized Parker, havin' seen
him play on a law-school team. Also 'twas Willie who thought of the
paper bein' in the football.

"Land of love! What a hero they made of that waiter!

"'By the livin' Moses!' bubbles old Gabe, shakin' both the boy's hands.
'That was the finest run and tackle and the finest kick I ever saw
anywhere. I've seen every big game for ten years, and I never saw
anything half so good.'

"The Pinkerton man laughed. 'There's only one chap on earth who can kick
like that. Here he is,' layin' his hand on 'Willie's' shoulder. Bearse,
the All-American half-back last year.'

"Gabe's mouth fell open. 'Not "Bung" Bearse, of Yarvard!' he sings out.
'Why! WHY!'

"'Of course, father!' purrs his daughter, smilin' and happy. 'I knew
him at once. He and I were--er--slightly acquainted when I was at
Highcliffe.'

"'But--but "Bung" Bearse!' gasps the old gent. 'Why, you rascal! I saw
you kick the goal that beat Haleton. Your reputation is worldwide.'

"Willie--Fred Bearse, that is--shook his head, sad and regretful.

"'Thank you, Mr. Sterzer,' says he, in his gentle tenor. 'I have no
desire to be famous in athletics. My aspirations now are entirely
literary.'

"Well, he's got his literary job at last, bein' engaged as sportin'
editor on one of Gabe's papers. His dad, old Sol Bearse, seems to be
pretty well satisfied, partic'lar as another engagement between the
Bearse family and the Sterzers has just been given out."

Barzilla helped himself to another doughnut. His host leaned back in his
chair and laughed uproariously.

"Well, by the great and mighty!" he exclaimed, "that Willie chap
certainly did fool you, didn't he. You can't always tell about these
college critters. Sometimes they break out unexpected, like chickenpox
in the 'Old Men's Home.' Ha! ha! Say, do you know Nate Scudder?"

"Know him? Course I know him! The meanest man on the Cape, and livin'
right in my own town, too! Well, if I didn't know him I might trust him,
and that would be the beginnin' of the end--for me."

"It sartin would. But what made me think of him was what he told
me about his nephew, who was a college chap, consider'ble like your
'Willie,' I jedge. Nate and this nephew, Augustus Tolliver, was mixed up
in that flyin'-machine business, you remember."

"I know they was. Mixed up with that Professor Dixland the papers are
makin' such a fuss over. Wellmouth's been crazy over it all, but it
happened a year ago and nobody that I know of has got the straight
inside facts about it yet. Nate won't talk at all. Whenever you ask him
he busts out swearin' and walks off. His wife's got such a temper that
nobody dared ask her, except the minister. He tried it, and ain't been
the same man since."

"Well," the depot master smilingly scratched his chin, "I cal'late I've
got those inside facts."

"You HAVE?"

"Yes. Nate gave 'em to me, under protest. You see, I know Nate pretty
well. I know some things about him that . . . but never mind that part.
I asked him and, at last, he told me. I'll have to tell you in his
words, 'cause half the fun was the way he told it and the way he looked
at the whole business. So you can imagine I'm Nate, and--"

"'Twill be a big strain on my imagination to b'lieve you're Nate
Scudder, Sol Berry."

"Thanks. However, you'll have to do it for a spell. Well, Nate said that
it really begun when the Professor and Olivia landed at the Wellmouth
depot with the freight car full of junk. Of course, the actual
beginnin' was further back than that, when that Harmon man come on from
Philadelphy and hunted him up, makin' proclamation that a friend of
his, a Mr. Van Brunt of New York, had said that Scudder had a nice quiet
island to let and maybe he could hire it.

"Course Nate had an island--that little sun-dried sandbank a mile or
so off shore, abreast his house, which we used to call 'Horsefoot Bar.'
That crazy Van Brunt and his chum, Hartley, who lived there along
with Sol Pratt a year or so ago, re-christened it 'Ozone Island,' you
remember. Nate was willin' to let it. He'd let Tophet, if he owned it,
and a fool come along who wanted to hire it and could pay for the rent
and heat.

"So Nate and this Harmon feller rowed over to the Bar--to Ozone Island,
I mean--and the desolation and loneliness of it seemed to suit him to
perfection. So did the old house and big barn and all the tumbledown
buildin's stuck there in the beach-grass and sand. Afore they'd left
they made a dicker. He wa'n't the principal in it. He was the private
secretary and fust mate of Mr. Professor Ansel Hobart Dixland, the
scientist--perhaps Scudder'd heard of him?

"Perhaps he had, but if so, Nate forgot it, though he didn't tell him
that. Harmon ordered a fifteen-foot-high board fence built all around
the house and barn, and made Nate swear not to tell a soul who was
comin' nor anything. Dixland might want the island two months, he said,
or he might want it two years. Nate didn't care. He was in for good
pickin's, and begun to pick by slicin' a liberal commission off that
fencebuildin' job. There was a whole passel of letters back and forth
between Nate and Harmon, and finally Nate got word to meet the victims
at the depot.

"There was the professor himself, an old dried-up relic with whiskers
and a temper; and there was Miss Olivia Dixland, his niece and
housekeeper, a slim, plain lookin' girl, who wore eyeglasses and a
straight up and down dress. And there was a freight car full of crates
and boxes and land knows what all. But nary sign was there of a private
secretary and assistant. The professor told Nate that Mr. Harmon's
health had suddenly broke down and he'd had to be sent South.

"'It's a calamity,' says he; 'a real calamity! Harmon has been with
me in my work from the beginnin'; and now, just as it is approachin'
completion, he is taken away. They say he may die. It is very annoyin'.'

"'Humph!' says Nate. 'Well, maybe it annoys HIM some, too; you can't
tell. What you goin' to do for a secretary?'

"'I understand,' says the professor, 'that there is a person of
consider'ble scientific attainment residin' with you, Mr. Scudder, at
present. Harmon met him while he was here; they were in the same class
at college. Harmon recommended him highly. Olivia,' he says to the
niece, 'what was the name of the young man whom Harmon recommended?'

"'Tolliver, Uncle Ansel,' answers the girl, lookin' kind of disdainful
at Nate. Somehow he had the notion that she didn't take to him fust
rate.

"'Hey?' sings out Nate. 'Tolliver? Why, that's Augustus! AUGUSTUS! well,
I'll be switched!'

"Augustus Tolliver was Nate's nephew from up Boston way. Him and Nate
was livin' together at that time. Huldy Ann, Mrs. Scudder, was out West,
in Omaha, takin' care of a cousin of hers who was a chronic invalid and,
what's more to the purpose, owned a lot of stock in copper mines.

"Augustus was a freckle-faced, spindle-shanked little critter, with
spectacles and a soft, polite way of speakin' that made you want to
build a fire under him to see if he could swear like a Christian. He
had a big head with consider'ble hair on the top of it and nothin'
underneath but what he called 'science' and 'sociology.' His science
wa'n't nothin' but tommy-rot to Nate, and the 'sociology' was some kind
of drivel about everybody bein' equal to everybody else, or better.
'Seemed to think 'twas wrong to get a good price for a thing when you
found a feller soft enough to pay it. Did you ever hear the beat of that
in your life?' says Nate.

"However, Augustus had soaked so much science and sociology into that
weak noddle of his that they kind of made him drunk, as you might say,
and the doctor had sent him down to board with the Scudders and sleep it
off. 'Nervous prostration' was the way he had his symptoms labeled, and
the nerve part was all right, for if a hen flew at him he'd holler and
run. Scart! you never see such a scart cat in your born days. Scart of a
boat, scart of being seasick, scart of a gun, scart of everything! Most
special he was scart of Uncle Nate. The said uncle kept him that way
so's he wouldn't dast to kick at the grub him and Huldy Ann give him, I
guess.

"'Augustus Tolliver,' says old Dixland, noddin'. 'Yes, that is the name.
Has he had a sound scientific trainin'?'

"'Scientific trainin'!' says Nate. 'Scientific trainin'? Why, you bet
he's had it! That's the only kind of trainin' he HAS had. He'll be just
the feller for you, Mr. Dixland.'

"So that was settled, all but notifyin' Augustus. But Scudder sighted
another speculation in the offin', and hove alongside of it.

"'Mr. Harmon, when he was here,' says he, 'he mentioned you needin'
a nice, dependable man to live on the island and be sort of general
roustabout. My wife bein' away just now, and all, it struck me that I
might as well be that man. Maybe my terms'll seem a little high, at fust
mention, but--'

"'Very good,' says the professor, 'very good. I'm sure you'll be
satisfactory. Now please see to the unloading of that car. And be
careful, VERY careful.'

"Nate broke the news to Augustus that afternoon. He had his nose stuck
in a book, as usual, and never heard, so Nate yelled at him like a mate
on a tramp steamer, just to keep in trainin'.

"'Who? Who? Who? What? What?' squeals Augustus, jumpin' out of the
chair as if there was pins in it. 'What is it? Who did it? Oh, my poor
nerves!'

"'Drat your poor nerves!' Nate says. 'I've got a good promisin' job for
you. Listen to this.'

"Then he told about the professor's wantin' Gus to be assistant and help
do what the old man called 'experiments.'

"'Dixland?' says Gus, 'Ansel Hobart Dixland, the great scientist! And
I'm to be HIS assistant? Assistant to the man who discovered DIXIUM and
invented--'

"'Oh, belay there!' snorts Nate, impatient. Tell me this--he's awful
rich, ain't he?'

"'Why, I believe--yes, Harmon said he was. But to think of MY bein'--'

"'Now, nephew,' Nate cut in, 'let me talk to you a minute. Me and your
Aunt Huldy Ann have been mighty kind to you sence you've been here, and
here's your chance to do us a good turn. You stick close to science and
the professor and let me attend to the finances. If this family ain't
well off pretty soon it won't be your Uncle Nate's fault. Only don't you
put your oar in where 'tain't needed.'

"Lord love you, Gus didn't care about finances. He was so full of joy at
bein' made assistant to the great Ansel Whiskers Dixland that he forgot
everything else, nerves and all.

"So in another day the four of 'em was landed on Ozone Island and so was
the freight-car load of crates and boxes. Grub and necessaries was to be
provided by Scudder--for salary as stated and commission understood.

"It took Nate less than a week to find out what old Dixland was up to.
When he learned it, he set down in the sand and fairly snorted disgust.
The old idiot was cal'latin' to FLY. Seems that for years he'd been
experimentin' with what he called 'aeroplanes,' and now he'd reached the
stage where he b'lieved he could flap his wings and soar. 'Thinks I,'
says Nate, 'your life work's cut out for you, Nate Scudder. You'll spend
the rest of your days as gen'ral provider for the Ozone private asylum.'
Well, Scudder wa'n't complainin' none at the outlook. He couldn't make a
good livin' no easier.

"The aeroplane was in sections in them boxes and crates. Nate and
Augustus and the professor got out the sections and fitted 'em together.
The buildin's on Ozone was all joined together--first the house, then
the ell, then the wash-rooms and big sheds, and, finally, the barn.
There was doors connectin', and you could go from house to barn, both
downstairs and up, without steppin' outside once.

"'Twas in the barn that they built what Whiskers called the 'flyin'
stage.' 'Twas a long chute arrangement on trestles, and the idea was
that the aeroplane was to get her start by slidin' down the chute, out
through the big doors and off by the atmosphere route to glory. I say
that was the IDEA. In practice she worked different.

"Twice the professor made proclamations that everything was ready, and
twice they started that flyin' machine goin'. The fust time Dixland
was at the helm, and him and the aeroplane dropped headfust into the
sandbank just outside the barn. The machine was underneath, and the
pieces of it acted as a fender, so all the professor fractured was his
temper. But it took ten days to get the contraption ready for the next
fizzle. Then poor, shaky, scart Augustus was pilot, and he went so deep
into the bank that Nate says he wondered whether 'twas wuth while doin'
anything but orderin' the gravestone. But they dug him out at last,
whole, but frightened blue, and his nerves was worse than ever after
that.

"Then old Dixland announces that he has discovered somethin' wrong in
the principle of the thing, and they had to wait while he ordered some
new fittin's from Boston.

"Meanwhile there was other complications settin' in. Scudder was kept
busy providin' grub and such like and helpin' the niece, Olivia,
with the housework. Likewise he had his hands full keepin' the
folks alongshore from findin' out what was goin' on. All this flyin'
foolishness had to be a dead secret.

"But, busy as he was, he found time to notice the thick acquaintance
that was developin' between Augustus and Olivia. Them two was what the
minister calls 'kindred sperrits.' Seems she was sufferin' from science
same as he was and, more'n that, she was loaded to the gunwale with
'social reform.' To hear the pair of 'em go on about helpin' the poor
and 'settlement work' and such was enough, accordin' to Nate, to make
you leave the table. But there! He couldn't complain. Olivia was her
uncle's only heir, and Nate could see a rainbow of promise ahead for the
Scudder family.

"The niece was a nice, quiet girl. The only thing Nate had against her,
outside of the sociology craziness and her not seemin' to take a shine
to him, was her confounded pets. Nate said he never had no use for
pets--lazy critters, eatin' up the victuals and costin' money--but
Olivia was dead gone on 'em. She adopted an old reprobate of a tom-cat,
which she labeled 'Galileo,' after an Eyetalian who invented spyglasses
or somethin' similar, and a great big ugly dog that answered to the hail
of 'Phillips Brooks'; she named him that because she said the original
Phillips was a distinguished parson and a great philanthropist.

"That dog was a healthy philanthropist. When Nate kicked him the first
time, he chased him the whole length of the barn. After that they had to
keep him chained up. He was just pinin' for a chance to swaller Scudder
whole, and he showed it.

"Well, as time went on, Olivia and Augustus got chummier and chummier.
Nate give 'em all the chance possible to be together, and as for old
Professor Whiskers, all he thought of, anyway, was his blessed flyin'
machine. So things was shapin' themselves well, 'cordin' to Scudder's
notion.

"One afternoon Nate come, unexpected, to the top of a sand hill at
t'other end of the island, and there, below, set Olivia and Augustus.
He had a clove hitch 'round her waist, and they was lookin' into each
other's spectacles as if they was windows in the pearly gates. Thinks
Nate: 'They've signed articles,' and he tiptoed away, feelin' that life
wa'n't altogether an empty dream.

"They was lively hours, them that followed. To begin with, when Nate got
back to the barn he found the professor layin' on the floor, under the
flyin' stage, groanin' soulful but dismal. He'd slipped off one of the
braces of the trestles and sprained both wrists and bruised himself till
he wa'n't much more than one big lump. He hadn't bruised his tongue
none to speak of, though, and his language wa'n't sprained so that you'd
notice it. What broke him up most of all was that he'd got his aeroplane
ready to 'fly' again, and now he was knocked out so's he couldn't be
aboard when she went off the ways.

"'It is the irony of fate,' says he.

"'I got it off the blacksmith over to Wellmouth Centre,' Nate told him;
'but HE might have got it from Fate, or whoever you mean. 'Twas slippery
iron, I know that, and I warned you against steppin' on it yesterday.'

"The professor more'n hinted that Nate was a dunderhead idiot, and then
he commenced to holler for Tolliver; he wanted to see Tolliver right
off. Scudder thought he'd ought to see a doctor, but he wouldn't, so
Nate plastered him up best he could, got him into the big chair in the
front room, and went huntin' Augustus. Him and Olivia was still
camped in the sand bank. Gus's right arm had got tired by this time, I
cal'late, but he had a new hitch with his left. Likewise they was still
starin' into each other's specs.

"'Excuse me for interruptin' the mesmerism,' says Nate, 'but the
professor wants to see you.'

"They jumped and broke away. But it took more'n that to bring 'em down
out of the clouds. They'd been flyin' a good sight higher than the old
aeroplane had yet.

"'Uncle Nathan,' says Augustus, gettin' up and shakin' hands, 'I have
the most wonderful news for you. It's hardly believable. You'll never
guess it.'

"'Give me three guesses and I'll win on the fust,' says Nate. 'You two
are engaged.'

"They looked at him as if he'd done somethin' wonderful. 'But, Uncle,'
says Gus, shakin' hands again, 'just think! she's actually consented to
marry me.'

"'Well, that's gen'rally understood to be a part of engagin', ain't
it?' says Nate. 'I'm glad to hear it. Miss Dixland, I congratulate you.
You've got a fine, promisin' young man.'

"That, to Nate's notion, was about the biggest lie he ever told, but
Olivia swallered it for gospel. She seemed to thaw toward Scudder a
little mite, but 'twa'n't at a permanent melt, by no means.

"'Thank you, Mr. Scudder,' says she, still pretty frosty. 'I am full
aware of Mr. Tolliver's merits. I'm glad to learn that YOU recognize
them. He has told some things concernin' his stay at your home which--'

"'Yes, yes,' says Nate, kind of hurried. 'Well, I'm sorry to dump bad
news into a puddle of happiness like this, but your Uncle Ansel, Miss
Dixland, has been tryin' to fly without his machine, and he's sorry for
it.'

"Then he told what had happened to the professor, and Olivia started on
the run for the house. Augustus was goin', too, but Nate held him back.

"'Wait a minute, Gus,' says he. 'Walk along with me; I want to talk with
you. Now, as an older man, your nighest relation, and one that's come to
love you like a son--yes, sir, like a son--I think it's my duty just now
to say a word of advice. You're goin' to marry a nice girl that's comin'
in for a lot of money one of these days. The professor, he's kind of
old, his roof leaks consider'ble, and this trouble is likely to hurry
the end along.

"'Now, then,' Nate goes on, 'Augustus, my boy, what are you and that
simple, childlike girl goin' to do with all that money? How are you
goin' to take care of it? You and 'Livia--you mustn't mind my callin'
her that 'cause she's goin' to be one of the family so soon--you'll
want to be fussin' with science and such, and you won't have no time
to attend to the finances. You'll need a good, safe person to be your
financial manager. Well, you know me and you know your Aunt Huldy Ann.
WE know all about financin'; WE'VE had experience. You just let us
handle the bonds and coupons and them trifles. We'll invest 'em for you.
We'll be yours and 'Livia's financial managers. As for our wages, maybe
they'll seem a little high, but that's easy arranged. And--'

"Gus interrupted then. 'Oh, that's all settled,' he says. 'Olivia and I
have planned all that. When we're married we shall devote our lives to
social work--to settlement work. All the money we ever get we shall use
to help the poor. WE don't want any of it. We shall live AMONG the poor,
live just as frugally as they do. Our money we shall give--every cent of
it--to charity and--'

"'Lord sakes!' yells Nate, 'DON'T talk that way! Don't! Be you crazy,
too? Why--'

"But Gus went on, talkin' a steady streak about livin' in a little
tenement in what he called the 'slums' and chuckin' the money to this
tramp and that, till Nate's head was whirlin'. 'Twa'n't no joke. He
meant it and so did she, and they was just the pair of loons to do it,
too.

"Afore Nate had a chance to think up anything sensible to say, Olivia
comes hollerin' for Gus to hurry. Off he went, and Nate followed
along, holdin' his head and staggerin' like a voter comin' home from a
political candidate's picnic. All he could think of was: 'THIS the end
of all my plannin'! What--WHAT'LL Huldy Ann say to THIS?'

"Nate found the professor bolstered up in his chair, with the other
two standin' alongside. He was layin' down the law about that blessed
aeroplane.

"'No! no! NO! I tell you!' he roars, 'I'll see no doctor. My invention
is ready at last, and, if I'm goin' to die, I'll die successful.
Tolliver, you've been a faithful worker with me, and yours shall be the
privilege of makin' the first flight. Wheel me to the window, Olivia,
and let me see my triumph.'

"But Olivia didn't move. Instead, she looked at Augustus and he at her.
'Wheel me to the window!' yells Dixland. 'Tolliver, what are you waitin'
for? The doors are open, the aeroplane is ready. Go this instant and
fly.'

"Augustus was a bird all right, 'cordin' to Nate's opinion, but he
didn't seem anxious to spread his wings. He was white, and them nerves
of his was all in a twitter. If ever there was a scart critter, 'twas
him then.

"'Go out and fly,' says Nate to him, pretty average ugly. 'Don't you
hear the boss's order? Here, professor, I'll push you to the window.'

"'Thank you, Scudder,' says Dixland. And then turnin' to Gus: 'Well,
sir, may I ask why you wait?'

"'Twas Olivia that answered. 'Uncle Ansel,' says she, 'I must tell you
somethin'. I should have preferred tellin' you privately,' she puts in,
glarin' at Nate, 'but it seems I can't. Mr. Tolliver and I are engaged
to be married.'

"Old Whiskers didn't seem to care a continental. All he had in his
addled head was that flyin' contraption.

"'All right, all right,' he snaps, fretty, 'I'm satisfied. He appears to
be a decent young man enough. But now I want him to start my aeroplane.'

"'No, Uncle Ansel,' goes on Olivia, 'I cannot permit him to risk his
life in that way. His nerves are not strong and neither is his heart.
Besides, the aeroplane has failed twice. Luckily no one was killed in
the other trials, but the chances are that the third time may prove
fatal.'

"'Fatal, you imbecile!' shrieks the professor. 'It's perfected, I tell
you! I--'

"'It makes no difference. No, uncle, Augustus and I have made up our
minds. His life and health are too precious; he must be spared for the
grand work that we are to do together. No, Uncle Ansel, he shall NOT
fly.'

"Did you ever see a cat in a fit? That was the professor just then, so
Nate said. He tried to wave his sprained wrists and couldn't; tried to
stamp his foot and found it too lame. But his eyeglasses flashed sparks
and his tongue spit fire.

"'Are you goin' to start that machine?' he screams at the blue-white,
shaky Augustus.

"'No, Professor Dixland,' stammers Gus. 'No, sir, I'm sorry, but--'

"'Why don't you ask Mr. Scudder to make the experiment, uncle?' suggests
that confounded niece, smilin' the spitefullest smile.

"'Scudder,' says the professor, 'I'll give you five thousand dollars
cash to start in that aeroplane this moment.'

"For a jiffy Nate was staggered. Five thousand dollars CASH--whew! But
then he thought of how deep Gus had been shoved into that sandbank.
And there was a new and more powerful motor aboard the thing now. Five
thousand dollars ain't much good to a telescoped corpse. He fetched a
long breath.

"'Well, now, Mr. Dixland,' he says, 'I'd like to, fust rate, but you see
I don't know nothin' about mechanics.'

"'Professor--' begins Augustus. 'Twas the final straw. Old Whiskers
jumped out of the chair, lameness and all.

"'Out of this house, you ingrate!' he bellers. 'Out this instant! I
discharge you. Go! go!'

"He was actually frothin' at the mouth. I cal'late Olivia thought he was
goin' to die, for she run to him.

"'You'd better go, I think,' says she to her shakin' beau. 'Go, dear,
now. I must stay with him for the present, but we will see each other
soon. Go now, and trust me.'

"'I disown you, you ungrateful girl,' foams her uncle. 'Scudder, I order
you to put that--that creature off this island.'

"'Yes, sir,' says Nate, polite; 'in about two shakes of a heifer's
tail.'

"He started for Augustus, and Gus started for the door. I guess Olivia
might have interfered, but just then the professor keels over in a kind
of faint and she had to tend to him. Gus darts out of the door with Nate
after him. Scudder reached the beach just as his nephew was shovin' off
in the boat, bound for the mainland.

"'Consarn your empty head!' Nate yelled after him. 'See what you get by
not mindin' me, don't you? I'm runnin' things on this island after this.
I'm boss here; understand? When you're ready to sign a paper deedin'
over ha'f that money your wife's goin' to get to me and Huldy Ann, maybe
I'll let you come back. And perhaps then I'll square things for you with
Dixland. But if you dare to set foot on these premises until then I'll
murder you; I'll drown you; I'll cut you up for bait; I'll feed you to
the dog.'

"He sculled off, his oars rattlin' 'Hark from the tomb' in the rowlocks.
He b'lieved Nate meant it all. Oh, Scudder had HIM trained all right."




CHAPTER VII

CAPTAIN SOL DECIDES TO MOVE


"Trust Nate for that," interrupted Wingate. "He's just as much a born
bully as he is a cheat and a skinflint."

"Yup," went on Captain Sol. "Well, when Nate got back to the house the
professor was alone in the chair, lookin' sick and weak. Olivia was up
in her room havin' a cryin' fit. Nate got the old man to bed, made him
some clam soup and hot tea, and fetched and carried for him like he was
a baby. The professor's talk was mainly about the ungrateful desertion,
as he called it, of his assistant.

"'Keep him away from this island,' he says. 'If he comes, I shall commit
murder; I know it.'

"Scudder promised that Augustus shouldn't come back. The professor
wanted guard kept night and day. Nate said he didn't know's he could
afford so much time, and Dixland doubled his wages on the spot. So Nate
agreed to stand double watches, made him comfort'ble for the night, and
left him.

"Olivia didn't come downstairs again. She didn't seem to want any
supper, but Nate did and had it, a good one. Galileo, the cat, came
yowlin' around, and Nate kicked him under the sofy. Phillips Brooks
was howlin' starvation in the woodshed, and Scudder let him howl. If
he starved to death Nate wouldn't put no flowers on his grave. Take it
altogether, he was havin' a fairly good time.

"And when, later on, he set alone up in his room over the kitchen, he
begun to have a better one. Prospects looked good. Maybe old Dixland
WOULD disown his niece. If he did, Nate figgered he was as healthy a
candidate for adoption as anybody. And Augustus would have to come to
terms or stay single. That is, unless him and Olivia got married on
nothin' a week, paid yearly. Nate guessed Huldy Ann would think he'd
managed pretty well.

"He set there for a long while, thinkin', and then he says he cal'lates
he must have dozed off. At any rate, next thing he knew he was settin'
up straight in his chair, listenin'. It seemed to him that he'd heard a
sound in the kitchen underneath.

"He looked out of the window, and right away he noticed somethin'. 'Twas
a beautiful, clear moonlight night, and the high board fence around the
buildin's showed black against the white sand. And in that white
strip was a ten-foot white gape. Nate had shut that gate afore he went
upstairs. Who'd opened it? Then he heard the noise in the kitchen again.
Somebody was talkin' down there.

"Nate got up and tiptoed acrost the room. He was in his stockin' feet,
so he didn't make a sound. He reached into the corner and took out his
old duck gun. It was loaded, both barrels. Nate cocked the gun and crept
down the back stairs.

"There was a lamp burnin' low on the kitchen table, and there, in a
couple of chairs hauled as close together as they could be, set
that Olivia niece and Augustus. They was in a clove hitch again and
whisperin' soft and slushy.

"My! but Scudder was b'ilin'! He give one jump and landed in the middle
of that kitchen floor.

"'You--you--you!' he yelled, wavin' the shotgun. 'You're back here, are
you? You know what I told you I'd do to you? Well, now, I'll do it.'

"The pair of 'em had jumped about as far as Nate had, only the opposite
way. Augustus was a paralyzed statue, but Olivia had her senses with
her.

"'Run, Augustus!' she screamed. 'He'll shoot you. Run!'

"And then, with a screech like a siren whistle, Augustus commenced to
run. Nate was between him and the outside door, so he bolted headfirst
into the dining room. And after him went Nate Scudder, so crazy mad he
didn't know what he was doin'.

"'Twas pitch dark in the dining room, but through it they went rattlety
bang! dishes smashin', chairs upsettin' and 'hurrah, boys!' to pay
gen'rally. Then through the best parlor and into the front hall.

"I cal'late Nate would have had him at the foot of the front stairs if
it hadn't been for Galileo. That cat had been asleep on the sofy, and
the noise and hullabaloo had stirred him up till he was as crazy as the
rest of 'em. He run right under Nate's feet and down went Nate sprawlin'
and both barrels of the shotgun bust loose like a couple of cannon.

"Galileo took for tall timber, whoopin' anthems. Up them front stairs
went Augustus, screechin' shrill, like a woman; he was SURE Nate meant
to murder him now. And after him his uncle went on all fours, swearin'
tremendous.

"Then 'twas through one bedroom after another, and each one more crowded
with noisy, smashable things than that previous. Nate said he could
remember the professor roarin' 'Fire!' and 'Help!' as the two of 'em
bumped into his bed, but they didn't stop--they was too busy. The whole
length of the house upstairs they traveled, then through the ell, then
the woodshed loft, and finally out into the upper story of the barn. And
there Nate knew he had him. The ladder was down.

"'Now!' says Nate. 'Now, you long-legged villain, if I don't give you
what's comin' to you, then--Oh, there ain't no use in your climbin' out
there; you can't get down.'

"The big barn doors was open, and, in the moonlight, Nate could see
Gus scramblin' up and around on the flyin' stage where the professor's
aeroplane was perched, lookin' like some kind of magnified June bug.

"'Come back, you fool!' Scudder yelled at him. 'Come back and be
butchered. You might as well; it's too high for you to drop. You won't?
Then I'll come after you.'

"Nate says he never shall forget Augustus's face in the blue light when
he see his uncle climbin' out on that stage after him. He was simply
desperate--that's it, desperate. And the next thing he did was jump into
the saddle of the machine and pull the startin' lever.

"There was the buzz of the electric motor, a slippery, slidin' sound,
one awful hair-raisin' whoop from Augustus, and then--'F-s-s-s-t!'--down
the flyin' stage whizzed that aeroplane and out through the doors.

"Nate set down on the trestles and waited for the sound of the smash.
I guess he actually felt conscience stricken. Of course, he'd only done
his duty, and yet--

"But no smash came. Instead, there was a long scream from the
kitchen--Olivia's voice that was. And then another yell that for pure
joy beat anything ever heard.

"'It flies!' screamed Professor Ansel Hobart Whiskers Dixland, from his
bedroom window. 'At last! At last! It FLIES!'

"It took Nate some few minutes to paw his way back through the shed loft
and the ell over the things him and Gus knocked down on the fust lap,
until he got to his room where the trouble had started. Then he went
down to the kitchen and outdoor.

"Olivia, a heavenly sort of look on her face, was standin' in the
moonlight, with her hands clasped, lookin' up at the sky.

"'It flies!' says she, in a kind of whisper over and over again. 'Oh! it
FLIES!'

"Alongside of her was old Dixland, wrapped in a bedquilt, forgettin' all
about sprains and lameness; and he likewise was staring at the sky and
sayin' over and over:

"'It flies! It really FLIES!'

"And Nate looked up, and there, scootin' around in circles, now up high
and now down low, tippin' this way and tippin' that, was that aeroplane.
And in the stillness you could hear the buzz of the motor and the yells
of Augustus.

"Down flopped Scudder in the sand. 'Great land of love,' he says, 'it
FLIES!'

"Well, for five minutes or so they watched that thing swoop and duck and
sail up there overhead. And then, slow and easy as a feather in a May
breeze, down she flutters and lands soft on a hummock a little ways off.
And that Augustus--a fool for luck--staggers out of it safe and sound,
and sets down and begins to cry.

"The fust thing to reach him was Olivia. She grabbed him around the
neck, and you never heard such goin's on as them two had. Nate come
hurryin' up.

"'Here you!' he says, pullin' 'em apart. 'That's enough of this. And
you,' he adds to Gus, 'clear right out off this island. I won't make
shark bait of you this time, but--'

"And then comes Dixland, hippity-hop over the hummocks. 'My noble boy!'
he sings out, fallin' all of a heap onto Augustus's round shoulders. 'My
noble boy! My hero!'

"Nate looked on for a full minute with his mouth open. Olivia went away
toward the house. The professor and Gus was sheddin' tears like a couple
of waterin' pots.

"'Come! come!' says Scudder finally; 'get up, Mr. Dixland; you'll catch
cold. Now then, you Tolliver, toddle right along to your boat. Don't you
worry, professor, I'll fix him so's he won't come here no more.'

"But the professor turned on him like a flash.

"'How dare you interfere?' says he. 'I forgive him everything. He is a
hero. Why, man, he FLEW!'

"Olivia came up behind and touched Nate on the shoulders. 'Don't
you think you'd better go, Mr. Scudder?' she purred. 'I've unchained
Phillips Brooks.'

"Nate swears he never made better time than he done gettin' to the shore
and the boat Augustus had come over in. But that philanthropist dog only
missed the supper he'd been waitin' for by about a foot and a half, even
as 'twas.

"And that was the end of it, fur's Nate was concerned. Olivia was boss
from then on, and Scudder wa'n't allowed to land on his own island. And
pretty soon they all went away, flyin' machine and all, and now Gus and
Olivia are married."

"Well, by gum!" cried Wingate. "Say, that must have broke Nate's heart
completely. All that good money goin' to the poor. Ha! ha!"

"Yes," said Captain Sol, with a broad grin. "Nate told me that every
time he realized that Gus's flyin' at all was due to his scarin' him
into it, it fairly made him sick of life."

"What did Huldy Ann say? I'll bet the fur flew when SHE heard of it!"

"I guess likely it did. Scudder says her jawin's was the worst of all.
Her principal complaint was that he didn't take up with the professor's
five-thousand offer and try to fly. 'What if 'twas risky?' she says.
'If anything happened to you the five thousand would have come to your
heirs, wouldn't it? But no! you never think of no one but yourself.'"

Mr. Wingate glanced at his watch. "Good land!" he cried, "I didn't
realize 'twas so late. I must trot along down and meet Stitt. He and I
are goin' to corner the clam market."

"I must be goin', too," said the depot master, rising and moving toward
the door, picking up his cap on the way. He threw open the door and
exclaimed, "Hello! here's Sim. What you got on your mind, Sim?"

Mr. Phinney looked rather solemn. "I wanted to speak with you a minute,
Sol," he began. "Hello! Barzilla, I didn't know you was here."

"I shan't be here but one second longer," replied Mr. Wingate, as he and
Phinney shook hands. "I'm late already. Bailey'll think I ain't comin'.
Good-by, boys. See you this afternoon, maybe."

"Yes, do," cried Berry, as his guest hurried down to the gate. "I want
to hear about those automobiles over your way. You ain't bought one,
have you, Barzilla?"

Wingate grinned over his shoulder. "No," he called, "I ain't. But other
folks you know have. It's the biggest joke on earth. You and Sim'll want
to hear it."

He waved a big hand and walked briskly up the Shore Road. The depot
master turned to his friend.

"Well, Sim?" he asked.

"Well, Sol," answered the building mover gravely, "I've just met Mr.
Hilton, the minister, and he told me somethin' about Olive Edwards,
somethin' I thought you'd want to know. You said for me to find out what
she was cal'latin' to do when she had to give up her home and--"

"I know what I said," interrupted the depot master rather sharply. "What
did Hilton say?"

"Mr. Hilton told me not to tell," continued Phinney, "and I shan't tell
nobody but you, Sol. I know you wont t mention it. The minister says
that Olive's hard up as she can be. All she's got in the world is the
little furniture and store stuff in her house. The store stuff don't
amount to nothin', but the furniture belonged to her pa and ma, and she
set a heap by it. Likewise, as everybody knows, she's awful proud and
self-respectin'. Anything like charity would kill her. Now out West--in
Omaha or somewheres--she's got a cousin who owed her dad money. Old
Cap'n Seabury lent this Omaha man two or three thousand dollars and set
him up in business. Course, the debt's outlawed, but Olive don't
realize that, or, if she did, it wouldn't count with her. She couldn't
understand how law would have any effect on payin' money you honestly
owe. She's written to the Omaha cousin, tellin' him what a scrape she's
in and askin' him to please, if convenient, let her have a thousand or
so on account. She figgers if she gets that, she can go to Bayport or
Orham or somewheres and open another notion store."

Captain Berry lit a cigar. "Hum!" he said, after a minute. "You say
she's written to this chap. Has she got an answer yet?"

"No, not any definite one. She heard from the man's wife sayin' that her
husband--the cousin--had gone on a fishin' trip somewheres up in Canady
and wouldn't be back afore the eighth of next month. Soon's he does come
he'll write her. But Mr. Hilton thinks, and so do I--havin' heard a
few things about this cousin--that it's mighty doubtful if he sends any
money."

"Yes, I shouldn't wonder. Where's Olive goin' to stay while she's
waitin' to hear?"

"In her own house. Mr. Hilton went to Williams and pleaded with him, and
he finally agreed to let her stay there until the 'Colonial' is moved
onto the lot. Then the Edwardses house'll be tore down and Olive'll have
to go, of course."

The depot master puffed thoughtfully at his cigar.

"She won't hear before the tenth, at the earliest," he said. "And if
Williams begins to move his 'Colonial' at once, he'll get it to her lot
by the seventh, sure. Have you given him your figures for the job?"

"Handed 'em in this very mornin'. One of his high-and-mighty servants,
all brass buttons and braid, like a feller playin' in the band, took my
letter and condescended to say he'd pass it on to Williams. I'd liked
to have kicked the critter, just to see if he COULD unbend; but I jedged
'twouldn't be good business."

"Probably not. If the 'Colonial' gets to Olive's lot afore she hears
from the Omaha man, what then?"

"Well, that's the worst of it. The minister don't know what she'll do.
There's plenty of places where she'd be more'n welcome to visit a spell,
but she's too proud to accept. Mr. Hilton's afraid she'll start for
Boston to hunt up a job, or somethin'. You know how much chance she
stands of gettin' a job that's wuth anything."

Phinney paused, anxiously awaiting his companion's reply. When it came
it was very unsatisfactory.

"I'm goin' to the depot," said the Captain, brusquely. "So long, Sim."

He slammed the door of the house behind him, strode to the gate, flung
it open, and marched on. Simeon gazed in astonishment, then hurried
to overtake him. Ranging alongside, he endeavored to reopen the
conversation, but to no purpose. The depot master would not talk. They
turned into Cross Street.

"Well!" exclaimed Mr. Phinney, panting from his unaccustomed hurry,
"what be we, runnin' a race? Why! . . . Oh, how d'ye do, Mr. Williams,
sir? Want to see me, do you?"

The magnate of East Harniss stepped forward.

"Er--Phinney," he said, "I want a moment of your time. Morning, Berry."

"Mornin', Williams," observed Captain Sol brusquely. "All right, Sim.
I'll wait for you farther on."

He continued his walk. The building mover stood still. Mr. Williams
frowned with lofty indignation.

"Phinney," he said, "I've just looked over those figures of yours, your
bid for moving my new house. The price is ridiculous."

Simeon attempted a pleasantry. "Yes," he answered, "I thought 'twas
ridic'lous myself; but I needed the money, so I thought I could afford
to be funny."

The Williams frown deepened.

"I didn't mean ridiculously low," he snapped; "I meant ridiculously
high. I'd rather help out you town fellows if I can, but you can't work
me for a good thing. I've written to Colt and Adams, of Boston, and
accepted their offer. You had your chance and didn't see fit to take it.
That's all. I'm sorry."

Simeon was angry; also a trifle skeptical.

"Mr. Williams," he demanded, "do you mean to tell me that THEM people
have agreed to move you cheaper'n I can?"

"Their price--their actual price may be no lower; but considering their
up-to-date outfit and--er--progressive methods, they're cheaper. Yes.
Morning, Phinney."

He turned on his heel and walked off. Mr. Phinney, crestfallen and
angrier than ever, moved on to where the depot master stood waiting for
him. Captain Sol smiled grimly.

"You don't look merry as a Christmas tree, Sim," he observed. "What did
his Majesty have to say to you?"

Simeon related the talk with Williams. The depot master's grim smile
grew broader.

"Sim," he asked, with quiet sarcasm, "don't you realize that progressive
methods are necessary in movin' a house?"

Phinney tried to smile in return, but the attempt was a failure.

"Yes," went on the Captain. "Well, if you can't take the Grand
Panjandrum home, you can set on the fence and see him go by. That
ought to be honor enough, hadn't it? However, I may need some of your
ridiculous figgers on a movin' job of my own, pretty soon. Don't be TOO
comical, will you?"

"What do you mean by that, Sol Berry?"

"I mean that I may decide to move my own house."

"Move your OWN house? Where to, for mercy sakes?"

"To that lot on Main Street that belongs to Abner Payne. Abner has
wanted to buy my lot here on the Shore Road for a long time. He knows
it'll make a fine site for some rich bigbug's summer 'cottage.' He would
have bought the house, too, but I think too much of that to sell it.
Now Abner's come back with another offer. He'll swap my lot for the Main
Street one, pay my movin' expenses and a fair 'boot' besides. He don't
really care for my HOUSE, you understand; it's my LAND he's after."

"Are you goin' to take it up?"

"I don't know. The Main Street lot's a good one, and my house'll look
good on it. And I'll make money by the deal."

"Yes, but you've always swore by that saltwater view of yours. Told me
yourself you never wanted to live anywheres else."

Captain Sol took the cigar from his lips, looked at it, then threw it
violently into the gutter.

"What difference does it make where I live?" he snarled. "Who in blazes
cares where I live or whether I live at all?"

"Sol Berry, what on airth--"

"Shut up! Let me alone, Sim! I ain't fit company for anybody just now.
Clear out, there's a good feller."

The next moment he was striding down the hill. Mr. Phinney drew a long
breath, scratched his head and shook it solemnly. WHAT did it all mean?




CHAPTER VIII

THE OBLIGATIONS OF A GENTLEMAN


The methods of Messrs. Colt and Adams, the Boston firm of building
movers, were certainly progressive, if promptness in getting to work
is any criterion. Two days after the acceptance of their terms by Mr.
Williams, a freight car full of apparatus arrived at East Harniss. Then
came a foreman and a gang of laborers. Horses were hired, and within a
week the "pure Colonial" was off its foundations and on its way to the
Edwards lot. The moving was no light task. The big house must be brought
along the Shore Road to the junction with the Hill Boulevard, then swung
into that aristocratic highway and carried up the long slope, around the
wide curve, to its destination.

Mr. Phinney, though he hated the whole operation, those having it in
charge, and the mighty Williams especially, could not resist stealing
down to see how his successful rivals were progressing with the work
he had hoped to do. It caused him much chagrin to see that they were
getting on so very well. One morning, after breakfast, as he stood at
the corner of the Boulevard and the Shore Road, he found himself engaged
in a mental calculation.

Three days more and they would swing into the Boulevard; four or five
days after that and they would be abreast the Edwards lot. Another day
and . . . Poor Olive! She would be homeless. Where would she go? It
was too early for a reply from the Omaha cousin, but Simeon, having
questioned the minister, had little hope that that reply would be
favorable. Still it was a chance, and if the money SHOULD come before
the "pure Colonial" reached the Edwards lot, then the widow would at
least not be driven penniless from her home. She would have to leave
that home in any event, but she could carry out her project of opening
another shop in one of the neighboring towns. Otherwise . . . Mr.
Phinney swore aloud.

"Humph!" said a voice behind him. "I agree with you, though I don't
know what it's all about. I ain't heard anything better put for a long
while."

Simeon spun around, as he said afterwards, "like a young one's
pinwheel." At his elbow stood Captain Berry, the depot master, hands
in pockets, cigar in mouth, the personification of calmness and
imperturbability. He had come out of his house, which stood close to the
corner, and walked over to join his friend.

"Land of love!" exclaimed Simeon. "Why don't you scare a fellow to
death, tiptoein' around? I never see such a cat-foot critter!"

Captain Sol smiled. "Jumpin' it, ain't they?" he said, nodding toward
the "Colonial." "Be there by the tenth, won't it?"

"Tenth!" Mr. Phinney sniffed disgust. "It'll be there by the sixth, or I
miss my guess."

"Yup. Say, Sim, how soon could you land that shanty of mine in the road
if I give you the job to move it?"

"I couldn't get it up to the Main Street lot inside of a fortnight,"
replied Sim, after a moment's reflection. "Fur's gettin' it in the road
goes, I could have it here day after to-morrow if I had gang enough."

The depot master took the cigar out of his mouth and blew a ring of
smoke. "All right," he drawled, "get gang enough."

Phinney jumped. "You mean you've decided to take up with Payne's offer
and swap your lot for his?" he gasped. "Why, only two or three days ago
you said--"

"Ya-as. That was two or three days ago, and I've been watchin' the
'Colonial' since. I cal'late the movin' habit's catchin'. You have your
gang here by noon to-day."

"Sol Berry, are you crazy? You ain't seen Abner Payne; he's out of
town--"

"Don't have to see him. He's made me an offer and I'll write and accept
it."

"But you've got to have a selectmen's permit to move--"

"Got it. I went up and saw the chairman an hour ago. He's a friend of
mine. I nominated him town-meetin' day."

"But," stammered Phinney, very much upset by the suddenness of it all,
"you ain't got my price nor--"

"Drat your price! Give it when I ask it. See here, Sim, are you goin' to
have my house in the middle of the road by day after to-morrer? Or was
that just talk?"

"'Twa'n't talk. I can have it there, but--"

"All right," said Captain Sol coolly, "then have it."

Hands in pockets, he strolled away. Simeon sat down on a rock by the
roadside and whistled.

However, whistling was a luxurious and time-wasting method of expressing
amazement, and Mr. Phinney could not afford luxuries just then. For the
rest of that day he was a busy man. As Bailey Stitt expressed it, he
"flew round like a sand flea in a mitten," hiring laborers, engaging
masons, and getting his materials ready. That very afternoon the masons
began tearing down the chimneys of the little Berry house. Before the
close of the following day it was on the rollers. By two of the day
after that it was in the middle of the Shore Road, just when its mover
had declared it should be. They were moving it, furniture and all,
and Captain Sol was, as he said, going to "stay right aboard all the
voyage." No cooking could be done, of course, but the Captain arranged
to eat at Mrs. Higgins's hospitable table during the transit. His sudden
freak was furnishing material for gossip throughout the village, but he
did not care. Gossip concerning his actions was the last thing in the
world to trouble Captain Sol Berry.

The Williams's "Colonial" was moving toward the corner at a rapid
rate, and the foreman of the Boston moving firm walked over to see Mr.
Phinney.

"Say," he observed to Simeon, who, the perspiration streaming down
his face, was resting for a moment before recommencing his labor of
arranging rollers; "say," observed the foreman, "we'll be ready to turn
into the Boulevard by tomorrer night and you're blockin' the way."

"That's all right," said Simeon, "we'll be past the Boulevard corner by
that time."

He thought he was speaking the truth, but next morning, before work
began, Captain Berry appeared. He had had breakfast and strolled around
to the scene of operations.

"Well," asked Phinney, "how'd it seem to sleep on wheels?"

"Tiptop," replied the depot master. "Like it fust rate. S'pose my next
berth will be somewheres up there, won't it?"

He was pointing around the corner instead of straight ahead. Simeon
gaped, his mouth open.

"Up THERE?" he cried. "Why, of course not. That's the Boulevard. We're
goin' along the Shore Road."

"That so? I guess not. We're goin' by the Boulevard. Can go that way,
can't we?"

"Can?" repeated Simeon aghast. "Course we CAN! But it's like boxin' the
whole compass backward to get ha'f a p'int east of no'th. It's way round
Robin Hood's barn. It'll take twice as long and cost--"

"That's good," interrupted the Captain. "I like to travel, and I'm
willin' to pay for it. Think of the view I'll get on the way."

"But your permit from the selectmen--" began Phinney. Berry held up his
hand.

"My permit never said nothin' about the course to take," he answered,
his eye twinkling just a little. "There, Sim, you're wastin' time. I
move by the Hill Boulevard."

And into the Boulevard swung the Berry house. The Colt and Adams foreman
was an angry man when he saw the beams laid in that direction. He rushed
over and asked profane and pointed questions.

"Thought you said you was goin' straight ahead?" he demanded.

"Thought I was," replied Simeon, "but, you see, I'm only navigator of
this craft, not owner."

"Where is the blankety blank?" asked the foreman.

"If you're referrin' to Cap'n Berry, I cal'late you'll find him at
the depot," answered Phinney. To the depot went the foreman. Receiving
little satisfaction there, he hurried to the home of his employer, Mr.
Williams. The magnate, red-faced and angry, returned with him to
the station. Captain Sol received them blandly. Issy, who heard the
interview which followed, declared that the depot master was so cool
that "an iceberg was a bonfire 'longside of him." Issy's description
of this interview, given to a dozen townspeople within the next three
hours, was as follows:

"Mr. Williams," said the wide-eyed Issy, "he comes postin' into the
waitin' room, his foreman with him. Williams marches over to Cap'n Sol
and he says, 'Berry,' he says, 'are you responsible for the way that
house of yours is moved?'

"Cap'n Sol bowed and smiled. 'Yes,' says he, sweet as a fresh scallop.

"'You're movin' it to Main Street, aren't you? I so understood.'

"'You understood correct. That's where she's bound.'

"'Then what do you mean by turning out of your road and into mine?'

"'Oh, I don't own any road. Have you bought the Boulevard? The selectmen
ought to have told us that. I s'posed it was town thoroughfare.'

"Mr. Williams colored up a little. 'I didn't mean my road in that
sense,' he says. 'But the direct way to Main Street is along the
shore, and everybody knows it. Now why do you turn from that into the
Boulevard?'

"Cap'n Sol took a cigar from his pocket. 'Have one?' says he, passin' it
toward Mr. Williams. 'No? Too soon after breakfast, I s'pose. Why do
I turn off?' he goes on. 'Well, I'll tell you. I'm goin' to stay right
aboard my shack while it's movin', and it's so much pleasanter a ride up
the hill that I thought I'd go that way. I always envied them who could
afford a house on the Boulevard, and now I've got the chance to have one
there--for a spell. I'm sartin I shall enjoy it.'

"The foreman growled, disgusted. Mr. Williams got redder yet.

"'Don't you understand?' he snorts. 'You're blockin' the way of the
house I'M movin'. I have capable men with adequate apparatus to move
it, and they would be able to go twice as fast as your one-horse country
outfit. You're blockin' the road. Now they must follow you. It's an
outrage!'

"Cap'n Sol smiled once more. 'Too bad,' says he. 'It's a pity such
a nice street ain't wider. If it was my street in my town--I b'lieve
that's what you call East Harniss, ain't it?--seems to me I'd widen it.'

"The boss of 'my town' ground his heel into the sand. 'Berry,' he snaps,
'are you goin' to move that house over the Boulevard ahead of mine?'

"The Cap'n looked him square in the eye. 'Williams,' says he, 'I am.'

"The millionaire turned short and started to go.

"'You'll pay for it,' he snarls, his temper gettin' free at last.

"'I cal'late to,' purrs the Cap'n. 'I gen'rally do pay for what I want,
and a fair price, at that. I never bought in cheap mortgages and held
'em for clubs over poor folks, never in my life. Good mornin'.'

"And right to Mr. Williams's own face, too," concluded Issy. "WHAT do
you think of that?"

Here was defiance of authority and dignity, a sensation which should
have racked East Harniss from end to end. But most of the men in the
village, the tradespeople particularly, had another matter on their
minds, namely, Major Cuthbertson Scott Hardee, of "Silverleaf Hall." The
Major and his debts were causing serious worriment.

The creditors of the Major met, according to agreement, on the Monday
evening following their previous gathering at the club. Obed Gott, one
of the first to arrive, greeted his fellow members with an air of gloomy
triumph and a sort of condescending pity.

Higgins, the "general store" keeper, acting as self-appointed chairman,
asked if anyone had anything to report. For himself, he had seen the
Major and asked point-blank for payment of his bill. The Major had been
very polite and was apparently much concerned that his fellow townsmen
should have been inconvenienced by any neglect of his. He would write to
his attorneys at once, so he said.

"He said a whole lot more, too," added Higgins. "Said he had never been
better served than by the folks in this town, and that I kept a fine
store, and so on and so forth. But I haven't got any money yet. Anybody
else had any better luck?"

No one had, although several had had similar interviews with the master
of "Silverleaf Hall."

"Obed looks as if he knew somethin'," remarked Weeks. "What is it,
Obed?"

Mr. Gott scornfully waved his hand.

"You fellers make me laugh," he said. "You talk and talk, but you don't
do nothin'. I b'lieve in doin', myself. When I went home t'other night,
thinks I: 'There's one man that might know somethin' 'bout old Hardee,
and that's Godfrey, the hotel man.' So I wrote to Godfrey up to Boston
and I got a letter from him. Here 'tis."

He read the letter aloud. Mr. Godfrey wrote that he knew nothing about
Major Hardee further than that he had been able to get nothing from him
in payment for his board.

"So I seized his trunk," the letter concluded. "There was nothing in it
worth mentioning, but I took it on principle. The Major told me a
lot about writing to his attorneys for money, but I didn't pay much
attention to that. I'm afraid he's an old fraud, but I can't help liking
him, and if I had kept on running my hotel I guess he would have got
away scot-free."

"There!" exclaimed the triumphant Obed, with a sneer, "I guess that
settles it, don't it? Maybe you'd be willin' to turn your bills over to
Squire Baker now."

But they were not willing. Higgins argued, and justly, that although the
Major was in all probability a fraud, not even a lawyer could get water
out of a stone, and that when a man had nothing, suing him was a waste
of time and cash.

"Besides," he said, "there's just a chance that he may have attorneys
and property somewheres else. Let's write him a letter and every one of
us sign it, tellin' him that we'll call on him Tuesday night expectin'
to be paid in full. If we call and don't get any satisfaction, why,
we ain't any worse off, and then we can--well, run him out of town, if
nothin' more."

So the letter was written and signed by every man there. It was a long
list of signatures and an alarming total of indebtedness. The letter was
posted that night.

The days that followed seemed long to Obed. He was ill-natured at home
and ugly at the shop, and Polena declared that he was "gettin' so a body
couldn't live with him." Her own spirits were remarkably high, and Obed
noticed that, as the days went by, she seemed to be unusually excited.
On Thursday she announced that she was going to Orham to visit her
niece, one Sarah Emma Cahoon, and wouldn't be back right off. He knew
better than to object, and so she went.

That evening each of the signers of the letter to Major Hardee received
a courteous note saying that the Major would be pleased to receive the
gentlemen at the Hall. Nothing was said about payment.

So, after some discussion, the creditors marched in procession across
the fields and up to "Silverleaf Hall."

"Hardee's been to Orham to-day," whispered the keeper of the livery
stable, as they entered the yard. "He drove over this mornin' and come
back to-night."

"DROVE over!" exclaimed Obed, halting in his tracks. "He did? Where'd he
get the team? I'll bet five dollars you was soft enough to let him have
it, and never said a word. Well, if you ain't--By jimmy! you wait till I
get at him! I'll show you that he can't soft soap me."

Augustus met them at the door and ushered them into the old-fashioned
parlor. The Major, calm, cool, and imperturbably polite, was waiting to
receive them. He made some observation concerning the weather.

"The day's fine enough," interrupted Obed, pushing to the front, "but
that ain't what we come here to talk about. Are you goin' to pay us what
you owe? That's what we want to know."

The "gentleman of the old school" did not answer immediately. Instead he
turned to the solemn servant at his elbow.

"Augustus," he said, "you may make ready." Then, looking serenely at the
irate Mr. Gott, whose clenched fist rested under the center table, which
he had thumped to emphasize his demands, the Major asked:

"I beg your pardon, my dear sir, but what is the total of my
indebtedness to you?"

"Nineteen dollars and twenty-eight cents, and I want you to understand
that--"

Major Hardee held up a slim, white hand.

"One moment, if you please," he said. "Now, Augustus."

Augustus opened the desk in the corner and produced an imposing stack of
bank notes. Then he brought forth neat piles of halves, quarters, dimes,
and pennies, and arranged the whole upon the table. Obed's mouth and
those of his companions gaped in amazement.

"Have you your bill with you, Mr. Gott?" inquired the Major.

Dazedly Mr. Gott produced the required document.

"Thank you. Augustus, nineteen twenty-eight to this gentleman. Kindly
receipt the bill, Mr. Gott, if you please. A mere formality, of course,
but it is well to be exact. Thank you, sir. And now, Mr. Higgins."

One by one the creditors shamefacedly stepped forward, received the
amount due, receipted the bill, and stepped back again. Mr. Peters, the
photographer, was the last to sign.

"Gentlemen," said the Major, "I am sorry that my carelessness in
financial matters should have caused you this trouble, but now that you
are here, a representative gathering of East Harniss's men of affairs,
upon this night of all nights, it seems fitting that I should ask for
your congratulations. Augustus."

The wooden-faced Augustus retired to the next room and reappeared
carrying a tray upon which were a decanter and glasses.

"Gentlemen," continued the Major, "I have often testified to my
admiration and regard for your--perhaps I may now say OUR--charming
village. This admiration and regard has extended to the fair daughters
of the township. It may be that some of you have conscientious scruples
against the use of intoxicants. These scruples I respect, but I am sure
that none of you will refuse to at least taste a glass of wine with me
when I tell you that I have this day taken one of the fairest to love
and cherish during life."

He stepped to the door of the dining room, opened it, and said quietly,
"My dear, will you honor us with your presence?"

There was a rustle of black silk and there came through the doorway the
stately form of her who had been Mrs. Polena Ginn.

"Gentlemen," said the Major, "permit me to present to you my wife, the
new mistress of 'Silverleaf Hall.'"

The faces of the ex-creditors were pictures of astonishment. Mr. Gott's
expressive countenance turned white, then red, and then settled to a
mottled shade, almost as if he had the measles. Polena rushed to his
side.

"O Obed!" she exclaimed. "I know we'd ought to have told you, but 'twas
only Tuesday the Major asked me, and we thought we'd keep it a secret
so's to s'prise you. Mr. Langworthy over to Orham married us, and--"

"My dear," her husband blandly interrupted, "we will not intrude our
private affairs upon the patience of these good friends. And now,
gentlemen, let me propose a toast: To the health and happiness of the
mistress of 'Silverleaf Hall'! Brother Obed, I--"

The outside door closed with a slam; "Brother Obed" had fled.

A little later, when the rest of the former creditors of the Major came
out into the moonlight, they found their companion standing by the
gate gazing stonily into vacancy. "Hen" Leadbetter, who, with Higgins,
brought up the rear of the procession, said reflectively:

"When he fust fetched out that stack of money I couldn't scarcely
b'lieve my eyes. I begun to think that we fellers had put our foot in
it for sartin, and had lost a mighty good customer; but, of course, it's
all plain enough NOW."

"Yes," remarked Weeks with a nod; "I allers heard that P'lena kept a
mighty good balance in the bank."

"It looks to me," said Higgins slyly, "as if we owed Obed here a vote of
thanks. How 'bout that, Obed?"

And then Major Hardee's new brother-in-law awoke with a jump.

"Aw, you go to grass!" he snarled, and tramped savagely off down the
hill.




CHAPTER IX

THE WIDOW BASSETT


These developments, Major Hardee's marriage and Mr. Gott's discomfiture,
overshadowed, for the time, local interest in the depot master's house
moving. This was, in its way, rather fortunate, for those who took the
trouble to walk down to the lower end of the Boulevard were astonished
to see how very slowly the moving was progressing.

"Only one horse, Sim?" asked Captain Hiram Baker. "Only one! Why, it'll
take you forever to get through, won't it?"

"I'm afraid it'll take quite a spell," admitted Mr. Phinney.

"Where's your other one, the white one?"

"The white horse," said Simeon slowly, "ain't feelin' just right and
I've had to lay him off."

"Humph! that's too bad. How does Sol act about it? He's such a hustler,
I should think--"

"Sol," interrupted Sim, "ain't unreasonable. He understands."

He chuckled inwardly as he said it. Captain Sol did understand. Also Mr.
Phinney himself was beginning to understand a little.

The very day on which Williams and his foreman had called on the depot
master and been dismissed so unceremoniously, that official paid a short
visit to his mover.

"Sim," he said, the twinkle still in his eye, "his Majesty, Williams
the Conqueror, was in to see me just now and acted real peevish. He was
pretty disrespectful to you, too. Called your outfit 'one horse.' That's
a mistake, because you've got two horses at work right now. It seems a
shame to make a great man like that lie. Hadn't you better lay off one
of them horses?"

"Lay one OFF?" exclaimed Simeon. "What for? Why, we'll be slow enough,
as 'tis. With only one horse we wouldn't get through for I don't know
how long."

"That's so," murmured the Captain. "I s'pose with one horse you'd hardly
reach the middle of the Boulevard by--well, before the tenth of the
month. Hey?"

The tenth of the month! The TENTH! Why, it was on the tenth that that
Omaha cousin of Olive Edwards was to--Mr. Phinney began to see--to see
and to grin, slow but expansive.

"Hm-m-m!" he mused.

"Yes," observed Captain Sol. "That white horse of yours looks sort of
ailin' to me, Sim. I think he needs a rest."

And, sure enough, next day the white horse was pronounced unfit and
taken back to the stable. The depot master's dwelling moved, but that is
all one could say truthfully concerning its progress.

At the depot the Captain was quieter than usual. He joked with his
assistant less than had been his custom, and for the omission Issy
was duly grateful. Sometimes Captain Sol would sit for minutes without
speaking. He seemed to be thinking and to be pondering some grave
problem. When his friends, Mr. Wingate, Captain Stitt, Hiram Baker, and
the rest, dropped in on him he cheered up and was as conversational as
ever. After they had gone he relapsed into his former quiet mood.

"He acts sort of blue, to me," declared Issy, speaking from the depths
of sensational-novel knowledge. "If he was a younger man I'd say he was
most likely in love. Ah, hum! I s'pose bein' in love does get a feller
mournful, don't it?"

Issy made this declaration to his mother only. He knew better than to
mention sentiment to male acquaintances. The latter were altogether too
likely to ask embarrassing questions.

Mr. Wingate and Captain Stitt were still in town, although their stay
was drawing to a close. One afternoon they entered the station together.
Captain Sol seemed glad to see them.

"Set down, fellers," he ordered. "I swan I'm glad to see you. I ain't
fit company for myself these days."

"Ain't Betsy Higgins feedin' you up to the mark?" asked Stitt. "Or is
house movin' gettin' on your vitals?"

"No," growled the depot master, "grub's all right and so's movin',
I cal'late. I'm glad you fellers come in. What's the news to Orham,
Barzilla? How's the Old Home House boarders standin' it? Hear from
Jonadab regular, do you?"

Mr. Wingate laughed. "Nothin' much," he said. "Jonadab's too busy
to write these days. Bein' a sport interferes with letter writing
consider'ble."

"Sport!" exclaimed Captain Bailey. "Land of Goshen! Cap'n Jonadab is the
last one I'd call a sport."

"That's 'cause you ain't a good judge of human nature, Bailey," chuckled
Barzilla. "When ancient plants like Jonadab Wixon DO bloom, they're gay
old blossoms, I tell you!"

"What do you mean?" asked the depot master.

"I mean that Jonadab's been givin' me heart disease, that's what; givin'
it to me in a good many diff'rent ways, too. We opened the Old Home
House the middle of April this year, because Peter T. Brown thought we
might catch some spring trade. We did catch a little, though whether it
paid to open up so early's a question. But 'twas June 'fore Jonadab got
his disease so awful bad. However, most any time in the last part of May
the reg'lar programme of the male boarders was stirrin' him up.

"Take it of a dull day, for instance. Sky overcast and the wind aidgin'
round to the sou'east, so's you couldn't tell whether 'twould rain or
fair off; too cold to go off to the ledge cod fishin' and too hot for
billiards or bowlin'; a bunch of the younger women folks at one end
of the piazza playin' bridge; half a dozen men, includin' me and Cap'n
Jonadab, smokin' and tryin' to keep awake at t'other end; amidships a
gang of females--all 'fresh air fiends'--and mainly widows or discards
in the matrimony deal, doin' fancywork and gossip. That would be about
the usual layout.

"Conversation got to you in homeopath doses, somethin' like this:

"'Did you say "Spades"? WELL! if I'd known you were going to make us
lose our deal like that, I'd never have bridged it--not with THIS hand.'

"'Oh, Miss Gabble, have you heard what people are sayin' about--' The
rest of it whispers.

"'A--oo--OW! By George, Bill! this is dead enough, isn't it? Shall we
match for the cigars or are you too lazy?'

"Then, from away off in the stillness would come a drawn-out 'Honk!
honk!' like a wild goose with the asthma, and pretty soon up the road
would come sailin' a big red automobile, loaded to the guards with
goggles and grandeur, and whiz past the hotel in a hurricane of dust and
smell. Then all hands would set up and look interested, and Bill would
wink acrost at his chum and drawl:

"'That's the way to get over the country! Why, a horse isn't
one--two--three with that! Cap'n Wixon, I'm surprised that a sportin'
man like you hasn't bought one of those things long afore this.'

"For the next twenty minutes there wouldn't be any dullness. Jonadab
would take care of that. He'd have the floor and be givin' his opinions
of autos and them that owned and run 'em. And between the drops of his
language shower you'd see them boarders nudgin' each other and rockin'
back and forth contented and joyful.

"It always worked. No matter what time of day or night, all you had to
say was 'auto' and Cap'n Jonadab would sail up out of his chair like one
of them hot-air balloons the youngsters nowadays have on Fourth of July.
And he wouldn't come down till he was empty of remarks, nuther. You
never see a man get so red faced and eloquent.

"It wa'n't because he couldn't afford one himself. I know that's the
usual reason for them kind of ascensions, but 'twa'n't his. No, sir!
the summer hotel business has put a considerable number of dollars in
Jonadab's hands, and the said hands are like a patent rat trap, a
mighty sight easier to get into than out of. He could have bought three
automobiles if he'd wanted to, but he didn't want to. And the reason he
didn't was named Tobias Loveland and lived over to Orham."

"I know Tobias," interrupted Captain Bailey Stitt.

"Course you do," continued Barzilla. "So does Sol, I guess. Well,
anyhow, Tobias and Cap'n Jonadab never did hitch. When they was boys
together at school they was always rowin' and fightin', and when they
grew up to be thirty and courted the same girl--ten years younger than
either of 'em, she was--twa'n't much better. Neither of 'em got her,
as a matter of fact; she married a tin peddler named Bassett over to
Hyannis. But both cal'lated they would have won if t'other hadn't been
in the race, and consequently they loved each other with a love that
passed understandin'. Tobias had got well to do in the cranberry-raisin'
line and drove a fast horse. Jonadab, durin' the last prosperous year
or two, had bought what he thought was some horse, likewise. They met
on the road one day last spring and trotted alongside one another for a
mile. At the end of that mile Jonadab's craft's jib boom was just astern
of Tobias's rudder. Inside of that week the Cap'n had swapped his horse
for one with a two-thirty record, and the next time they met Tobias was
left with a beautiful, but dusty, view of Jonadab's back hair. So HE
bought a new horse. And that was the beginnin'.

"It went along that way for twelve months. Fust one feller's nag would
come home freighted with perspiration and glory, and then t'other's. One
week Jonadab would be so bloated with horse pride that he couldn't find
room for his vittles, and the next he'd be out in the stable growlin'
'cause it cost so much for hay to stuff an old hide rack that wa'n't
fit to put in a museum. At last it got so that neither one could find a
better horse on the Cape, and the two they had was practically an even
match. I begun to have hopes that the foolishness was over. And then the
tin peddler's widow drifts in to upset the whole calabash.

"She made port at Orham fust, this Henrietta Bassett did, and the style
she slung killed every female Goliath in the Orham sewin' circle dead.
Seems her husband that was had been an inventor, as a sort of side line
to peddlin' tinware, and all to once he invented somethin' that worked.
He made money--nobody knew how much, though all hands had a guess--and
pretty soon afterwards he made a will and Henrietta a widow. She'd been
livin' in New York, so she said, and had come back to revisit the scenes
of her childhood. She was a mighty well-preserved woman--artificial
preservatives, I cal'late, like some kinds of tomatter ketchup--and her
comin' stirred Orham way down to the burnt places on the bottom of the
kettle."

"I guess I remember HER, too," put in Captain Bailey.

"Say!" queried Mr. Wingate snappishly, "do you want to tell about her?
If you do, why--"

"Belay, both of you!" ordered the depot master. "Heave ahead, Barzilla."

"The news of her got over to Wellmouth, and me and Jonadab heard of it.
He was some subject to widows--most widower men are, I guess--but he
didn't develop no alarmin' symptoms in this case and never even hinted
that he'd like to see his old girl. Fact is, his newest horse trade had
showed that it was afraid of automobiles, and he was beginnin' to get
rabid along that line. Then come that afternoon when him and me was out
drivin' together, and we--Well, I'll have to tell you about that.

"We was over on the long stretch of wood road between Trumet and
Denboro, nice hard macadam, the mare--her name was Celia, but Jonadab
had re-christened her Bay Queen after a boat he used to own--skimmin'
along at a smooth, easy gait, when, lo and behold you! we rounds a turn
and there ahead of us is a light, rubber-tired wagon with a man and
woman on the seat of it. I heard Jonadab give a kind of snort.

"'What's the matter?' says I.

"'Nothin',' says he, between his teeth. 'Only, if I ain't some mistaken,
that's Tobe Loveland's rig. Wonder if he's got his spunk with him? The
Queen's feelin' her oats to-day, and I cal'late I can show him a few
things.'

"'Rubbish!' says I, disgusted. 'Don't be foolish, Jonadab. I don't know
nothin' about his spunk, but I do know there's a woman with him. 'Tain't
likely he'll want to race you when he's got a passenger aboard.'

"'Oh, I don't know!' says he. 'I've got you, Barzilla; so 'twill be two
and two. Let's heave alongside and see.'

"So he clucked to the Queen, and in a jiffy we was astern of t'other
rig. Loveland looked back over his shoulder.

"'Ugh!' he grunts, 'bout as cordial as a plate of ice cream. ''Lo,
Wixon, that you?'

"'Um-hm,' begins Jonadab. 'How's that crowbait of yours to-day, Tobe?
Got any go in him? 'Cause if he has, I--'

"He stopped short. The woman in Loveland's carriage had turned her head
and was starin' hard.

"'Why!' she gasps. 'I do believe--Why, Jonadab!'

"'HETTIE!' says the Cap'n.

"Well, after that 'twas pull up, of course, and shake hands and talk.
The widow, she done most of the talkin'. She was SO glad to see him. How
had he been all these years? She knew him instantly. He hadn't changed
a mite--that is, not so VERY much. She was plannin' to come over to the
Old Home House and stay a spell later on; but now she was havin' SUCH a
good time in Orham, Tobias--Mr. Loveland--was makin' it SO pleasant for
her. She did enjoy drivin' so much, and Mr. Loveland had the fastest
horse in the county--did we know that?

"Tobias and Jonadab glowered back and forth while all this gush was
bein' turned loose, and hardly spoke to one another. But when 'twas over
and we was ready to start again, the Cap'n says, says he:

"'I'll be mighty glad to see you over to the hotel, when you're ready to
come, Hettie. I can take you ridin', too. Fur's horse goes, I've got a
pretty good one myself.'

"'Oh!' squeals the widow. 'Really? Is that him? It's awful pretty, and
he looks fast.'

"'She is,' says Jonadab. 'There's nothin' round here can beat her.'

"'Humph!' says Loveland. 'Git dap!'

"'Git dap!' says Jonadab, agreein' with him for once.

"Tobias started, and we started. Tobias makes his horse go a little
faster, and Jonadab speeded up some likewise. I see how 'twas goin' to
be, and therefore I wa'n't surprised to death when the next ten minutes
found us sizzlin' down that road, neck and neck with Loveland, dust
flyin', hoofs poundin', and the two drivers leanin' way for'ard over
the dash, reins gripped and teeth sot. For a little ways 'twas an even
thing, and then we commenced to pull ahead a little.

"'Loveland,' yells Jonadab, out of the port corner of his mouth, 'if
I ain't showin' you my tailboard by the time we pass the fust house in
Denboro, I'll eat my Sunday hat.'

"I cal'late he would 'a' beat, too. We was drawin' ahead all the time
and had a three-quarter length lead when we swung clear of the woods and
sighted Denboro village, quarter of a mile away. And up the road comes
flyin' a big auto, goin' to beat the cars.

"Let's forget the next few minutes; they wa'n't pleasant ones for me.
Soon's the Bay Queen sot eyes on that auto, she stopped trottin' and
commenced to hop; from hoppin' she changed to waltzin' and high jumpin'.
When the smoke had cleared, the auto was out of sight and we was in the
bushes alongside the road, with the Queen just gettin' ready to climb
a tree. As for Tobias and Henrietta, they was roundin' the turn by the
fust house in Denboro, wavin' by-bys to us over the back of the seat.

"We went home then; and every foot of the way Cap'n Jonadab called an
automobile a new kind of name, and none complimentary. The boarders,
they got wind of what had happened and begun to rag him, and the more
they ragged, the madder he got and the more down on autos.

"And, to put a head on the whole business, I'm blessed if Tobias
Loveland didn't get in with an automobile agent who was stoppin' in
Orham and buy a fifteen-hundred-dollar machine off him. And the very
next time Jonadab was out with the Queen on the Denboro road, Tobias
and the widow whizzed past him in that car so fast he might as well have
been hove to. And, by way of rubbin' it in, they come along back pretty
soon and rolled alongside of him easy, while Henrietta gushed about Mr.
Loveland's beautiful car and how nice it was to be able to go just as
swift as you wanted to. Jonadab couldn't answer back, nuther, bein' too
busy keepin' the Queen from turnin' herself into a flyin' machine.

"'Twas then that he got himself swore in special constable to arrest
auto drivers for overspeedin'; and for days he wandered round layin' for
a chance to haul up Tobias and get him fined. He'd have had plenty of
game if he'd been satisfied with strangers, but he didn't want them
anyhow, and, besides, most of 'em was on their way to spend money at the
Old Home House. 'Twould have been poor business to let any of THAT cash
go for fines, and he realized it.

"'Twas in early June, only a few weeks ago, that the widow come to our
hotel. I never thought she meant it when she said she was comin', and so
I didn't expect her. Fact is, I was expectin' to hear that she and Tobe
Loveland was married or engaged. But there was a slip up somewheres, for
all to once the depot wagon brings her to the Old Home House, she hires
a room, and settles down to stay till the season closed, which would be
in about a fortn't.

"From the very fust she played her cards for Jonadab. He meant to be
middlin' average frosty to her, I imagine--her bein' so thick with
Tobias prejudiced him, I presume likely. But land sakes! she thawed
him out like hot toddy thaws out some folks' tongues. She never took no
notice of his coldness, but smiled and gushed and flattered, and looked
her prettiest--which was more'n average, considerin' her age--and by the
end of the third day he was hangin' round her like a cat round a cook.

"It commenced to look serious to me. Jonadab was a pretty old fish to
be caught with soft soap and a set of false crimps; but you can't
never tell. When them old kind do bite, they gen'rally swallow hook and
sinker, and he sartinly did act hungry. I wished more'n once that Peter
T. Brown, our business manager, was aboard to help me with advice, but
Peter is off tourin' the Yosemite with his wife and her relations, so
whatever pilotin' there was I had to do. And every day fetched Jonadab's
bows nigher the matrimonial rocks.

"I'd about made up my mind to sound the fog horn by askin' him straight
out what he was cal'latin' to do; but somethin' I heard one evenin', as
I set alone in the hotel office, made me think I'd better wait a spell.

"The office window was open and the curtain drawed down tight. I was
settin' inside, smokin' and goin' over the situation, when footsteps
sounded on the piazza and a couple come to anchor on the settee right by
that window. Cap'n Jonadab and Henrietta! I sensed that immediate.

"She was laughin' and actin' kind of queer, and he was talkin' mighty
earnest.

"'Oh, no, Cap'n! Oh, no!' she giggles. 'You mustn't be so serious on
such a beautiful night as this. Let's talk about the moon.'

"'Drat the moon!' says Jonadab. 'Hettie, I--'

"'Oh, just see how beautiful the water looks! All shiny and--"

"'Drat the water, too! Hettie, what's the reason you don't want to talk
serious with me? If that Tobe Loveland--'

"'Really, I don't see why you bring Mr. Loveland's name into the
conversation. He is a perfect gentleman, generous and kind; and as for
the way in which he runs that lovely car of his--'

"The Cap'n interrupted her. He ripped out somethin' emphatic.

"'Generous!' he snarls. ''Bout as generous as a hog in the feed trough,
he is. And as for runnin' that pesky auto, if I'd demean myself to own
one of them things, I'll bet my other suit I could run it better'n he
does. If I couldn't, I'd tie myself to the anchor and jump overboard.'

"The way she answered showed pretty plain that she didn't believe him.
'Really?' she says. 'Do you think so? Good night, Jonadab.'

"I could hear her walkin' off acrost the piazza. He went after her.
'Hettie,' he says, 'you answer me one thing. Are you engaged to Tobe
Loveland?'

"She laughed again, sort of teasin' and slow. 'Really,' says she, 'you
are--Why, no, I'm not.'

"That was all, but it set me to thinkin' hard. She wa'n't engaged to
Loveland; she said so, herself. And yet, if she wanted Jonadab, she was
actin' mighty funny. I ain't had no experience, but it seemed to me that
then was the time to bag him and she'd put him off on purpose. She was
ages too ancient to be a flirt for the fun of it. What was her game?"




CHAPTER X

CAPTAIN JONADAB GOES


Mr. Wingate stopped and roared a greeting to Captain Hiram Baker, who
was passing the open door of the waiting room.

"Hello, there, Hime!" he shouted. "Come up in here! What, are you too
proud to speak to common folks?"

Captain Hiram entered. "Hello!" he said. "You look like a busy gang, for
sure. What you doin'--seatin' chairs?"

"Just now we're automobilin'," observed Captain Sol. "Set down, Hiram."

"Automobilin'?" repeated the new arrival, evidently puzzled.

"Sartin. Barzilla's takin' us out. Go on, Barzilla."

Mr. Wingate smiled broadly. "Well," he began, "we HAVE just about
reached the part where I went autoin'. The widow and me and Jonadab."

"Jonadab!" shouted Stitt. "I thought you said--"

"I know what I said. But we went auto ridin' just the same.

"'Twas Henry G. Bradbury that took us out, him and his bran-new big
tourin' car. You see, he landed to board with us the next day after
Henrietta come--this Henry G. did--and he was so quiet and easy spoken
and run his car so slow that even a pizen auto hater like Jonadab
couldn't take much offense at him. He wa'n't very well, he said, subject
to some kind of heart attacks, and had come to the Old Home for rest.

"Him and the Cap'n had great arguments about the sins of automobilin'.
Jonadab was sot on the idee that nine folks out of ten hadn't machine
sense enough to run a car. Bradbury, he declared that that was a fact
with the majority of autos, but not with his. 'Why, a child could run
it,' says he. 'Look here, Cap'n: To start it you just do this. To stop
it you do so and so. To make her go slow you haul back on this lever. To
make her go faster you shove down this one. And as for steerin'--well,
a man that's handled the wheels of as many catboats as you have would
simply have a picnic. I'm in entire sympathy with your feelin's against
speeders and such--I'd be a constable if I was in your shoes--but this
is a gentleman's car and runs like one.'

"All Jonadab said was 'Bosh!' and 'Humph!' but he couldn't help actin'
interested, particular as Mrs. Bassett kept him alongside of the machine
and was so turrible interested herself. And when, this partic'lar
afternoon, Henry G. invites us all to go out with him for a little 'roll
around,' the widow was so tickled and insisted so that he just HAD to
go; he didn't dast say no.

"Somehow or 'nother--I ain't just sure yet how it happened--the seatin'
arrangements was made like this: Jonadab and Bradbury on the front seat,
and me and Henrietta in the stuffed cockpit astern. We rolled out and
purred along the road, smooth as a cat trottin' to dinner. No speedin',
no joltin', no nothin'. 'TWAS a 'gentleman's car'; there wa'n't no doubt
about that.

"We went 'way over to Bayport and Orham and beyond. And all the time
Bradbury kept p'intin' out the diff'rent levers to Jonadab and tellin'
him how to work 'em. Finally, after we'd headed back, he asked Jonadab
to take the wheel and steer her a spell. Said his heart was feelin' sort
of mean and 'twould do him good to rest.

"Jonadab said no, emphatic and more'n average ugly, but Henry G. kept
beggin' and pleadin', and pretty soon the widow put in her oar. He must
do it, to please her. He had SAID he could do it--had told her so--and
now he must make good. Why, when Mr. Loveland--

"'All right,' snarls Jonadab. 'I'll try. But if ever--'

"'Hold on!' says I. 'Here's where I get out.'

"However, they wouldn't let me, and the Cap'n took the wheel. His jaw
was set and his hands shakin', but he done it. Hettie had give her
orders and she was skipper.

"For a consider'ble spell we just crawled. Jonadab was steerin' less
crooked every minute and it tickled him; you could see that.

"'Answers her hellum tiptop, don't she?' he says.

"'Bet your life!' says Bradbury. 'Better put on a little more speed,
hadn't we?'"

He put it on himself, afore the new pilot could stop him, and we
commenced to move.

"'When you want to make her jump,' he says, you press down on that with
your foot, and you shove the spark back.'

"'Shut up!' howls Jonadab. 'Belay! Don't you dast to touch that. I'm
scart to death as 'tis. Here! you take this wheel.'

"But he wouldn't, and we went on at a good clip. For a green hand the
Cap'n was leavin' a pretty straight wake.

"'Gosh!' he says, after a spell; 'I b'lieve I'm kind of gettin' the hang
of the craft.'

"'Course you are,' says Bradbury. 'I told--Oh!'

"He straightens up, grabs at his vest, and slumps down against the back
of the seat.

"'What IS it?' screams the widow. 'Oh, what IS it, Mr. Bradbury?'

"He answers, plucky, but toler'ble faintlike. My heart!' he gasps.
'I--I'm afraid I'm goin' to have one of my attacks. I must get to a
doctor quick.'

"'Doctor!' I sings out. 'Great land of love! there ain't a doctor nigher
than Denboro, and that's four mile astern.'

"'Never mind,' cries the Bassett woman. 'We must go there, then. Turn
around, Jonadab! Turn around at once! Mr. Bradbury--'

"But poor Henry G. was curled up against the cushions and we couldn't
get nothin' out of him but groans. And all the time we was sailin' along
up the road.

"'Turn around, Jonadab!' orders Henrietta. 'Turn around and go for the
doctor!'

"Jonadab's hands was clutched on that wheel, and his face was white as
his rubber collar.

"'Jerushy!' he groans desperate, 'I--I don't know HOW to turn around.'

"'Then stop, you foolhead!' I bellers. 'Stop where you be!'

"And he moans--almost cryin' he was: 'I--I've forgotten how to STOP.'

"Talk about your situations! If we wa'n't in one then I miss my guess.
Every minute we was sinkin' Denboro below the horizon.

"'We MUST get to a doctor,' says the widow. 'Where is there another one,
Mr. Wingate?'

"'The next one's in Bayport,' says I, 'and that's ten mile ahead if it's
a foot.'

"However, there wa'n't nothin' else for it, so toward Bayport we put.
Bradbury groaned once in a while, and Mrs. Bassett got nervous.

"'We'll never get there at this rate,' says she. 'Go faster, Jonadab.
Faster! Press down on--on that thing he told you to. Please! for MY
sake.'

"'Don't you--' I begun; but 'twas too late. He pressed, and away we
went. We was eatin' up the road now, I tell you, and though I was
expectin' every minute to be my next, I couldn't help admirin' the way
the Cap'n steered. And, as for him, he was gettin' more and more set up
and confident.

"'She handles like a yacht, Barzilla,' he grunts, between his teeth.
'See me put her around the next buoy ahead there. Hey! how's that?'

"The next 'buoy' was a curve in the road, and we went around it
beautiful. So with the next and the next and the next. Bayport wa'n't so
very fur ahead. All to once another dreadful thought struck me.

"'Look here!' I yells. 'How in time are we goin' to stop when we--OW!'

"The Bassett woman had pinched my arm somethin' savage. I looked at her,
and she was scowlin' and shakin' her head.

"'S-sh-sh!' she whispers. 'Don't disturb him. He'll be frightened and--'

"'Frightened! Good heavens to Betsy! I cal'late he won't be the only one
that's fri--'

"But she looked so ugly that I shut up prompt, though I done a heap of
thinkin'. On we went and, as we turned the next 'buoy,' there, ahead of
us, was another auto, somethin' like ours, with only one person in it, a
man, and goin' in the same direction we was, though not quite so fast.

"Then I WAS scart. 'Hi, Jonadab!' I sings out. 'Heave to! Come about!
Shorten sail! Do you want to run him down? Look OUT!'

"I might as well have saved my breath. Heavin' to and the rest of it
wa'n't included in our pilot's education. On we went, same as ever. I
don't know what might have happened if the widow hadn't kept her head.
She leaned over the for'ard rail of the after cockpit and squeezed a
rubber bag that was close to Jonadab's starboard arm. It was j'ined to
the fog whistle, I cal'late, 'cause from under our bows sounded a beller
like a bull afoul of a barb-wire fence.

"The feller in t'other car turned his head and looked. Then he commenced
to sheer off to wind'ard so's to let us pass. But all the time he kept
lookin' back and starin' and, as we got nigher, and I could see him
plainer through the dust, he looked more and more familiar. 'Twas
somebody I knew.

"Then I heard a little grunt, or gasp, from Cap'n Jonadab. He was
leanin' for'ard over the wheel, starin' at the man in the other auto.
The nigher we got, the harder he stared; and the man in front was
actin' similar in regards to him. And, all to once, the head car stopped
swingin' off to wind'ard, turned back toward the middle of the road, and
begun to go like smoke. The next instant I felt our machine fairly jump
beneath me. I looked at Jonadab's foot. 'Twas pressed hard down on the
speed lever.

"'You crazy loon!' I screeched. 'You--you--you--Stop it! Take your foot
off that! Do you want to--!'

"I was climbin' over the back of the front seat, my knee pretty nigh on
Bradbury's head. But, would you believe it, that Jonadab man let go of
the wheel with one hand--let GO of it, mind you--and give me a shove
that sent me backward in Henrietta Bassett's lap.

"'Barzilla!' he growled, between his teeth, 'you set where you be
and keep off the quarterdeck. I'm runnin' this craft. I'll beat that
Loveland this time or run him under, one or t'other!'

"As sure as I'm alive this minute, the man in the front car was Tobias
Loveland!

"And from then on--Don't talk! I dream about it nights and wake up with
my arms around the bedpost. I ain't real sure, but I kind of have an
idee that the bedpost business comes from the fact that I was huggin'
the widow some of the time. If I did, 'twa'n't knowin'ly, and she never
mentioned it afterwards. All I can swear to is clouds of dust, and horns
honkin', and telegraph poles lookin' like teeth in a comb, and Jonadab's
face set as the Day of Judgment.

"He kept his foot down on the speed place as if 'twas glued. He shoved
the 'spark'--whatever that is--'way back. Every once in a while he
yelled, yelled at the top of his lungs. What he yelled hadn't no sense
to it. Sometimes you'd think that he was drivin' a horse and next that
he was handlin' a schooner in a gale.

"'Git dap!' he'd whoop. 'Go it, you cripples! Keep her nose right in the
teeth of it! She's got the best of the water, so let her bile! Whe-E-E!'

"We didn't stop at Bayport. Our skipper had made other arrangements.
However, the way I figgered it, we was long past needin' a doctor, and
you can get an undertaker 'most anywhere. We went through the village
like a couple of shootin' stars, Tobias about a length ahead, his hat
blowed off, his hair--what little he's got--streamin' out behind, and
that blessed red buzz wagon of his fairly skimmin' the hummocks and
jumpin' the smooth places. And right astern of him comes Jonadab,
hangin' to the wheel, HIS hat gone, his mouth open, and fillin' the dust
with yells and coughs.

"You could see folks runnin' to doors and front gates; but you never saw
'em reach where they was goin'--time they done that we was somewheres
round the next bend. A pullet run over us once--yes, I mean just that.
She clawed the top of the widow's bunnit as we slid underneath her, and
by the time she lit we was so fur away she wa'n't visible to the
naked eye. Bradbury--who'd got better remarkable sudden--was pawin' at
Jonadab's arm, tryin' to make him ease up; but he might as well have
pawed the wind. As for Henrietta Bassett, she was acrost the back of the
front seat tootin' the horn for all she was wuth. And curled down in a
heap on the cockpit floor was a fleshy, sea-farin' person by the name of
Barzilla Wingate, sufferin' from chills and fever.

"I think 'twas on the long stretch of the Trumet road that we beat
Tobias. I know we passed somethin' then, though just what I ain't
competent to testify. All I'm sure of is that, t'other side of Bayport
village, the landscape got some less streaked and you could most
gen'rally separate one house from the next.

"Bradbury looked at Henrietta and smiled, a sort of sickly smile. She
was pretty pale, but she managed to smile back. I got up off the floor
and slumped on the cushions. As for Cap'n Jonadab Wixon, he'd stopped
yellin', but his face was one broad, serene grin. His mouth, through
the dust and the dirt caked around it, looked like a rain gully in a
sand-bank. And, occasional, he crowed, hoarse but vainglorious.

"'Did you see me?' he barked. 'Did you notice me lick him? He'll laugh
at me, will he?--him and his one-horse tin cart! Ho! HO! Why, you'd
think he was settin' down to rest! I've got him where I want him now!
Ho, ho! Say, Henrietta, did you go swift as you--? Land sakes! Mr.
Bradbury, I forgot all about you. And I--I guess we must have got a good
ways past the doctor's place.'

"Bradbury said never mind. He felt much better, and he cal'lated he'd do
till we fetched the Old Home dock. He'd take the wheel, now, he guessed.

"But, would you b'lieve it, that fool Jonadab wouldn't let him! He was
used to the ship now, he said, and, if 'twas all the same to Henry G.
and Hettie, he'd kind of like to run her into port.

"'She answers her hellum fine,' he says. 'After a little practice I
cal'late I could steer--'

"'Steer!' sings out Bradbury. 'STEER! Great Caesar's ghost! I give you
my word, Cap'n Wixon, I never saw such handlin' of a machine as you did
goin' through Bayport, in my life. You're a wonder!'

"'Um-hm,' says Jonadab contented. 'I've steered a good many vessels in
my time, through traffic and amongst the shoals, and never run afoul
of nothin' yet. I don't see much diff'rence on shore--'cept that it's a
little easier.'

"EASIER! Wouldn't that--Well, what's the use of talkin'?

"We got to the Old Home House safe and sound; Jonadab, actin' under
Bradbury's orders, run her into the yard, slowin' up and stoppin' at
the front steps slick as grease. He got out, his chest swelled up like
a puffin' pig, and went struttin' in to tell everybody what he'd done to
Loveland. I don't know where Bradbury and the widow went. As for me, I
went aloft and turned in. And 'twas two days and nights afore I got up
again. I had a cold, anyway, and what I'd been through didn't help it
none.

"The afternoon of the second day, Bradbury come up to see me. He was
dressed in his city clothes and looked as if he was goin' away. Sure
enough, he was; goin' on the next train.

"'Where's Jonadab?' says I.

"'Oh, he's out in his car,' he says. 'Huntin' for Loveland again,
maybe.'

"'HIS car? You mean yours.'

"'No, I mean his. I sold my car to him yesterday mornin' for twenty-five
hundred dollars cash.'

"I set up in bed. 'Go 'long!' I sings out. 'You didn't nuther!'

"'Yes, I did. Sure thing. After that ride, you couldn't have separated
him from that machine with blastin' powder. He paid over the money like
a little man.'

"I laid down again. Jonadab Wixon payin' twenty-five hundred dollars for
a plaything! Not promisin', but actually PAYIN' it!

"'Has--has the widow gone with him?' I asked, soon's I could get my
breath.

"He laughed sort of queer. 'No,' he says, 'she's gone out of town for
a few days. Ha, ha! Well, between you and me, Wingate, I doubt if
she comes back again. She and I have made all we're likely to in this
neighborhood, and she's too good a business woman to waste her time.
Good-by; glad to have met you.'

"But I smelt rat strong and wouldn't let him go without seein' the
critter.

"'Hold on!' I says. 'There's somethin' underneath all this. Out with it.
I won't let on to the Cap'n if you don't want me to.'

"'Well,' says he, laughin' again, 'Mrs. Bassett WON'T come back and
I know it. She and I have sold four cars on the Cape in the last five
weeks, and the profits'll more'n pay vacation expenses. Two up in
Wareham, one over in Orham, to Loveland--'

"'Did YOU sell Tobias his?' I asks, settin' up again.

"'Hettie and I did--yes. Soon's we landed him, we come over to bag old
Wixon. I thought one time he'd kill us before we got him, but he didn't.
How he did run that thing! He's a game sport.'

"'See here!' says I. 'YOU and Hettie sold--What do you mean by that?'

"'Mrs. Bassett is my backer in the auto business,' says he. 'She put in
her money and I furnished the experience. We've got a big plant up in--'
namin' a city in Connecticut.

"I fetched a long breath. 'WELL!' says I. 'And all this makin' eyes at
Tobe and Jonadab was just--just--'

"'Just bait, that's all,' says he. 'I told you she was a good business
woman.'

"I let this sink in good. Then says I, 'Humph! I swan to man! And how's
your heart actin' now?'

"'Fine!' he says, winkin'. 'I had that attack so's the Cap'n would learn
to run on his own hook. I didn't expect quite so much of a run, but
I'm satisfied. Don't you worry about my heart disease. That twenty-five
hundred cured it. 'Twas all in the way of business,' says Henry G.
Bradbury."

"Whew!" whistled Captain Hiram as Barzilla reached into his pocket for
pipe and tobacco. "Whew! I should say your partner had a narrer escape.
Want to look out sharp for widders. They're dangerous, hey, Sol?"

The depot master did not answer. Captain Hiram asked another question.
"How'd Jonadab take Hettie's leavin'?" he inquired.

"Oh," said Barzilla, "I don't think he minded so much. He was too crazy
about his new auto to care for anything else. Then, too, he was b'ilin'
mad 'cause Loveland swore out a warrant against him for speedin'.

"'Nice trick, ain't it?' he says. 'I knew Tobe was a poor loser, but
I didn't think he'd be so low down as all that. Says I was goin' fifty
mile an hour. He! he! Well, I WAS movin', that's a fact. I don't care.
'Twas wuth the twenty-dollar fine.'

"'Maybe so,' I says, 'but 'twon't look very pretty to have a special
auto constable hauled up and fined for breakin' the law he's s'posed to
protect.'

"He hadn't thought of that. His face clouded over.

"'No use, Barzilla,' says he; 'I'll have to give it up.'

"'Guess you will,' says I. 'Automobilin' is--'

"'I don't mean automobilin',' he snorts disgusted. 'Course not! I mean
bein' constable.'

"So there you are! From cussin' automobiles he's got so that he can't
talk enough good about 'em. And every day sence then he's out on the
road layin' for another chance at Tobias. I hope he gets that chance
pretty soon, because--well, there's a rumor goin' round that Loveland is
plannin' to swap his car for a bigger and faster one. If he does . . ."

"If he does," interrupted Captain Sol, "I hope you'll fix the next race
for over here. I'd like to see you go by, Barzilla."

"Guess you'd have to look quick to see him," laughed Stitt. "Speakin'
about automobiles--"

"By gum!" ejaculated Wingate, "you'd have to look somewheres else to
find ME. I've got all the auto racin' I want!"

"Speakin' of automobiles," began Captain Bailey again. No one paid the
slightest attention.

"How's Dusenberry, your baby, Hiram?" asked the depot master, turning to
Captain Baker. "His birthday's the Fourth, and that's only a couple of
days off."

The proud parent grinned, then looked troubled.

"Why, he ain't real fust-rate," he said. "Seems to be some under
the weather. Got a cold and kind of sore throat. Dr. Parker says he
cal'lates it's a touch of tonsilitis. There's consider'ble fever, too.
I was hopin' the doctor'd come again to-day, but he's gone away on
a fishin' cruise. Won't be home till late to-morrer. I s'pose me and
Sophrony hadn't ought to worry. Dr. Parker seems to know about the
case."

"Humph!" grunted the depot master, "there's only two bein's in creation
that know it all. One's the Almighty and t'other's young Parker. He's
right out of medical school and is just as fresh as his diploma. He
hadn't any business to go fishin' and leave his patients. We lost a
good man when old Dr. Ryder died. He . . . Oh, well! you mustn't
worry, Hiram. Dusenberry'll pull out in time for his birthday. Goin' to
celebrate, was you?"

Captain Baker nodded. "Um-hm," he said. "Sophrony's goin' to bake a
frosted cake and stick three candles on it--he's three year old, you
know--and I've made him a 'twuly boat with sails,' that's what he's been
beggin' for. Ho! ho! he's the cutest little shaver!"

"Speakin' of automobiles," began Bailey Stitt for the third time.

"That youngster of yours, Hiram," went on the depot master, "is the
right kind. Compared with some of the summer young ones that strike this
depot, he's a saint."

Captain Hiram grinned. "That's what I tell Sophrony," he said.
"Sometimes when Dusenberry gets to cuttin' up and she is sort of
provoked, I say to her, 'Old lady,' I say, 'if you think THAT'S a
naughty boy, you ought to have seen Archibald.'"

"Who was Archibald?" asked Barzilla.

"He was a young rip that Sim Phinney and I run across four years ago
when we went on our New York cruise together. The weir business had been
pretty good and Sim had been teasin' me to go on a vacation with him, so
I went. Sim ain't stopped talkin' about our experiences yet. Ho! ho!"

"You bet he ain't!" laughed the depot master. "One mix-up you had with
a priest, and a love story, and land knows what. He talks about that to
this day."

"What was it? He never told me," said Wingate.

"Why, it begun at the Golconda House, the hotel where Sim and I was
stayin'. We--"

"Did YOU put up at the Golconda?" interrupted Barzilla. "Why, Cap'n
Jonadab and me stayed there when we went to New York."

"I know you did. Jonadab recommended it to Sim, and Sim took the
recommendation. That Golconda House is the only grudge I've got against
Jonadab Wixon. It sartin is a tough old tavern."

"I give in to that. Jonadab's so sot on it account of havin' stopped
there on his honeymoon, years and years ago. He's too stubborn to
own it's bad. It's a matter of principle with him, and he's sot on
principle."

"Yes," continued Baker. "Well, Sim and me had been at that Golconda
three days and nights. Mornin' of the fourth day we walked out of the
dinin' room after breakfast, feelin' pretty average chipper. Gettin'
safe past another meal at that hotel was enough of itself to make a chap
grateful.

"We walked out of the dinin' room and into the office. And there, by the
clerk's desk, was a big, tall man, dressed up in clothes that was loud
enough to speak for themselves, and with a shiny new tall hat, set with
a list to port, on his head. He was smooth-faced and pug-nosed, with an
upper lip like a camel's.

"He didn't pay much attention to us, nor to anybody else, for the matter
of that. He was as mournful as a hearse, for all his joyful togs.

"'Fine day, ain't it?' says Sim, social.

"The tall chap looked up at him from under the deck of the beaver hat.

"'Huh!' he growls out, and looks down again.

"'I say it's a fine day,' said Phinney again.

"'I was after hearin' yez say it,' says the man, and walks off, scowlin'
like a meat ax. We looked after him.

"'Who was that murderer?' asks Sim of the clerk. 'And when are they
going to hang him?'

"'S-sh-sh!' whispers the clerk, scart. ''Tis the boss. The bloke what
runs the hotel. He's a fine man, but he has troubles. He's blue.'

"'So that's the boss, hey?' says I. 'And he's blue. Well, he looks it.
What's troublin' him? Ain't business good?'

"'Never better. It ain't that. He has things on his mind. You see--'

"I cal'late he'd have told us the yarn, only Sim wouldn't wait to hear
it. We was goin' sight-seein' and we had 'aquarium' and 'Stock Exchange'
on the list for that afternoon. The hotel clerk had made out a kind of
schedule for us of things we'd ought to see while we was in New York,
and so fur we'd took in the zoological menagerie and the picture museum,
and Central Park and Brooklyn Bridge.

"On the way downtown in the elevated railroad Sim done some preachin'.
His text was took from the Golconda House sign, which had 'T. Dempsey,
Proprietor,' painted on it.

"'It's that Dempsey man's conscience that makes him so blue, Hiram,'
says Sim. 'It's the way he makes his money. He sells liquor.'

"'Oh!' says I. 'Is THAT it? I thought maybe he'd been sleepin' on one
of his own hotel beds. THEY'RE enough to make any man blue--black and
blue.'

"The 'aquarium' wa'n't a success. Phinney was disgusted. He give one
look around, grabbed me by the arm, and marched me out of that building
same as Deacon Titcomb, of the Holiness Church at Denboro, marched his
boy out of the Universalist sociable.

"'It's nothin' but a whole passel of fish,' he snorts. 'The idea of
sendin' two Cape Codders a couple of miles to look at FISH. I've looked
at 'em and fished for 'em, and et 'em all the days of my life,' he says,
'and when I'm on a vacation I want a change. I'd forgot that "aquarium"
meant fish, or you wouldn't have got me within smellin' distance of
it. Necessity's one thing and pleasure's another, as the boy said about
takin' his ma's spring bitters.'

"So we headed for the Stock Exchange. We got our gallery tickets at the
bank where the Golconda folks kept money, and in a little while we was
leanin' over a kind of marble bulwarks and starin' down at a gang of men
smokin' and foolin' and carryin' on. 'Twas a dull day, so we found out
afterward, and I guess likely that was true. Anyway, I never see such
grown-up men act so much like children. There was a lot of poles stuck
up around with signs on 'em, and around every pole was a circle of
bedlamites hollerin' like loons. Hollerin' was the nighest to work
of anything I see them fellers do, unless 'twas tearin' up papers and
shovin' the pieces down somebody's neck or throwin' 'em in the air like
a play-actin' snowstorm.

"'What's the matter with 'em?' says I. 'High finance taken away their
brains?'

"But Phinney was awful interested. He dumped some money in a mine once.
The mine caved in on it, I guess, for not a red cent ever come to the
top again, but he's been a kind of prophet concernin' finances ever
sence.

"'I want to see the big fellers,' says he. 'S'pose that fat one is
Morgan?'

"'I don't know,' says I. 'Me and Pierpont ain't met for ever so long.
Don't lean over and point so; you're makin' a hit.'

"He was, too. Some of the younger crew on the floor was lookin' up and
grinnin', and more kept stoppin' and joinin' in all the time. I cal'late
we looked kind of green and soft, hangin' over that marble rail, like
posies on a tombstone; and green is the favorite color to a stockbroker,
they tell me. Anyhow, we had a good-sized congregation under us in
less than no time. Likewise, they got chatty, and commenced to unload
remarks.

"'Land sakes!' says one. 'How's punkins?'

"'How's crops down your way?' says another.

"Now there wa'n't nothin' real bright and funny about these
questions--more fresh than new, they struck me--but you'd think they
was gems from the comic almanac, jedgin' by the haw-haws. Next minute
a little bald-headed smart Alec, with clothes that had a tailor's sign
hull down and out of the race, steps to the front and commences to make
a speech.

"'Gosh t'mighty, gents,' says he. 'With your kind permission, I'll sing
"When Reuben Comes to Town."'

"And he did sing it, too, in a voice that needed cultivatin' worse'n
a sandy front yard. And with every verse the congregation whooped and
laughed and cheered. When the anthem was concluded, all hands set up a
yell and looked at us to see how we took it.

"As for me, I was b'ilin' mad and mortified and redhot all over. But Sim
Phinney was as cool as an October evenin'. Once in a while old Sim
comes out right down brilliant, and he done it now. He smiled, kind
of tolerant and easy, same as you might at the tricks of a hand-organ
monkey. Then he claps his hands, applaudin' like, reaches into his
pocket, brings up a couple of pennies, and tosses 'em down to little
baldhead, who was standin' there blown up with pride.

"For a minute the crowd was still. And THEN such a yell as went up! The
whole floor went wild. Next thing I knew the gallery was filled with
brokers, grabbin' us by the hands, poundin' us on the back, beggin' us
to come have a drink, and generally goin' crazy. We was solid with the
'system' for once in our lives. We could have had that whole buildin',
from marble decks to gold maintruck, if we'd said the word. Fifty
yellin' lunatics was on hand to give it to us; the other two hundred was
joyfully mutilatin' the baldhead.

"Well, I wanted to get away, and so did Sim, I guess; but the crowd
wouldn't let us. We'd got to have a drink; hogsheads of drinks. That was
the best joke on Eddie Lewisburg that ever was. Come on! We MUST come
on! Whee! Wow!

"I don't know how it would have ended if some one hadn't butted head
first through the mob and grabbed me by the shoulder. I was ready to
fight by this time, and maybe I'd have begun to fight if the chap who
grabbed me hadn't been a few inches short of seven foot high. And,
besides that, I knew him. 'Twas Sam Holden, a young feller I knew when
he boarded here one summer. His wife boarded here, too, only she wa'n't
his wife then. Her name was Grace Hargrave and she was a fine girl.
Maybe you remember 'em, Sol?"

The depot master nodded.

"I remember 'em well," he said. "Liked 'em both--everybody did."

"Yes. Well, he knew us and was glad to see us.

"'It IS you!' he sings out. 'By George! I thought it was when I came on
the floor just now. My! but I'm glad to see you. And Mr. Phinney, too!
Bully! Clear out and let 'em alone, you Indians.'

"The crowd didn't want to let us alone, but Sam got us clear somehow,
and out of the Exchange Buildin' and into the back room of a kind of
restaurant. Then he gets chairs for us, orders cigars, and shakes hands
once more.

"'To think of seein' you two in New York!' he says, wonderin'. 'What are
you doin' here? When did you come? Tell us about it.'

"So we told him about our pleasure cruise, and what had happened to us
so fur. It seemed to tickle him 'most to death.

"'Grace and I are keepin' house, in a modest way, uptown,' says Sam,
'and she'll be as glad to see you as I am. You're comin' up to dinner
with me to-night, and you're goin' to make us a visit, you know,' he
says.

"Well, if we didn't know it then, we learned it right away. Nothin'
that me or Simeon could say would make him change the course a point. So
Phinney went up to the Golconda House and got our bags, and at half-past
four that afternoon the three of us was in a hired hack bound uptown.

"On the way Sam was full of fun as ever. He laughed and joked, and asked
questions about East Harniss till you couldn't rest. All of a sudden he
slaps his knee and sings out:

"'There! I knew I'd forgotten somethin'. Our butler left yesterday,
and I was to call at the intelligence office on my way home and see if
they'd scared up a new one.'

"I looked at Simeon, and he at me.

"'Hum!' says I, thinkin' about that 'modest' housekeepin'. 'Do you keep
a butler?'

"'Not long,' says he, dry as a salt codfish. And that's all we could get
out of him.

"I s'pose there's different kinds of modesty. We hadn't more'n got
inside the gold-plated front door of that house when I decided that the
Holden brand of housekeepin' wa'n't bashful enough to blush. If I'D been
runnin' that kind of a place, the only time I'd felt shy and retirin'
was when the landlord came for the rent.

"One of the fo'mast hands--hired girls, I mean--went aloft to fetch Mrs.
Holden, and when Grace came down she was just as nice and folksy and
glad to see us as a body could be. But she looked sort of troubled, just
the same.

"'I'm ever so glad you're here,' says she to me and Simeon. 'But, oh,
Sam! it's a shame the way things happen. Cousin Harriet and Archie came
this afternoon to stay until to-morrow. They're on their way South.
And I have promised that you and I shall take Harriet to see Marlowe
to-night. Of course we won't do it now, under any consideration, but you
know what she is.'

"Sam seemed to know. He muttered somethin' that sounded like a Scripture
text. Simeon spoke up prompt.

"'Indeed you will,' says he, decided. 'Me and Hiram ain't that kind.
We've got relations of our own, and we know what it means when they
come a-visitin'. You and Mr. Holden'll take your comp'ny and go to
see--whatever 'tis you want to see, and we'll make ourselves to home
till you get back. Yes, you will, or we clear out this minute.'

"They didn't want to, but we was sot, and so they give in finally. It
seemed that this Cousin Harriet was a widow relation of the Holdens, who
lived in a swell country house over in Connecticut somewhere, and was
rich as the rest of the tribe. Archie was her son. 'Hers and the Evil
One's,' Sam said.

"We didn't realize how much truth there was in this last part until we
run afoul of Archie and his ma at dinner time. Cousin Harriet was tall
and middlin' slim, thirty-five years old, maybe, at a sale for
taxes, but discounted to twenty at her own valuation. She was got up
regardless, and had a kind of chronic, tired way of talkin', and a
condescendin' look to her, as if she was on top of Bunker Hill monument,
and all creation was on its knees down below. She didn't warm up to
Simeon and me much; eyed us over through a pair of gilt spyglasses, and
admitted that she was 'charmed, I'm sure.' Likewise, she was afflicted
with 'nerves,' which must be a divil of a disease--for everybody but the
patient, especial.

"Archie--his ma hailed him as 'Archibald, dear'--showed up pretty
soon in tow of his 'maid,' a sweet-faced, tired-out Irish girl named
Margaret. 'Archibald, dear,' was five years old or so, sufferin' from
curls and the lack of a lickin'. I never see a young one that needed a
strap ile more.

"'How d'ye do Archie?' says Simeon, holdin' out his hand.

"Archie didn't take the hand. Instead of that he points at Phinney and
commences to laugh.

"'Ho, ho!' says he, dancin' and pointin'. 'Look at the funny whiskers.'

"Sim wa'n't expectin' that, and it set him all aback, like he'd run into
a head squall. He took hold of his beard and looked foolish. Sam and
Grace looked ashamed and mad. Cousin Harriet laughed one of her lazy
laughs.

"'Archibald, de-ar,' she drawls, 'you mustn't speak that way. Now be
nice, and play with Margaret durin' dinner, that's a good boy.'

"'I won't,' remarks Archie, cheerful. 'I'm goin' to dine with you,
mama.'

"'Oh, no, you're not, dear. You'll have your own little table, and--'

"Then 'twas' Hi, yi!' 'Bow, wow!' Archibald wa'n't hankerin' for little
tables. He was goin' to eat with us, that's what. His ma, she argued
with him and pleaded, and he yelled and stamped and hurrahed. When
Margaret tried to soothe him he went at her like a wild-cat, and kicked
and pounded her sinful. She tried to take him out of the room, and then
Cousin Harriet come down on her like a scow load of brick.

"'Haven't I told you,' says she, sharp and vinegary, 'not to oppose the
child in that way? Archibald has such a sensitive nature,' she says to
Grace, 'that opposition arouses him just as it did me at his age. Very
well, dear; you MAY dine with us to-night, if you wish. Oh, my poor
nerves! Margaret, why don't you place a chair for Master Archibald? The
creature is absolutely stupid at times,' she says, talkin' about that
poor maid afore her face with no more thought for her feelin's than
if she was a wooden image. 'She has no tact whatever. I wouldn't have
Archibald's spirit broken for anything.'

"'Twas his neck that needed breakin' if you asked ME. That was a joyful
meal, now I tell you.

"There was more joy when 'twas over. Archie didn't want to go to bed,
havin' desires to set up and torment Simeon with questions about his
whiskers; askin' if they growed or was tied on, and things like that.
Course he didn't know his ma was goin' to the show, or he wouldn't have
let her. But finally he was coaxed upstairs by Margaret and a box of
candy, and, word havin' been sent down that he was asleep, Sam got
out his plug hat, and Grace and Cousin Harriet got on their fur-lined
dolmans and knit clouds, and was ready for the hack.

"'I feel mighty mean to go off and leave you this way,' says Sam to
me and Simeon. 'But you make yourself at home, won't you? This is your
house to-night, you know; servants and all.'

"'How about that boy's wakin' up?' says I.

"'Oh, his maid'll attend to him. If she needs any help you can give it
to her,' he says, winkin' on the side.

"But Cousin Harriet was right at his starboard beam, and she heard him.
She flew up like a settin' hen.

"'Indeed they will NOT!' she sings out. 'If anyone but Margaret was to
attempt to control Archibald, I don't dare think what might happen.
I shall not stir from this spot until these persons promise not to
interfere in ANY way; Archibald, dear, is such a sensitive child.'

"So we promised not to interfere, although Sim Phinney looked
disappointed when he done it. I could see that he'd had hopes afore he
give that promise."




CHAPTER XI

IN THE GREAT METROPOLIS


"So they left you and Sim Phinney to keep house, did they, Hiram?"
observed Wingate.

"They did. And, for a spell, we figgered on bein' free from too much
style.

"After they'd gone we loafed into the settin' room or libr'ry, or
whatever you call it, and come to anchor in a couple of big lazy chairs.

"'Now,' says I, takin' off my coat, 'we can be comf'table.'

"But we couldn't. In bobs a servant girl to know if we 'wanted
anything.' We didn't, but she looked so shocked when she see me in my
shirt sleeves that I put the coat on again, feelin' as if I'd ought
to blush. And in a minute back she comes to find out if we was SURE we
didn't want anything. Sim was hitchin' in his chair. Between 'nerves'
and Archibald, his temper was raw on the edges.

"'Say,' he bursts out, 'you look kind of pale to me. What you need is
fresh air. Why don't you go take a walk?'

"The girl looked at him with her mouth open.

"'Oh,' says she, 'I couldn't do that, thank you, sir. That would leave
no one but the cook and the kitchen girl. And the master said you was to
be made perfectly comf'table, and--'

"'Yes,' says Sim, dry, 'I heard him say it. And we can't be comf'table
with you shut up in the house this nice evenin'. Go and take a walk, and
take the cook and stewardess with you. Don't argue about it. I'm skipper
here till the boss gets back. Go, the three of you, and go NOW. D'ye
hear?'

"There was a little more talk, but not much. In five minutes or so the
downstairs front door banged, and there was gigglin' outside.

"'There,' says Simeon, peelin' off HIS coat and throwin' himself back in
one chair with his feet on another one. 'Now, by Judas, I'm goin' to be
homey and happy like poor folks. I don't wonder that Harriet woman's got
nerves. Darn style, anyhow! Pass over that cigar box, Hiram.'

"'Twas half an hour later or so when Margaret, the nursemaid, came
downstairs. I'd almost forgot her. We was tame and toler'ble contented
by that time. Phinney called to her as she went by the door.

"'Is that young one asleep?' he asked.

"'Yes, sir,' says she, 'he is. Is there anything I can do? Did you want
anything?'

"Simeon looks at me. 'I swan to man, it's catchin'!' he says. 'They've
all got it. No, we don't want anything, except--What's the matter? YOU
don't need fresh air, do you?'

"The girl looked as if she'd lost her last friend. Her pretty face was
pale and her eyes was wet, as if she'd been cryin'.

"'No, sir,' says she, puzzled. 'No, sir, thank you, sir.'

"'She's tired out, that's all,' says I. I swan, I pitied the poor thing.
'You go somewheres and take a nap,' I told her. 'Me and my friend won't
tell.'

"Oh, no, she couldn't do that. It wa'n't that she was tired--no more
tired than usual--but she'd been that troubled in her mind lately,
askin' our pardon, that she was near to crazy.

"We was sorry for that, but it didn't seem to be none of our business,
and she was turnin' away, when all at once she stops and turns back
again.

"'Might I ask you gintlemen a question?' she says, sort of pleadin'.
'Sure I mane no harm by it. Do aither of you know a man be the name of
Michael O'Shaughnessy?'

"Me and Sim looked at each other. 'Which?' says I. 'Mike O' who?' says
Simeon.

"'Aw, don't you know him?' she begs. 'DON'T you know him? Sure I hoped
you might. If you'd only tell me where he is I'd git on me knees and
pray for you. O Mike, Mike! why did you leave me like this? What'll
become of me?'

"And she walks off down the hall, coverin' her face with her hands and
cryin' as if her heart was broke.

"'There! there!' says Simeon, runnin' after her, all shook up. He's a
kind-hearted man--especially to nice-lookin' females. 'Don't act so,' he
says. 'Be a good girl. Come right back into the settin' room and tell
me all about it. Me and Cap'n Baker ain't got nerves, and we ain't rich,
neither. You can talk to us. Come, come!'

"She didn't know how to act, seemingly. She was like a dog that's been
kicked so often he's suspicious of a pat on the head. And she was cryin'
and sobbin' so, and askin' our pardon for doin' it, that it took a good
while to get at the real yarn. But we did get it, after a spell.

"It seems that the girl--her whole name was Margaret Sullivan--had
been in this country but a month or so, havin' come from Ireland in a
steamboat to meet the feller who'd kept comp'ny with her over there. His
name was Michael O'Shaughnessy, and he'd been in America for four years
or more, livin' with a cousin in Long Island City. And he'd got a good
job at last, and he sent for her to come on and be married to him.
And when she landed 'twas the cousin that met her. Mike had drawn a
five-thousand-dollar prize in the Mexican lottery a week afore, and
hadn't been seen sence.

"So poor Margaret goes to the cousin's to stay. And she found them poor
as Job's pet chicken, and havin' hardly grub enough aboard to feed the
dozen or so little cousins, let alone free boarders like her. And so,
havin' no money, she goes out one day to an intelligence office where
they deal in help, and puts in a blank askin' for a job as servant girl.
'Twas a swell place, where bigbugs done their tradin', and there she
runs into Cousin Harriet, who was a chronic customer, always out of
servants, owin' to the complications of Archibald and nerves. And
Harriet hires her, because she was pretty and would work for a shavin'
more'n nothin', and carts her right off to Connecticut. And when
Margaret sets out to write for her trunk, and to tell where she is, she
finds she's lost the cousin's address, and can't remember whether it's
Umpty-eighth Street or Tin Can Avenue.

"'And, oh,' says she, 'what SHALL I do? The mistress is that hard to
please, and the child is that wicked till I want to die. And I have no
money and no friends. O Mike! Mike!' she says. 'If you only knew you'd
come to me. For it's a good heart he has, although the five thousand
dollars carried away his head,' says she.

"I don't believe I ever wanted to make a feller's acquaintance more than
I done that O'Shaughnessy man's. The mean blackguard, to leave his girl
that way. And 'twas easy to see what she'd been through with Cousin
Harriet and that brat. We tried to comfort her all we could; promised to
have a hunt through Long Island and the directory, and to help get her
another place when she got back from the South, and so on. But 'twas
kind of unsatisfactory. 'Twas her Mike she wanted.

"'I told the Father about it at the church up there,' she says, 'and he
wrote, but the letters was lost, I guess. And I thought if I might see
a priest here in New York he might help me. But the mistress is to go at
noon to-morrer, and I'll have no time. What SHALL I do?' says she, and
commenced to cry again.

"Then I had an idea. 'Priest?' says I. 'There's a fine big church, with
a cross on the ridgepole of it, not five minutes' walk from this house.
I see it as we was comin' up. Why don't you run down there this minute?'
I says.

"No, she didn't want to leave Archibald. Suppose he should wake up.

"'All right,' says I. 'Then I'll go myself. And I'll fetch a priest up
here if I have to tote him on my back, like the feller does the codfish
in the advertisin' picture.'

"I didn't have to tote him. He lived in a mighty fine house, hitched
onto the church, and there was half a dozen assistant parsons to help
him do his preachin'. But he was big and fat and gray-haired and as
jolly and as kind-hearted a feller as you'd want to meet. He said he'd
come right along; and he done it.

"Phinney opened the door for us. 'What's the row?' says I, lookin' at
his face.

"'Row?' he snorts; 'there's row enough for six. That da--excuse me,
mister--that cussed Archibald has woke up.'

"He had; there wa'n't no doubt about it. And he was raisin' hob, too.
The candy, mixed up with the dinner, had put his works in line with his
disposition, and he was poundin' and yellin' upstairs enough to wake the
dead. Margaret leaned over the balusters.

"'Is it the Father?' she says. 'Oh, dear! what'll I do?'

"'Send some of the other servants to the boy,' says the priest, 'and
come down yourself.'

"Simeon, lookin' kind of foolish, explained what had become of the other
servants. Father McGrath--that was his name--laughed and shook all over.

"'Very well,' says he. 'Then bring the young man down. Perhaps he'll be
quiet here.'

"So pretty soon down come Margaret with Archibald, full of the Old
Scratch, as usual, dressed up gay in a kind of red blanket nighty, with
a rope around the middle of it. The young one spotted Simeon, and set up
a whoop.

"'Oh! there's the funny whiskers,' he sings out.

"'Good evenin', my son,' says the priest.

"'Who's the fat man?' remarks Archibald, sociable. 'I never saw such a
red fat man. What makes him so red and fat?'

"These questions didn't make Father McGrath any paler. He laughed, of
course, but not as if 'twas the funniest thing he ever heard.

"'So you think I'm fat, do you, my boy?' says he.

"'Yes, I do,' says Archibald. 'Fat and red and funny. Most as funny as
the whisker man. I never saw such funny-lookin' people.'

"He commenced to point and holler and laugh. Poor Margaret was so
shocked and mortified she didn't know what to do.

"'Stop your noise, sonny,' says I. 'This gentleman wants to talk to your
nurse.'

"The answer I got was some unexpected.

"'What makes your feet so big?' says Archie, pointin' at my Sunday
boots. 'Why do you wear shoes like that? Can't you help it? You're
funny, too, aren't you? You're funnier than the rest of 'em.'

"We all went into the library then, and Father McGrath tried to ask
Margaret some questions. I'd told him the heft of the yarn on the way
from the church, and he was interested. But the questionin' was mighty
unsatisfyin'. Archibald was the whole team, and the rest of us was
yeller dogs under the wagon.

"'Can't you keep that child quiet?' asks the priest, at last, losin' his
temper and speakin' pretty sharp.

"'O Archie, dear! DO be a nice boy,' begs Margaret, for the eight
hundredth time.

"'Why don't you punish him as he deserves?'

"'Father, dear, I can't. The mistress says he's so sensitive that he has
to have his own way. I'd lose my place if I laid a hand on him.'

"'Come on into the parlor and see the pictures, Archie,' says I.

"'I won't,' says Archibald. 'I'm goin' to stay here and see the fat man
make faces.'

"'You see,' says Sim, apologizin' 'we can't touch him, 'cause we
promised his ma not to interfere. And my right hand's got cramps in the
palm of it this minute,' he adds, glarin' at the young one.

"Father McGrath stood up and reached for his hat. Margaret began to cry.
Archibald, dear, whooped and kicked the furniture. And just then the
front-door bell rang.

"For a minute I thought 'twas Cousin Harriet and the Holdens come back,
but then I knew it was hours too early for that. Margaret was too much
upset to be fit for company, so I answered the bell myself. And who in
the world should be standin' on the steps but that big Dempsey man, the
boss of the Golconda House, where me and Simeon had been stayin'; the
feller we'd spoke to that very mornin'.

"'Good evenin', sor,' says he, in a voice as deep as a well. 'I'm glad
to find you to home, sor. There's a telegram come for you at my place,'
he says, 'and as your friend lift the address when he come for the
baggage this afternoon, I brought it along to yez. I was comin' this
way, so 'twas no trouble.'

"'That's real kind of you,' I says. 'Step inside a minute, won't you?'

"So in he comes, and stands, holdin' his shiny beaver in his hand, while
I tore open the telegram envelope. 'Twas a message from a feller I knew
with the Clyde Line of steamboats. He had found out, somehow, that we
was in New York, and the telegram was an order for us to come and make
him a visit.

"'I hope it's not bad news, sor,' says the big chap.

"'No, no,' says I. 'Not a bit of it, Mr. Dempsey. Come on in and have a
cigar, won't you?'

"'Thank you, sor,' says he. 'I'm glad it's not the bad news. Sure, I ax
you and your friend's pardon for bein' so short to yez this mornin', but
I'm in that throuble lately that me timper is all but gone.'

"'That so?' says I. 'Trouble's thick in this world, ain't it? Me and Mr.
Phinney got a case of trouble on our hands now, Mr. Dempsey, and--'

"'Excuse me, sor,' he says. 'My name's not Dempsey. I suppose you seen
the sign with me partner's name on it. I only bought into the business
a while ago, and the new sign's not ready yit. Me name is O'Shaughnessy,
sor.'

"'What?' says I. And then: 'WHAT?'

"'O'Shaughnessy. Michael O'Shaughnessy. I--'

"'Hold on!' I sung out. 'For the land sakes, hold on! WHAT'S your name?'

"He bristled up like a cat.

"'Michael O'Shaughnessy,' he roars, like the bull of Bashan. 'D'yez
find any fault with it? 'Twas me father's before me--Michael Patrick
O'Shaughnessy, of County Sligo. I'll have yez know--WHAT'S THAT?'

"'Twas a scream from the libr'ry. Next thing I knew, Margaret, the nurse
girl, was standin' in the hall, white as a Sunday shirt, and swingin'
back and forth like a wild-carrot stalk in a gale.

"'Mike!' says she, kind of low and faint. 'Mary be good to us! MIKE!'

"And the big chap dropped his tall hat on the floor and turned as white
as she was.

"'MAGGIE!' he hollers. And then they closed in on one another.

"Sim and the priest and Archie had followed the girl into the hall. Me
and Phinney was too flabbergasted to do anything, but big Father McGrath
was cool as an ice box. When Archibald, like the little imp he was, sets
up a whoop and dives for them two, the priest grabs him by the rope of
the blanket nighty and swings him into the libr'ry, and shuts the door
on him.

"'And now,' says he, takin' Sim and me by the arms and leadin' us to the
parlor, 'we'll just step in here and wait a bit.'

"We waited, maybe, ten minutes. Archibald, dear, shut up in the libr'ry,
was howlin' blue murder, but nobody paid any attention to him. Then
there was a knock on the door between us and the hall, and Father
McGrath opened it. There they was, the two of 'em--Mike and
Maggie--lookin' red and foolish--but happy, don't talk!

"'You see, sor,' says the O'Shaughnessy man to me, ''twas the
five-thousand-dollar prize that done it. I'd been workin' at me trade,
sor--larnin' to tind bar it was--and I'd just got a new job where the
pay was pretty good, and I'd sint over for Maggie, and was plannin' for
the little flat we was to have, and the like of that, when I drew that
prize. And the joy of it was like handin' me a jolt on the jaw. It put
me out for two weeks, sor, and when I come to I was in Baltimore, where
I'd gone to collect the money; and two thousand of the five was gone,
and I knew me job in New York was gone, and I was that shamed and sick
it took me three days more to make up me mind to come to me Cousin
Tim's, where I knew Maggie'd be waitin' for me. And when I did come back
she was gone, too.'

"'And then,' says Father McGrath, sharp, 'I suppose you went on another
spree, and spent the rest of the money.'

"'I did not, sor--axin' your pardon for contradictin' your riverence.
I signed the pledge, and I'll keep it, with Maggie to help me. I put
me three thousand into a partnership with me friend Dempsey, who was
runnin' the Golconda House--'tis over on the East Side, with a fine bar
trade--and I'm doin' well, barrin' that I've been crazy for this poor
girl, and advertisin' and--'

"'And look at the clothes of him!' sings out Margaret, reverentlike.
'And is that YOUR tall hat, Mike? To think of you with a tall hat! Sure
it's a proud girl I am this day. Saints forgive me, I've forgot Archie!'

"And afore we could stop her she'd run into the hall and unfastened
the libr'ry door. It took her some time to smooth down the young one's
sensitive feelin's, and while she was gone, me and Simeon told the
O'Shaughnessy man a little of what his girl had had to put up with along
of Cousin Harriet and Archibald. He was mad.

"'Is that the little blackguard?' he asks, pointin' to Archibald, who
had arrived by now.

"'That's the one,' says I.

"Archibald looked up at him and grinned, sassy as ever.

"'Father McGrath,' asks O'Shaughnessy, determined like, 'can you marry
us this night?'

"'I can,' says the Father.

"'And will yez?'

"'I will, with pleasure.'

"'Maggie,' says Mike, 'get your hat and jacket on and come with the
Father and me this minute. These gintlemen here will explain to your
lady when she comes back. But YOU'LL come back no more. We'll send for
your trunk to-morrer.'

"Even then the girl hesitated. She'd been so used to bein' a slave that
I suppose she couldn't realize she was free at last.

"'But, Mike, dear,' she says. 'I--oh, your lovely hat! Put it down,
Archie, darlin'. Put it down!'

"Archibald had been doin' a little cruisin' on his own hook, and he'd
dug up Mike's shiny beaver where it had been dropped in the hall. Now he
was dancin' round with it, bangin' it on the top as if it was a drum.

"'Put it down, PLEASE!' pleads Margaret. 'Twas plain that that plug was
a crown of glory to her.

"'Drop it, you little thafe!' yells O'Shaughnessy, makin' a dive for the
boy.

"'I won't!' screams Archibald, and starts to run. He tripped over the
corner of a mat, and fell flat. The plug hat was underneath him, and it
fell flat, too.

"'Oh! oh! oh!' wails Margaret, wringin' her hands. 'Your beautiful hat,
Mike!'

"Mike's face was like a sunset.

"'Your reverence,' says he, 'tell me this; don't the wife promise to
"obey" in the marriage service?'

"'She does,' says Father McGrath.

"'D'ye hear that, you that's to be Margaret O'Shaughnessy? You do? Well,
then, as your husband that's to be in tin minutes, I order you to give
that small divil what's comin' to him. D'ye hear me? Will yez obey me,
or will yez not?'

"She didn't know what to do. You could see she wanted to--her fingers
was itchin' to do it, but--And then Archie held up the ruins of the hat
and commenced to laugh.

"That settled it. Next minute he was across her knee and gettin' what
he'd been sufferin' for ever sence he was born; and gettin' all the back
numbers along with it, too.

"And in the midst of the performance Sim Phinney leans over to me with
the most heavenly, resigned expression on his face, and says he:

"'It ain't OUR fault, Hiram. We promised not to interfere.'"

"What did Sam Holden and his wife say when they got home?" asked Captain
Sol, when the triumphant whoops over Archibald's righteous chastisement
had subsided.

"We didn't give him much of a chance to say anything. I laid for him in
the hall when he arrived and told him that Phinney had got a telegram
and must leave immediate. He wanted to know why, and a whole lot more,
but I told him we'd write it. Neither Sim nor me cared to face Cousin
Harriet after her darlin' son had spun his yarn. Ha! ha! I'd like to
have seen her face--from a safe distance."

Captain Bailey Stitt cleared his throat. "Referrin' to them
automobiles," he said, "I--"

"Say, Sol," interrupted Wingate, "did I ever tell you of Cap'n Jonadab's
and my gettin' took up by the police when WE was in New York?"

"No," replied the astounded depot master. "Took up by the POLICE?"

"Um--hm. Surprises you, don't it? Well, that whole trip was a surprise
to me.

"When Laban Thorp set out to thrash his son and the boy licked him
instead, they found the old man settin' in the barnyard, holdin' on to
his nose and grinnin' for pure joy.

"'Hurt?' says he. 'Why, some. But think of it! Only think of it! I
didn't believe Bill had it in him.'

"Well, that's the way I felt when Cap'n Jonadab sprung the New York plan
on to me. I was pretty nigh as much surprised as Labe. The idea of a man
with a chronic case of lockjaw of the pocketbook, same as Jonadab had
worried along under ever sence I knew him, suddenly breakin' loose with
a notion to go to New York on a pleasure cruise! 'Twas too many for me.
I set and looked at him.

"'Oh, I mean it, Barzilla,' he says. 'I ain't been to New York sence I
was mate on the Emma Snow, and that was 'way back in the eighties. That
is, to stop I ain't. That time we went through on the way to Peter T.'s
weddin' don't count, 'cause we only went in the front door and out the
back, like Squealer Wixon went through high school. Let's you and me go
and stay two or three days and have a real high old time,' says he.

"I fetched a long breath. 'Jonadab,' I says, don't scare a feller this
way; I've got a weak heart. If you're goin' to start in and be divilish
in your old age, why, do it kind of gradual. Let's go over to the
billiard room and have a bottle of sass'parilla and a five-cent cigar,
just to break the ice.'

"But that only made him mad.

"'You talk like a fish,' he says. 'I mean it. Why can't we go? It's
September, the Old Home House is shut up for the season, you and me's
done well--fur's profits are concerned--and we ought to have a change,
anyway. We've got to stay here in Orham all winter.'

"'Have you figgered out how much it's goin' to cost?' I asked him.

"Yes, he had. 'It won't be so awful expensive,' he says. 'I've got some
stock in the railroad and that'll give me a pass fur's Fall River. And
we can take a lunch to eat on the boat. And a stateroom's a dollar;
that's fifty cents apiece. And my daughter's goin' to Denboro on a
visit next week, so I'd have to pay board if I stayed to home. Come on,
Barzilla! don't be so tight with your money.'

"So I said I'd go, though I didn't have any pass, nor no daughter to
feed me free gratis for nothin' when I got back. And when we started,
on the followin' Monday, nothin' would do but we must be at the depot
at two o'clock so's not to miss the train, which left at quarter past
three.

"I didn't sleep much that night on the boat. For one thing, our
stateroom was a nice lively one, alongside of the paddle box and just
under the fog whistle; and for another, the supper that Jonadab had
brought, bein' mainly doughnuts and cheese, wa'n't the best cargo to
take to bed with you. But it didn't make much diff'rence, 'cause we
turned out at four, so's to see the scenery and git our money's worth.
What was left of the doughnuts and cheese we had for breakfast.

"We made the dock on time, and the next thing was to pick out a hotel.
I was for cruisin' along some of the main streets until we hove in sight
of a place that looked sociable and not too expensive. But no; Jonadab
had it all settled for me. We was goin' to the 'Wayfarer's Inn,' a
boardin' house where he'd put up once when he was mate of the Emma Snow.
He said 'twas a fine place and you could git as good ham and eggs there
as a body'd want to eat.

"So we set sail for the 'Wayfarer's,' and of all the times gittin' to a
place--don't talk! We asked no less than nine policemen and one hundred
and two other folks, and it cost us thirty cents in car fares, which
pretty nigh broke Jonadab's heart. However, we found it, finally, 'way
off amongst a nest of brick houses and peddler carts and children, and
it wa'n't the 'Wayfarer's Inn' no more, but was down in the shippin'
list as the 'Golconda House.' Jonadab said the neighborhood had changed
some sence he was there, but he guessed we'd better chance it, 'cause
the board was cheap.

"We had a nine-by-ten room up aloft somewheres, and there we set down on
the edge of the bed and a chair to take account of stock, as you might
say.

"'Now, I tell you, Jonadab,' says I; 'we don't want to waste no time,
and we've got the day afore us. What do you say if we cruise along
the water front for a spell? There's ha'f a dozen Orham folks aboard
diff'rent steamers that hail from this port, and 'twouldn't be no more'n
neighborly to call on 'em. There's Silas Baker's boy, Asa--he's with the
Savannah Line and he'd be mighty glad to see us. And there's--'

"But Jonadab held up his hand. He'd been mysterious as a baker's mince
pie ever sence we started, hintin' at somethin' he'd got to do when we'd
got to New York. And now he out with it.

"'Barzilla,' he says, 'I ain't sayin' but what I'd like to go to the
wharves with you, first rate. And we will go, too. But afore we do
anything else I've got an errand that must be attended to. 'Twas give
to me by a dyin' man,' he says, 'and I promised him I'd do it. So that
comes first of all.'

"He got his wallet out of his inside vest pocket, where it had been
pinned in tight to keep it safe from robbers, unwound a foot or so of
leather strap, and dug up a yeller piece of paper that looked old enough
to be Methusalem's will, pretty nigh.

"'Do you remember Patrick Kelly in Orham?' he asks.

"'Who?' says I. 'Pat Kelly, the Irishman, that lived in the little old
shack back of your barn? Course I do. But he's been dead for I don't
know how long.'

"'I know he has. Do you remember his boy Jim that run away from home?'

"'Let's see,' I says. 'Seems to me I do. Freckled, red-headed rooster,
wa'n't he? And of all the imps of darkness that ever--'

"'S-sh-sh!' he interrupted solemn. 'Don't say that now, Barzilla. Sounds
kind of irreverent. Well, me and old Pat was pretty friendly, in a way,
though he did owe me rent. When he was sick with the pleurisy he sends
for me and he says, "Cap'n 'Wixon," says he, "you're pretty close with
the money," he says--he was kind of out of his head at the time and
liable to say foolish things--"you're pretty close," he says, "but
you're a man of your word. My boy Jimmie, that run away, was the apple
of my eye."'

"'That's what he said about his girl Maggie that was took up for
stealin' Mrs. Elkanah Higgins's spoons,' I says. 'He had a healthy crop
of apples in HIS orchard.'

"'S-sh-h! DON'T talk so! I feel as if the old man's spirit was with
us this minute. "He's the apple of my eye," he says, "and he run away,
after me latherin' the life out of him with a wagon spoke. 'Twas all
for his good, but he didn't understand, bein' but a child. And now I've
heard," he says, "that he's workin' at 116 East Blank Street in the city
of New York. Cap'n Wixon, you're a man of money and a travelin' man," he
says (I was fishin' in them days). "When you go to New York," he says,
"I want you to promise me to go to the address on this paper and hunt
up Jimmie. Tell him I forgive him for lickin' him," he says, "and die
happy. Will you promise me that, Cap'n, on your word as a gentleman?"
And I promised him. And he died in less than ten months afterwards, poor
thing.'

"'But that was sixteen--eighteen--nineteen years ago,' says I. 'And the
boy run away three years afore that. You've been to New York in the past
nineteen years, once anyhow.'

"'I know it. But I forgot. I'm ashamed of it, but I forgot. And when
I was goin' through the things up attic at my daughter's last Friday,
seein' what I could find for the rummage sale at the church, I come
across my old writin' desk, and in it was this very piece of paper with
the address on it just as I wrote it down. And me startin' for New York
in three days! Barzilla, I swan to man, I believe something SENT me to
that attic.'

"I knew what sent him there and so did the church folks, judgin' by
their remarks when the contribution came in. But I was too much set back
by the whole crazy business to say anything about that.

"'Look here, Jonadab Wixon,' I sings out, 'do you mean to tell me that
we've got to put in the whole forenoon ransackin' New York to find a boy
that run off twenty-two years ago?'

"'It won't take the forenoon,' he says. 'I've got the number, ain't I?'

"'Yes, you've got the number where he WAS. If you want to know where I
think he's likely to be now, I'd try the jail.'

"But he said I was unfeelin' and disobligin' and lots more, so, to cut
the argument short, I agreed to go. And off we put to hunt up 116
East Blank Street. And when we located it, after a good hour of askin'
questions, and payin' car fares and wearin' out shoe leather, 'twas a
Chinese laundry.

"'Well,' I says, sarcastic, 'here we be. Which one of the heathen do you
think is Jimmie? If he had an inch or so more of upper lip, I'd gamble
on that critter with the pink nighty and the baskets on his feet. He has
a kind of familiar chicken-stealin' look in his eye. Oh, come down on
the wharves, Jonadab, and be sensible.'

"Would you believe it, he wa'n't satisfied. We must go into the wash
shop and ask the Chinamen if they knew Jimmie Kelly. So we went in and
the powwow begun.

"'Twas a mighty unsatisfyin' interview. Jonadab's idea of talkin' to
furriners is to yell at 'em as if they was stone deef. If they don't
understand what you say, yell louder. So between his yells and the
heathen's jabber and grunts the hullabaloo was worse than a cat in a hen
yard. Folks begun to stop outside the door and listen and grin.

"'What did he say?' asks the Cap'n, turnin' to me.

"'I don't know,' says I, 'but I cal'late he's gettin' ready to send
a note up to the crazy asylum. Come on out of here afore I go loony
myself.'

"So he done it, finally, cross as all get out, and swearin' that all
Chinese was no good and oughtn't to be allowed in this country. But he
wouldn't give up, not yet. He must scare up some of the neighbors and
ask them. The fifth man that we asked was an old chap who remembered
that there used to be a liquor saloon once where the laundry was now.
But he didn't know who run it or what had become of him.

"'Never mind,' I says. 'You're as warm as you're likely to be this trip.
A rum shop is just about the place I'd expect that Kelly boy WOULD be
in. And, if he's like the rest of his relations on his dad's side, he
drank himself to death years ago. NOW will you head for the Savannah
Line?'

"Not much, he wouldn't. He had another notion. We'd look in the
directory. That seemed to have a glimmer of sense somewheres in its
neighborhood, so we found an apothecary store and the clerk handed us
out a book once again as big as a church Bible.

"'Kelly,' says Jonadab. 'Yes, here 'tis. Now, "James Kelly." Land of
Love! Barzilla, look here.'

"I looked, and there wa'n't no less than a dozen pages of James Kellys
beginning with fifty James A.'s and endin' with four James Z.'s. The Y
in 'New York' ought to be a C, judgin' by that directory.

"'Godfrey mighty!' I says. 'This ain't no forenoon's job, Jonadab. If
you're goin' through that list you'll have to spend the rest of your
life here. Only, unless you want to be lonesome, you'll have to change
your name to Kelly.'

"'If I'd only got his middle letter,' says he, mournful, ''twould have
been easier. He had four middle names, if I remember right--the old man
was great on names--and 'twas too much trouble to write 'em all down.
Well, I've done my duty, anyhow. We'll go and call on Ase Baker.'

"But 'twas after eleven o'clock then, and the doughnuts and cheese I
had for breakfast was beginnin' to feel as if they wanted company. So we
decided to go back to the Golconda and have some dinner first.

"We had ham and eggs for dinner, some that was left over from the last
time Jonadab stopped there, I cal'late. Lucky there was hot bread and
coffee on the bill or we'd never got a square meal. Then we went up to
our room and the Cap'n laid down on the bed. He was beat out, he said,
and wanted to rest up a spell afore haulin' anchor for another cruise."




CHAPTER XII

A VISION SENT


"Where's the arrestin' come in?" demanded Stitt.

"Comes quick now, Bailey. Plenty quick enough for me and Jonadab, I tell
you that! After we got to our room the Cap'n went to sleep pretty soon
and I set in the one chair, readin' the newspaper and wishin' I hadn't
ate so many of the warm bricks that the Golconda folks hoped was
biscuit. They made me feel like a schooner goin' home in ballast. I
guess I was drowsin' off myself, but there comes a most unearthly yell
from the bed and I jumped ha'f out of the chair. There was Jonadab
settin' up and lookin' wild.

"'What in the world?' says I.

"'Oh! Ugh! My soul!' says he.

"'Your soul, hey?' says I. 'Is that all? I thought mebbe you'd lost a
quarter.'

"'Barzilla,' he says, comin' to and starin' at me solemn, 'Barzilla,
I've had a dream--a wonderful dream.'

"'Well,' I says, 'I ain't surprised. A feller that h'isted in as much
fried dough as you did ought to expect--'

"'But I tell you 'twas a WONDERFUL dream,' he says. 'I dreamed I was on
Blank Street, where we was this mornin', and Patrick Kelly comes to me
and p'ints his finger right in my face. I see him as plain as I see
you now. And he says to me--he said it over and over, two or three
times--Seventeen," says he, "Seventeen." Now what do you think of that?'

"'Humph!' I says. 'I ain't surprised. I think 'twas just seventeen
of them biscuits that you got away with. Wonder to me you didn't see
somebody worse'n old Pat.'

"But he was past jokin'. You never see a man so shook up by the
nightmare as he was by that one. He kept goin' over it and tellin' how
natural old Kelly looked and how many times he said 'Seventeen' to him.

"'Now what did he mean by it?' he says. 'Don't tell me that was a common
dream, 'cause twa'n't. No, sir, 'twas a vision sent to me, and I know
it. But what did he mean?'

"'I think he meant you was seventeen kinds of an idiot,' I snorts,
disgusted. 'Get up off that bed and stop wavin' your arms, will you?
He didn't mean for you to turn yourself into a windmill, that's sartin
sure.'

"Then he hits his knee a slap that sounds like a window blind blowin'
to. 'I've got it!' he sings out. 'He meant for me to go to number
seventeen on that street. That's what he meant.'

"I laughed and made fun of him, but I might as well have saved my
breath. He was sure Pat Kelly's ghost had come hikin' back from the
hereafter to tell him to go to 17 Blank Street and find his boy. 'Else
why was he ON Blank Street?' he says. 'You tell me that.'

"I couldn't tell him. It's enough for me to figger out what makes live
folks act the way they do, let alone dead ones. And Cap'n Jonadab was a
Spiritu'list on his mother's side. It ended by my agreein' to give the
Jimmie chase one more try.

"'But it's got to be the last,' I says. 'When you get to number
seventeen don't you say you think the old man meant to say "seventy" and
stuttered.'

"Number 17 Blank Street was a little combination fruit and paper store
run by an Eyetalian with curly hair and the complexion of a molasses
cooky. His talk sounded as if it had been run through a meat chopper.
All he could say was, 'Nica grape, genta'men? On'y fifteen cent a pound.
Nica grape? Nica apple? Nica pear? Nica ploom?'

"'Kelly?' says Jonadab, hollerin' as usual. 'Kelly! d'ye understand?
K-E-L-Kel L-Y-ly, Kelly. YOU know, KELLY! We want to find him.'

"And just then up steps a feller about six feet high and three foot
through. He was dressed in checkerboard clothes, some gone to seed, and
you could hardly see the blue tie he had on for the glass di'mond in
it. Oh, he was a little wilted now--for the lack of water, I judge--but
'twas plain that he'd been a sunflower in his time. He'd just come out
of a liquor store next door to the fruit shop and was wipin' his mouth
with the back of his hand.

"'What's this I hear?' says he, fetchin' Jonadab a welt on the back like
a mast goin' by the board. 'Is it me friend Kelly you're lookin' for?'

"I was just goin' to tell him no, not likin' his looks, but Jonadab cut
in ahead of me, out of breath from the earthquake the feller had landed
him, but excited as could be.

"'Yes, yes!' says he. 'It's Mr. Kelly we want. Do you know him?'

"'Do I know him? Why, me bucko, 'tis me old college chum he is. Come on
with me and we'll give him the glad hand.'

"He grabs Jonadab by the arm and starts along the sidewalk, steerin' a
toler'ble crooked course, but gainin' steady by jerks.

"'I was on me way to Kelly's place now,' says he. 'And here it is. Sure
didn't I bate the bookies blind on Rosebud but yesterday--or was it the
day before? I don't know, but come on, me lads, and we'll do him again.'

"He turned in at a little narrer entry-like, and went stumblin' up a
flight of dirty stairs. I caught hold of Jonadab's coat tails and pulled
him back.

"'Where you goin', you crazy loon?' I whispered. 'Can't you see he's
three sheets in the wind? And you haven't told him what Kelly you want,
nor nothin'.'

"But I might as well have hollered at a stone wall. 'I don't care if
he's as fur gone in liquor as Belshazzer's goat,' sputters the Cap'n,
all worked up. 'He's takin' us to a Kelly, ain't he? And is it likely
there'd be another one within three doors of the number I dreamed
about? Didn't I tell you that dream was a vision sent? Don't lay to NOW,
Barzilla, for the land sakes! It's Providence a-workin'.'

"'Cording to my notion the sunflower looked more like an agent from
t'other end of the line than one from Providence, but just then he
commenced to yell for us and upstairs we went, Jonadab first.

"'Whisht!' says the checkerboard, holdin' on to Jonadab's collar and
swingin' back and forth. 'Before we proceed to blow in on me friend
Kelly, let us come to an understandin' concernin' and touchin'
on--and--and--I don't know. But b'ys,' says he, solemn and confidential,
'are you on the square? Are yez dead game sports, hey?'

"'Yes, yes!' says Jonadab. 'Course we be. Mr. Kelly and us are old
friends. We've come I don't know how fur on purpose to see him. Now
where's--'

"'Say no more,' hollers the feller. 'Say no more. Come on with yez.' And
he marches down the dark hall to a door with a 'To let' sign on it and
fetches it a bang with his fist. It opens a little ways and a face shows
in the crack.

"'Hello, Frank!' hails the sunflower, cheerful. 'Will you take that ugly
mug of yours out of the gate and lave me friends in?'

"'What's the matter wid you, Mike?' asks the chap at the door. 'Yer
can't bring them two yaps in here and you know it. Gwan out of this.'

"He tried to shut the door, but the checkerboard had his foot between it
and the jamb. You might as well have tried to shove in the broadside of
an ocean liner as to push against that foot.

"'These gents are friends of mine,' says he. 'Frank, I'll do yez the
honor of an introduction to Gin'ral Grant and Dan'l O'Connell. Open that
door and compose your face before I'm obliged to break both of 'em.'

"'But I tell you, Mike, I can't,' says the door man, lookin' scared.
'The boss is out, and you know--'

"'WILL you open that door?' roars the big chap. And with that he hove
his shoulder against the panels and jammed the door open by main force,
all but flattenin' the other feller behind it. 'Walk in, Gin'ral,' he
says to Jonadab, and in we went, me wonderin' what was comin' next, and
not darin' to guess.

"There was a kind of partitioned off hallway inside, with another door
in the partition. We opened that, and there was a good-sized room,
filled with men, smokin' and standin' around. A high board fence was
acrost one end of the room, and from behind it comes a jinglin' of
telephone bells and the sounds of talk. The floor was covered with
torn papers, the window blinds was shut, the gas was burnin' blue, and,
between it and the smoke, the smells was as various as them in a fish
glue factory. On the fence was a couple of blackboards with 'Belmont'
and 'Brighton' and suchlike names in chalk wrote on 'em, and
beneath that a whole mess in writin' and figures like, 'Red Tail
4--Wt--108--Jock Smith--5--1,' 'Sourcrout 5--Wt--99--Jock Jones--20--5,'
and similar rubbish. And the gang--a mighty mixed lot--was scribblin'
in little books and watchin' each other as if they was afraid of havin'
their pockets picked; though, to look at 'em, you'd have guessed the
biggest part had nothin' in their pockets but holes.

"The six-foot checkerboard--who, it turned out, answered to the hail of
'Mike'--seemed to be right at home with the gang. He called most of 'em
by their first names and went sasshayin' around, weltin' 'em on the back
and tellin' 'em how he'd 'put crimps in the bookies rolls t'other day,'
and a lot more stuff that they seemed to understand, but was hog Greek
to me and Jonadab. He'd forgot us altogether which was a mercy the way I
looked at it, and I steered the Cap'n over into a corner and we come to
anchor on a couple of rickety chairs.

"'What--why--what kind of a place IS this, Barzilla?' whispers Jonadab,
scared.

"'Sh-h-h!' says I. 'Land knows. Just set quiet and hang on to your
watch.'

"'But--but I want to find Kelly,' says he.

"'I'd give somethin' to find a back door,' says I. 'Ain't this a
collection of dock rats though! If this is a part of your dream,
Jonadab, I wish you'd turn over and wake up. Oh land! here's one
murderer headin' this way. Keep your change in your fist and keep the
fist shut.'

"A more'n average rusty peep, with a rubber collar on and no necktie,
comes slinkin' over to us. He had a smile like a crack in a plate.

"'Say, gents,' he says, 'have you made your bets yet? I've got a dead
straight line on the handicap,' says he, 'and I'll put you next for a
one spot. It's a sure t'ing at fifteen to three. What do you say?'

"I didn't say nuthin'; but that fool dream was rattlin' round in
Jonadab's skull like a bean in a blowgun, and he sees a chance for a
shot.

"'See here, mister,' he says. 'Can you tell me where to locate Mr.
Kelly?'

"'Who--Pete?' says the feller. 'Oh, he ain't in just now. But about that
handicap. I like the looks of youse and I'll let youse in for a dollar.
Or, seein' it's you, we'll say a half. Only fifty cents. I wouldn't do
better for my own old man,' he says.

"While the Cap'n was tryin' to unravel one end of this gibberish I spoke
up prompt.

"'Say,' says I, 'tell me this, will you? Is the Kelly who owns
this--this palace, named Jimmie--James, I mean?'

"'Naw,' says he. 'Sure he ain't. It's Pete Kelly, of course--Silver
Pete. But what are you givin' us? Are you bettin' on the race, or ain't
you?'

"Well, Jonadab understood that. He bristled up like a brindled cat.
If there's any one thing the Cap'n is down on, it's gamblin' and
such--always exceptin' when he knows he's won already. You've seen that
kind, maybe.

"'Young feller,' he says, perkish, 'I want you to know that me and my
friend ain't the bettin' kind. What sort of a hole IS this, anyway?'

"The rubber collared critter backed off, lookin' worried. He goes acrost
the room, and I see him talkin' to two or three other thieves as tough
as himself. And they commenced to stare at us and scowl.

"'Come on,' I whispered to Jonadab. 'Let's get out of this place while
we can. There ain't no Jimmie Kelly here, or if there is you don't want
to find him.'

"He was as willin' to make tracks as I was, by this time, and we headed
for the door in the partition. But Rubber Collar and some of the others
got acrost our bows.

"'Cut it out,' says one of 'em. 'You can't get away so easy. Hi, Frank!
Frank! Who let these turnip pullers in here, anyhow? Who are they?'

"The chap who was tendin' door comes out of his coop. 'You've got me,'
he says. 'They come in with Big Mike, and he was loaded and scrappy and
jammed 'em through. Said they was pals of his. Where is he?'

"There was a hunt for Mike, and, when they got his bearin's, there
he was keeled over on a bench, breathin' like an escape valve. And an
admiral's salute wouldn't have woke him up. The whole crew was round us
by this time, some ugly, and the rest laffin' and carryin' on.

"'It's the Barkwurst gang,' says one.

"'It's old Bark himself,' says another. 'Look at them lace curtains.'
And he points to Jonadab's whiskers.

"'This one's Jacobs in disguise,' sings out somebody else. 'You can tell
him by the Rube get-up. Haw! haw!'

"'Soak 'em! Do 'em up! Don't let 'em out!' hollers a ha'f dozen more.

"Jonadab was game; I'll say that for him. And I hadn't been second mate
in my time for nothin'.

"'Take your hands off me!' yells the Cap'n. 'I come in here to find
a man I'm lookin' for, James Kelly it was, and--You would, would you!
Stand by, Barzilla!'

"I stood by. Rubber Collar got one from me that made him remember home
and mother, I'll bet. Anyhow, my knuckles ached for two days afterwards.
And Jonadab was just as busy. But I cal'late we'd have been ready for
the oven in another five minutes if the door hadn't bu'st open with a
bang, and a loud dressed chap, with the sweat pourin' down his face,
come tearin' in.

"'Beat it, fellers!' he yells. 'The place is goin' to be pinched. I've
just had the tip, and they're right on top of me.'

"THEN there was times. Everybody was shoutin' and swearin' and fallin'
over each other to get out. I was kind of lost in the shuffle, and
the next thing I remember for sartin is settin' up on Rubber Collar's
stomach and lookin' foggy at the door, where the loud dressed man was
wrestlin' with a policeman. And there was police at the windows and all
around.

"Well, don't talk! I got up, resurrects Jonadab from under a heap of
gamblers and furniture, and makes for harbor in our old corner. The
police was mighty busy, especially a fat, round-faced, red-mustached
man, with gold bands on his cap and arms, that the rest called 'Cap'n.'
Him and the loud dressed chap who'd give the alarm was talkin' earnest
close to us.

"'I can't help it, Pete,' says the police cap'n. ''Twas me or the Vice
Suppression crowd. They've been on to you for two weeks back. I only
just got in ahead of 'em as it was. No, you'll have to go along with
the rest and take your chances. Quiet now, everybody, or you'll get it
harder,' he roars, givin' orders like the skipper of a passenger boat.
'Stand in line and wait your turns for the wagon.'

"Jonadab grabbed me by the wrist. He was pale and shakin' all over.

"'Oh, Lordy!' says he, 'we're took up. Will we have to go to jail, do
you think?'

"'I don't know,' I says, disgusted. 'I presume likely we will. Did you
dream anything like this? You'd better see if you can't dream yourself
out now.' Twas rubbin' it in, but I was mad.

"'Oh! oh!' says he, flappin' his hands. 'And me a deacon of the church!
Will folks know it, do you think?'

"'Will they know it! Sounds as if they knew it already. Just listen to
that.'

"The first wagon full of prizes was bein' loaded in down at the front
door, and the crowd outside was cheerin' 'em. Judgin' by the whoops and
hurrahs there wa'n't no less than a million folks at the show, and they
was gettin' the wuth of admission.

"'Oh, dear!' groans Jonadab. 'And it'll be in the papers and all! I
can't stand this.'

"And afore I could stop him he'd run over and tackled the head
policeman.

"'Mister--Mister Cap'n,' he says, pantin', 'there's been a mistake, an
awful mis--take--'

"'That's right,' says the police cap'n, 'there has. Six or eight of you
tin horns got clear. But--' Then he noticed who was speakin' to him
and his mouth dropped open like a hatch. 'Well, saints above!' he says.
'Have the up-state delegates got to buckin' the ponies, too? Why ain't
you back home killin' pertater bugs? You ought to be ashamed.'

"'But we wa'n't gamblin'--me and my friend wa'n't. We was led in here
by mistake. We was told that a feller named Kelly lived here and we're
huntin' for a man of that name. I've got a message to him from his poor
dead father back in Orham. We come all the way from Orham, Mass.--to
find him and--'

"The police cap'n turned around then and stared at him hard. 'Humph!'
says he, after a spell. 'Go over there and set down till I want you. No,
you'll go now and we'll waste no breath on it. Go on, do you hear!'

"So we went, and there we set for ha'f an hour, while the rest of the
gang and the blackboards and the paper slips and the telephones and Big
Mike and his chair was bein' carted off to the wagon. Once, when one of
the constables was beatin' acrost to get us, the police cap'n spoke to
him.

"'You can leave these two,' he says. 'I'll take care of them.'

"So, finally, when there was nothin' left but the four walls and us and
some of the police, he takes me and Jonadab by the elbows and heads for
the door.

"'Now,' says he, 'walk along quiet and peaceable and tell me all about
it. Get out of this!' he shouts to the crowd of small boys and loafers
on the sidewalk, 'or I'll take you, too.'

"The outsiders fell astern, lookin' heartbroke and disapp'inted that we
wa'n't hung on the spot, and the fat boss policeman and us two paraded
along slow but grand. I felt like the feller that was caught robbin'
the poorhouse, and I cal'late Jonadab felt the same, only he was so
busy beggin' and pleadin' and explainin' that he couldn't stop to feel
anything.

"He told it all, the whole fool yarn from one end to t'other. How old
Pat give him the message and how he went to the laundry, and about his
ridiculous dream, every word. And the fat policeman shook all over, like
a barrel of cod livers.

"By and by we got to a corner of a street and hove to. I could see
the station house loomin' up large ahead. Fatty took a card from his
pocketbook, wrote on it with a pencil, and then hailed a hack, one of
them stern-first kind where the driver sits up aloft 'way aft. He pushed
back the cap with the gilt wreath on it, and I could see his red hair
shinin' like a sunset.

"'Here,' says he to the hack driver, 'take these--this pair of salads
to the--what d'ye call it?--the Golconda House, wherever on top of the
pavement that is. And mind you, deliver 'em safe and don't let the truck
horses get a bite at 'em. And at half-past eight to-night you call for
'em and bring 'em here,' handin' up the card he'd written on.

"''Tis the address of my house, I'm givin',' he says, turnin' to
Jonadab. 'I'll be off duty then and we'll have dinner and talk about old
times. To think of you landin' in Silver Pete's pool room! Dear! dear!
Why, Cap'n Wixon, barrin' that your whiskers are a bit longer and a
taste grayer, I'd 'a' known you anywheres. Many's the time I've stole
apples over your back fence. I'm Jimmie Kelly,' says he."

"Well, by mighty!" exclaimed the depot master, slapping his knee. "So HE
was the Kelly man! Humph!"

"Funny how it turned out, wa'n't it?" said Barzilla. "Course, Cap'n
Jonadab was perfectly sat on spiritu'lism and signs and omens and such
after that. He's had his fortune told no less'n eight times sence, and,
nigh's I can find out, each time it's different. The amount of blondes
and brunettes and widows and old maids that he's slated to marry,
accordin' to them fortune tellers, is perfectly scandalous. If he lives
up to the prophecies, Brigham Young wouldn't be a twospot 'longside of
him."

"It's funny about dreams," mused Captain Hiram. "Folks are always
tellin' about their comin' true, but none of mine ever did. I used to
dream I was goin' to be drowned, but I ain't been yet."

The depot master laughed. "Well," he observed, "once, when I was a
youngster, I dreamed two nights runnin' that I was bein' hung. I asked
my Sunday school teacher if he believed dreams come true, and he said
yes, sometimes. Then I told him my dream, and he said he believed in
that one. I judged that any other finish for me would have surprised
him. But, somehow or other, they haven't hung me yet."

"There was a hired girl over at the Old Home House who was sat on
fortune tellin'," said Wingate. "Her name was Effie, and--"

"Look here!" broke in Captain Bailey Stitt, righteous indignation in his
tone, "I've started no less than nineteen different times to tell you
about how I went sailin' in an automobile. Now do you want to hear it,
or don't you?"

"How you went SAILIN' in an auto?" repeated Barzilla. "Went ridin', you
mean."

"I mean sailin'. I went ridin', too, but--"

"You'll have to excuse me, Bailey," interrupted Captain Hiram, rising
and looking at his watch. "I've stayed here a good deal longer'n I
ought to, already. I must be gettin' on home to see how poor little
Dusenberry, my boy, is feelin'. I do hope he's better by now. I wish Dr.
Parker hadn't gone out of town."

The depot master rose also. "And I'll have to be excused, too," he
declared. "It's most time for the up train. Good-by, Hiram. Give my
regards to Sophrony, and if there's anything I can do to help, in case
your baby should be sick, just sing out, won't you?"

"But I want to tell about this automobilin' scrape," protested Captain
Bailey. "It was one of them things that don't happen every day."

"So was that fortune business of Effie's," declared Wingate. "Honest,
the way it worked out was queer enough."

But the train whistled just then and the group broke up. Captain Sol
went out to the platform, where Cornelius Rowe, Ed Crocker, Beriah
Higgins, Obed Gott, and other interested citizens had already assembled.
Wingate and Stitt followed. As for Captain Hiram Baker, he hurried home,
his conscience reproving him for remaining so long away from his wife
and poor little Hiram Joash, more familiarly known as "Dusenberry."




CHAPTER XIII

DUSENBERRY'S BIRTHDAY


Mrs. Baker met her husband at the door.

"How is he?" was the Captain's first question. "Better, hey?"

"No," was the nervous answer. "No, I don't think he is. His throat's
terrible sore and the fever's just as bad."

Again Captain Hiram's conscience smote him.

"Dear! dear!" he exclaimed. "And I've been loafin' around the depot
with Sol Berry and the rest of 'em instead of stayin' home with you,
Sophrony. I KNEW I was doin' wrong, but I didn't realize--"

"Course you didn't, Hiram. I'm glad you got a few minutes' rest, after
bein' up with him half the night. I do wish the doctor was home, though.
When will he be back?"

"Not until late to-morrer, if then. Did you keep on givin' the
medicine?"

"Yes, but it don't seem to do much good. You go and set with him now,
Hiram. I must be seein' about supper."

So into the sick room went Captain Hiram to sit beside the crib and
sing "Sailor boy, sailor boy, 'neath the wild billow," as a lugubrious
lullaby.

Little Hiram Joash tossed and tumbled. He was in a fitful slumber when
Mrs. Baker called her husband to supper. The meal was anything but
a cheerful one. They talked but little. Over the home, ordinarily so
cheerful, had settled a gloom that weighed upon them.

"My! my!" sighed Captain Hiram, "how lonesome it seems without him
chatterin' and racketin' sound. Seems darker'n usual, as if there was a
shadow on the place."

"Hush, Hiram! don't talk that way. A shadow! Oh, WHAT made you say that?
Sounds like a warnin', almost."

"Warnin'?"

"Yes, a forewarnin', you know. 'The valley of the shadow--'"

"HUSH!" Captain Baker's face paled under its sunburn. "Don't say such
things, Sophrony. If that happened, the Lord help you and me. But it
won't--it won't. We're nervous, that's all. We're always so careful of
Dusenberry, as if he was made out of thin china, that we get fidgety
when there's no need of it. We mustn't be foolish."

After supper Mrs. Baker tiptoed into the bedroom. She emerged with a
very white face.

"Hiram," she whispered, "he acts dreadful queer. Come in and see him."

The "first mate" was tossing back and forth in the crib, making odd
little choky noises in his swollen throat. When his father entered he
opened his eyes, stared unmeaningly, and said: "'Tand by to det der ship
under way."

"Good Lord! he's out of his head," gasped the Captain. Sophronia and he
stepped back into the sitting room and looked at each other, the same
thought expressed in the face of each. Neither spoke for a moment, then
Captain Hiram said:

"Now don't you worry, Sophrony. The Doctor ain't home, but I'm goin' out
to--to telegraph him, or somethin'. Keep a stiff upper lip. It'll be all
right. God couldn't go back on you and me that way. He just couldn't.
I'll be back in a little while."

"But, oh, Hiram! if he should--if he SHOULD be taken away, what WOULD we
do?"

She began to cry. Her husband laid a trembling hand on her shoulder.

"But he won't," he declared stoutly. "I tell you God wouldn't do such a
thing. Good-by, old lady. I'll hurry fast as I can."

As he took up his cap and turned to the door he heard the voice of the
weary little first mate chokily calling his crew to quarters. "All hands
on deck!"

The telegraph office was in Beriah Higgins's store. Thither ran the
Captain. Pat Sharkey, Mr. Higgins's Irish helper, who acted as telegraph
operator during Gertie Higgins's absence, gave Captain Hiram little
satisfaction.

"How can I get Dr. Parker?" asked Pat. "He's off on a cruise and land
knows where I can reach him to-night. I'll do what I can, Cap, but it's
ten chances out of nine against a wire gettin' to him."

Captain Hiram left the store, dodging questioners who were anxious to
know what his trouble might be, and dazedly crossed Main Street, to the
railway station. He thought of asking advice of his friend, the depot
master.

The evening train from Boston pulled out as he passed through the
waiting room. One or two passengers were standing on the platform. One
of these was a short, square-shouldered man with gray side whiskers and
eyeglasses. The initials on his suit case were J. S. M., Boston, and
they stood for John Spencer Morgan. If the bearer of the suit case had
followed the fashion of the native princes of India and had emblazoned
his titles upon his baggage, the commonplace name just quoted might have
been followed by "M.D., LL.D., at Harvard and Oxford; vice president
American Medical Society; corresponding secretary Associated Society of
Surgeons; lecturer at Harvard Medical College; author of 'Diseases of
the Throat and Lungs,' etc., etc."

But Dr. Morgan was not given to advertising either his titles or
himself, and he was hurrying across the platform to Redny Blount's depot
wagon when Captain Hiram touched him on the arm.

"Why, hello, Captain Baker," exclaimed the Doctor, "how do you do?"

"Dr. Morgan," said the Captain, "I--I hope you'll excuse my presumin' on
you this way, but I want to ask a favor of you, a great favor. I want to
ask if you'll come down to the house and see the boy; he's on the sick
list."

"What, Dusenberry?"

"Yes, sir. He's pretty bad, I'm 'fraid, and the old lady's considerable
upsot about him. If you just come down and kind of take an observation,
so's we could sort of get our bearin's, as you might say, 'twould be a
mighty help to all hands."

"But where's your town physician? Hasn't he been called?"

The Captain explained. He had inquired, and he had telegraphed, but
could get no word of Dr. Parker's whereabouts.

The great Boston specialist listened to Captain Hiram's story in an
absent-minded way. Holidays were few and far between with him, and when
he accepted the long-standing invitation of Mr. Ogden Williams to run
down for the week end he determined to forget the science of medicine
and all that pertained to it for the four days of his outing. But an
exacting patient had detained him long enough to prevent his taking the
train that morning, and now, on the moment of his belated arrival, he
was asked to pay a professional call. He liked the Captain, who had
taken him out fishing several times on his previous excursions to East
Harniss, and he remembered Dusenberry as a happy little sea urchin, but
he simply couldn't interrupt his pleasure trip to visit a sick baby.
Besides, the child was Dr. Parker's patient, and professional ethics
forbade interference.

"Captain Hiram," he said, "I am sorry to disappoint you, but it will
be impossible for me to do what you ask. Mr. Williams expected me this
morning, and I am late already. Dr. Parker will, no doubt, return soon.
The baby cannot be dangerously ill or he would not have left him."

The Captain slowly turned away.

"Thank you, Doctor," he said huskily. "I knew I hadn't no right to ask."

He walked across the platform, abstractedly striking his right hand into
his left. When he reached the ticket window he put one hand against the
frame as if to steady himself, and stood there listlessly.

The enterprising Mr. Blount had been hanging about the Doctor like a cat
about the cream pitcher; now he rushed up, grasped the suit case, and
officiously led the way toward the depot wagon. Dr. Morgan followed more
slowly. As he passed the Captain he glanced up into the latter's face,
lighted, as it was, by the lamp inside the window.

The Doctor stopped and looked again. Then he took another step forward,
hesitated, turned on his heel, and said:

"Wait a moment, Blount. Captain Hiram, do you live far from here?"

The Captain started. "No, sir, only a little ways."

"All right. I'll go down and look at this boy of yours. Mind you, I'll
not take the case, simply give my opinion on it, that's all. Blount,
take my grip to Mr. Williams's. I'm going to walk down with the
Captain."


"Haul on ee bowline, ee bowline, haul!" muttered the first mate, as they
came into the room. The lamp that Sophronia was holding shook, and the
Captain hurriedly brushed his eyes with the back of his hand.

Dr. Morgan started perceptibly as he bent forward to look at the little
fevered face of Dusenberry. Graver and graver he became as he felt the
pulse and peered into the swollen throat. At length he rose and led the
way back into the sitting room.

"Captain Baker," he said simply, "I must ask you and your wife to be
brave. The child has diphtheria and--"

"Diphthery!" gasped Sophronia, as white as her best tablecloth.

"Good Lord above!" cried the Captain.

"Diphtheria," repeated the Doctor; "and, although I dislike extremely to
criticize a member of my own profession, I must say that any physician
should have recognized it."

Sophronia groaned and covered her face with her apron.

"Ain't there--ain't there no chance, Doctor?" gasped the Captain.

"Certainly, there's a chance. If I could administer antitoxin by
to-morrow noon the patient might recover. What time does the morning
train from Boston arrive here?"

"Ha'f-past ten or thereabouts."

Dr. Morgan took his notebook from his pocket and wrote a few lines in
pencil on one of the pages. Then he tore out the leaf and handed it to
the Captain.

"Send that telegram immediately to my assistant in Boston," he said.
"It directs him to send the antitoxin by the early train. If nothing
interferes it should be here in time."

Captain Hiram took the slip of paper and ran out at the door bareheaded.

Dr. Morgan stood in the middle of the floor absent-mindedly looking at
his watch. Sophronia was gazing at him appealingly. At length he put his
watch in his pocket and said quietly:

"Mrs. Baker, I must ask you to give me a room. I will take the case."
Then he added mentally: "And that settles my vacation."


Dr. Morgan's assistant was a young man whom nature had supplied with a
prematurely bald head, a flourishing beard, and a way of appearing ten
years older than he really was. To these gifts, priceless to a young
medical man, might be added boundless ambition and considerable common
sense.

The yellow envelope which contained the few lines meaning life or death
to little Hiram Joash Baker was delivered at Dr. Morgan's Back Bay
office at ten minutes past ten. Dr. Payson--that was the assistant's
name--was out, but Jackson, the colored butler, took the telegram
into his employer's office, laid it on the desk among the papers, and
returned to the hall to finish his nap in the armchair. When Dr. Payson
came in, at 11:30, the sleepy Jackson forgot to mention the dispatch.

The next morning as Jackson was cleaning the professional boots in the
kitchen and chatting with the cook, the thought of the yellow envelope
came back to his brain. He went up the stairs with such precipitation
that the cook screamed, thinking he had a fit.

"Doctah! Doctah!" he exclaimed, opening the door of the assistant's
chamber, "did you git dat telegraft I lef' on your desk las' night?"

"What telegraph?" asked the assistant sleepily. By way of answer Jackson
hurried out and returned with the yellow envelope. The assistant opened
it and read as follows:


Send 1,500 units Diphtheritic Serum to me by morning train. Don't fail.
Utmost importance.

J. S. MORGAN.


Dr. Payson sprang out of bed, and running to the table took up the
Railway Guide, turned to the pages devoted to the O. C. and C. C.
Railroad and ran his finger down the printed tables. The morning train
for Cape Cod left at 7:10. It was 6:45 at that moment. As has been said,
the assistant had considerable common sense. He proved this by wasting
no time in telling the forgetful Jackson what he thought of him. He sent
the latter after a cab and proceeded to dress in double-quick time. Ten
minutes later he was on his way to the station with the little wooden
case containing the precious antitoxin, wrapped and addressed, in his
pocket.

It was seven by the Arlington Street Church clock as the cab rattled
down Boylston Street. A tangle of a trolley car and a market wagon
delayed it momentarily at Harrison Avenue and Essex Street. Dr. Payson,
leaning out as the carriage swung into Dewey Square, saw by the big
clock on the Union Station that it was 7:13. He had lost the train.

Now, the assistant had been assistant long enough to know that
excuses--in the ordinary sense of the word--did not pass current with
Dr. Morgan. That gentleman had telegraphed for antitoxin, and said it
was important that he should have it; therefore, antitoxin must be sent
in spite of time-tables and forgetful butlers. Dr. Payson went into the
waiting room and sat down to think. After a moment's deliberation he
went over to the ticket office and asked:

"What is the first stop of the Cape Cod express?"

"Brockboro," answered the ticket seller.

"Is the train usually on time?"

"Well, I should smile. That's Charlie Mills's train, and the old man
ain't been conductor on this road twenty-two years for nothin'."

"Mills? Does he live on Shawmut Avenue?"

"Dunno. Billy, where does Charlie Mills live?"

"Somewhere at the South End. Shawmut Avenue, I think."

"Thank you," said the assistant, and, helping himself to a time-table,
he went back rejoicing to his seat in the waiting room. He had stumbled
upon an unexpected bit of luck.

There might be another story written in connection with this one; the
story of a veteran railroad man whose daughter had been very, very ill
with a dreaded disease of the lungs, and who, when other physicians
had given up hope, had been brought back to health by a celebrated
specialist of our acquaintance. But this story cannot be told just now;
suffice it to say that Conductor Charlie Mills had vowed that he would
put his neck beneath the wheels of his own express train, if by so doing
he could confer a favor on Dr. John Spencer Morgan.

The assistant saw by his time-table that the Cape Cod express reached
Brockboro at 8:05. He went over to the telegraph office and wrote two
telegrams. The first read like this:


CALVIN S. WISE, The People's Drug Store, 28 Broad Street, Brockboro,
Mass.:

Send package 1,500 units Diphtheritic Serum marked with my name to
station. Hand to Conductor Mills, Cape Cod express. Train will wait.
Matter life and death.


The second telegram was to Conductor Mills. It read:


Hold train Brockboro to await arrival C. A. Wise. Great personal favor.
Very important.


Both of these dispatches were signed with the magic name, "J. S. Morgan,
M.D."

"Well," said the assistant as he rode back to his office, "I don't know
whether Wise will get the stuff to the train in time, or whether Mills
will wait for him, but at any rate I've done my part. I hope breakfast
is ready, I'm hungry."

Mr. Wise, of "The People's Drug Store," had exactly two minutes in which
to cover the three-quarters of a mile to the station. As a matter of
course, he was late. Inquiring for Conductor Mills, he was met by a
red-faced man in uniform, who, watch in hand, demanded what in the vale
of eternal torment he meant by keeping him waiting eight minutes.

"Do you realize," demanded the red-faced man, "that I'm liable to lose
my job? I'll have you to understand that if any other man than Doc.
Morgan asked me to hold up the Cape Cod express, I'd tell him to go
right plumb to--"

Here Mr. Wise interrupted to hand over the package and explain that it
was a matter of life and death. Conductor Mills only grunted as he swung
aboard the train.

"Hump her, Jim," he said to the engineer; "she's got to make up those
eight minutes."

And Jim did.


And so it happened that on the morning of the Fourth of July,
Dusenberry's birthday, Captain Hiram Baker and his wife sat together in
the sitting room, with very happy faces. The Captain had in his hands
the "truly boat with sails," which the little first mate had so ardently
wished for.

She was a wonder, that boat. Red hull, real lead on the keel, brass
rings on the masts, reef points on the main and fore sail, jib,
flying jib and topsails, all complete. And on the stern was the name,
"Dusenberry. East Harniss."

Captain Hiram set her down in front of him on the floor.

"Gee!" he exclaimed, "won't his eyes stick out when he sees that
rig, hey? Wisht he would be well enough to see it to-day, same as we
planned."

"Well, Hiram," said Sophrony, "we hadn't ought to complain. We'd ought
to be thankful he's goin' to get well at all. Dr. Morgan says, thanks to
that blessed toxing stuff, he'll be up and around in a couple of weeks."

"Sophrony," said her husband, "we'll have a special birthday celebration
for him when he gets all well. You can bake the frosted cake and we'll
have some of the other children in. I TOLD you God wouldn't be cruel
enough to take him away."

And this is how Fate and the medical profession and the O. C. and C.
C. Railroad combined to give little Hiram Joash Baker his birthday, and
explains why, as he strolled down Main Street that afternoon, Captain
Hiram was heard to sing heartily:

     Haul on the bowline, the 'Phrony is a-rollin',
     Haul on the bowline, the bowline, HAUL!




CHAPTER XIV

EFFIE'S FATE


Surely, but very, very slowly, the little Berry house moved on its
rollers up the Hill Boulevard. Right at its heels--if a house may be
said to have heels--came the "pure Colonial," under the guidance of the
foreman with "progressive methods." Groups of idlers, male and female,
stood about and commented. Simeon Phinney smilingly replied to their
questions. Captain Sol himself seemed little interested. He spent most
of his daylight time at the depot, only going to the Higginses' house
for his meals. At night, after the station was closed, he sought his own
dwelling, climbed over the joist and rollers, entered, retired to his
room, and went to bed.

Each day also he grew more taciturn. Even with Simeon, his particular
friend, he talked little.

"What IS the matter with you, Sol?" asked Mr. Phinney. "You're as glum
as a tongue-tied parrot. Ain't you satisfied with the way I'm doin' your
movin'? The white horse can go back again if you say so."

"I'm satisfied," grunted the depot master. "Let you know when I've
got any fault to find. How soon will you get abreast the--abreast the
Seabury lot?"

"Let's see," mused the building mover. "Today's the eighth. Well, I'll
be there by the eleventh, SURE. Can't drag it out no longer, Sol,
even if the other horse is took sick. 'Twon't do. Williams has been
complainin' to the selectmen and they're beginnin' to pester me. As for
that Colt and Adams foreman--whew!"

He whistled. His companion smiled grimly.

"Williams himself drops in to see me occasional," he said. "Tells me
what he thinks of me, with all the trimmin's added. I cal'late he gets
as good as he sends. I'm always glad to see him; he keeps me cheered up,
in his way."

"Ye-es, I shouldn't wonder. Was he in to-day?"

"He was. And somethin' has pleased him, I guess. At any rate he was in
better spirits. Asked me if I was goin' to move right onto that Main
Street lot soon as my house got there."

"What did you say?"

"I said I was cal'latin' to. Told him I hated to get out of the
high-society circles I'd been livin' in lately, but that everyone had
their comedowns in this world."

"Ho, ho! that was a good one. What answer did he make to that?"

"Well, he said the 'high society' would miss me. Then he finished up
with a piece of advice. 'Berry,' says he, 'don't move onto that lot TOO
quick. I wouldn't if I was you.' Then he went away, chucklin'."

"Chucklin', hey? What made him so joyful?"

"Don't know"--Captain Sol's face clouded once more--"and I care less,"
he added brusquely.

Simeon pondered. "Have you heard from Abner Payne, Sol?" he asked. "Has
Ab answered that letter you wrote sayin' you'd swap your lot for the
Main Street one?"

"No, he hasn't. I wrote him that day I told you to move me."

"Hum! that's kind of funny. You don't s'pose--"

He stopped, noticing the expression on his friend's face. The depot
master was looking out through the open door of the waiting room. On
the opposite side of the road, just emerging from Mr. Higgins's "general
store," was Olive Edwards, the widow whose home was to be pulled down
as soon as the "Colonial" reached its destination. She came out of
the store and started up Main Street. Suddenly, and as if obeying an
involuntary impulse, she turned her head. Her eyes met those of Captain
Sol Berry, the depot master. For a brief instant their glance met, then
Mrs. Edwards hurried on.

Sim Phinney sighed pityingly. "Looks kind of tired and worried, don't
she?" he ventured. His friend did not speak.

"I say," repeated Phinney, "that Olive looks sort of worn out and--"

"Has she heard from the Omaha cousin yet?" interrupted the depot master.

"No; Mr. Hilton says not. Sol, what DO you s'pose--"

But Captain Sol had risen and gone into the ticket office. The door
closed behind him. Mr. Phinney shook his head and walked out of the
building. On his way back to the scene of the house moving he shook his
head several times.

On the afternoon of the ninth Captain Bailey Stitt and his friend
Wingate came to say good-by. Stitt was going back to Orham on the "up"
train, due at 3:30. Barzilla would return to Wellmouth and the Old Home
House on the evening (the "down") train.

"Hey, Sol!" shouted Wingate, as they entered the waiting room. "Sol!
where be you?"

The depot master came out of the ticket office. "Hello, boys!" he said
shortly.

"Hello, Sol!" hailed Stitt. "Barzilla and me have come to shed the
farewell tear. As hirelin's of soulless corporations, meanin' the Old
Home House at Wellmouth and the Ocean House at Orham, we've engaged all
the shellfish along-shore and are goin' to clear out."

"Yes," chimed in his fellow "hireling," "and we thought the pleasantest
place to put in our few remainin' hours--as the papers say when a
feller's goin' to be hung--was with you."

"I thought so," said Captain Bailey, with a wink. "We've been havin'
more or less of an argument, Sol. Remember how Barzilla made fun of
Jonadab Wixon for believin' in dreams? Yes, well that was only make
believe. He believes in 'em himself."

"I don't either," declared Wingate. "And I never said so. What I said
was that sometimes it almost seemed as if there was somethin' IN fortune
tellin' and such."

"There is," chuckled Bailey with another wink at the depot master.
"There's money in it--for the fortune tellers."

"I said--and I say again," protested Barzilla, "that I knew a case at
our hotel of a servant girl named Effie, and she--"

"Oh, Heavens to Betsy! Here he goes again, I steered him in here on
purpose, Sol, so's he'd get off that subject."

"You never neither. You said--"

The depot master held up his hand. "Don't both talk at once," he
commanded. "Set down and be peaceful, can't you. That's right. What
about this Effie, Barzilla?"

"Now look here!" protested Stitt.

"Shut up, Bailey! Who was Effie, Barzilla?"

"She was third assistant roustabout and table girl at the Old Home
House," said Wingate triumphantly. "Got another cigar, Sol? Thanks. Yes,
this Effie had never worked out afore and she was greener'n a mess of
spinach; but she was kind of pretty to look at and--"

"Ah, ha!" crowed Captain Bailey, "here comes the heart confessions. Want
to look out for these old bachelors, Sol. Fire away, Barzilla; let us
know the worst."

"I took a fancy to her, in a way. She got in the habit of tellin' me her
troubles and secrets, me bein' old enough to be her dad--"

"Aw, yes!" this from Stitt, the irrepressible. "That's an old gag. We
know--"

"WILL you shut up?" demanded Captain Sol. "Go on, Barzilla."

"Me bein' old enough to be her dad," with a glare at Captain Bailey,
"and not bein' too proud to talk with hired help. I never did have that
high-toned notion. 'Twa'n't so long since I was a fo'mast hand.

"So Effie told me a lot about herself. Seems she'd been over to the
Cattle Show at Ostable one year, and she was loaded to the gunwale with
some more or less facts that a fortune-tellin' specimen by the name of
the 'Marvelous Oriental Seer' had handed her in exchange for a quarter.

"'Yup,' says she, bobbin' her head so emphatic that the sky-blue ribbon
pennants on her black hair flapped like a loose tops'l in a gale of
wind. 'Yup,' says she, 'I b'lieve it just as much as I b'lieve anything.
How could I help it when he told me so much that has come true already?
He said I'd seen trouble, and the dear land knows that's so! and that I
might see more, and I cal'late that's pretty average likely. And he said
I hadn't been brought up in luxury--'

"'Which wa'n't no exaggeration neither,' I put in, thinkin' of the shack
over on the Neck Road where she and her folks used to live.

"'No,' says she; 'and he told me I'd always had longin's for better and
higher things and that my intellectuals was above my station. Well, ever
sence I was knee high to a kitchen chair I'd ruther work upstairs than
down, and as for intellectuals, ma always said I was the smartest
young one she'd raised yet. So them statements give me consider'ble
confidence. But he give out that I was to make a journey and get money,
and when THAT come true I held up both hands and stood ready to swaller
all the rest of it.'

"'So it come true, did it?' says I.

"'Um-hm,' says she, bouncin' her head again. 'Inside of four year I
traveled 'way over to South Eastboro--'most twelve mile--to my Uncle
Issy's fun'ral, and there I found that he'd left me nine hundred dollars
for my very own. And down I flops on the parlor sofy and says I: "There!
don't talk superstition to ME no more! A person that can foretell Uncle
Issy's givin' anybody a cent, let alone nine hundred dollars, is a good
enough prophet for ME to tie to. Now I KNOW that I'm going to marry the
dark-complected man, and I'll be ready for him when he comes along.
I never spent a quarter no better than when I handed it over to that
Oriental Seer critter at the Cattle Show." That's what I said then and I
b'lieve it yet. Wouldn't you feel the same way?'

"I said sure thing I would. I'd found out that the best way to keep
Effie's talk shop runnin' was to agree with her. And I liked to hear her
talk.

"'Yup,' she went on, 'I give right in then. I'd traveled same as the
fortune teller said, and I'd got more money'n I ever expected to see,
let alone own. And ever sence I've been sartin as I'm alive that the
feller I marry will be of a rank higher'n mine and dark complected and
good-lookin' and distinguished, and that he'll be name of Butler.'

"'Butler?' says I. 'What will he be named Butler for?'

"''Cause the Seer critter said so. He said he could see the word Butler
printed out over the top of my head in flamin' letters. Pa used to say
'twas a wonder it never set fire to my crimps, but he was only foolin'.
I know that it's all comin' out true. You ain't acquaintanced to any
Butlers, are you?'

"'No,' says I. 'I heard Ben Butler make a speech once when he was
gov'nor, but he's dead now. There ain't no Butlers on the Old Home
shippin' lists.'

"'Oh, I know that!' she says. 'And everybody round here is homelier'n a
moultin' pullet. There now! I didn't mean exactly EVERYbody, of course.
But you ain't dark complected, you know, nor--'

"'No,' says I, 'nor rank nor distinguished neither. Course the handsome
part might fit me, but I'd have to pass on the rest of the hand. That's
all right, Effie; my feelin's have got fire-proofed sence I've been
in the summer hotel business. Now you'd better run along and report to
Susannah. I hear her whoopin' for you, and she don't light like a canary
bird on the party she's mad with.'

"She didn't, that was a fact. Susannah Debs, who was housekeeper for us
that year, was middlin' young and middlin' good-lookin', and couldn't
forget it. Also and likewise, she had a suit for damages against the
railroad, which she had hopes would fetch her money some day or other,
and she couldn't forget that neither. She was skipper of all the hired
hands and, bein' as Effie was prettier than she was, never lost a chance
to lay the poor girl out. She put the other help up to pokin' fun at
Effie's green ways and high-toned notions, and 'twas her that started
'em callin' her 'Lady Evelyn' in the fo'castle--servants' quarters, I
mean.

"'I'm a-comin', 'screams Effie, startin' for the door. 'Susannah's in a
tearin' hurry to get through early to-day,' she adds to me. 'She's got
the afternoon off, and her beau's comin' to take her buggy ridin'.
He's from over Harniss way somewheres and they say he's just lovely. My
sakes! I wisht somebody'd take ME to ride. Ah hum! cal'late I'll have to
wait for my Butler man. Say, Mr. Wingate, you won't mention my fortune
to a soul, will you? I never told anybody but you.'

"I promised to keep mum and she cleared out. After dinner, as I was
smokin', along with Cap'n Jonadab, on the side piazza, a horse and
buggy drove in at the back gate. A young chap with black curly hair was
pilotin' the craft. He was a stranger to me, wore a checkerboard suit
and a bonfire necktie, and had his hat twisted over one ear. Altogether
he looked some like a sunflower goin' to seed.

"'Who's that barber's sign when it's to home?' says I to Jonadab. He
snorted contemptuous.

"'That?' he says. 'Don't you know the cut of that critter's jib? He
plays pool "for the house" in Web Saunders's place over to Orham. He's
the housekeeper's steady comp'ny--steady by spells, if all I hear's
true. Good-for-nothin' cub, I call him. Wisht I'd had him aboard a
vessel of mine; I'd 'a' squared his yards for him. Look how he cants his
hat to starboard so's to show them lovelocks. Bah!'

"'What's his name?' I asks.

"'Name? Name's Butler--Simeon Butler. Don't you remember . . . Hey? What
in tunket . . .?'

"Both of us had jumped as if somebody'd touched off a bombshell under
our main hatches. The windows of the dining room was right astern of us.
We whirled round, and there was Effie. She'd been clearin' off one of
the tables and there she stood, with the smashed pieces of an ice-cream
platter in front of her, the melted cream sloppin' over her shoes, and
her face lookin' like the picture of Lot's wife just turnin' to salt.
Only Effie looked as if she enjoyed the turnin'. She never spoke nor
moved, just stared after that buggy with her black eyes sparklin' like
burnt holes in a blanket.

"I was too astonished to say anything, but Jonadab had his eye on that
smashed platter and HE had things to say, plenty of 'em. I walked off
and left Effie playin' congregation to a sermon on the text 'Crockery
costs money.' You'd think that ice-cream dish was a genuine ugly, nicked
'antique' wuth any city loon's ten dollars, instead of bein' only new
and pretty fifty-cent china. I felt real sorry for the poor girl.

"But I needn't have been. That evenin' I found her on the back steps,
all Sunday duds and airs. Her hair had a wire friz on it, and her dress
had Joseph's coat in Scriptur' lookin' like a mournin' rig. She'd have
been real handsome--to a body that was color blind.

"'My, Effie!' says I, 'you sartin do look fine to-night.'

"'Yup,' she says, contented, 'I guess likely I do. Hope so, 'cause I'm
wearin' all I've got. Say, Mr. Wingate,' says she, excited as a cat in a
fit, 'did you see him?'

"'Him?' says I. 'Who's him?'

"'Why, HIM! The one the Seer said was comin'. The handsome,
dark-complected feller I'm goin' to marry. The Butler one. That was him
in the buggy this afternoon.'

"I looked at her. I'd forgot all about the fool prophecy.

"'Good land of love!' I says. 'You don't cal'late he's comin' to marry
YOU, do you, just 'cause his name's Butler? There's ten thousand Butlers
in the world. Besides, your particular one was slated to be high ranked
and distinguished, and this specimen scrubs up the billiard-room floor
and ain't no more distinguished than a poorhouse pig.'

"'Ain't?' she sings out. 'Ain't distinguished? With all them beautiful
curls, and rings on his fingers, and--'

"'Bells on his toes? No!' says I, emphatic. 'Anyhow, he's signed for
the v'yage already. He's Susannah Debs's steady, and they're off buggy
ridin' together right now. And if she catches you makin' eyes at her
best feller--Whew!'

"Didn't make no difference. He was her Butler, sure. 'Twas Fate--that's
what 'twas--Fate, just the same as in storybooks. She was sorry for poor
Susannah and she wouldn't do nothin' mean nor underhanded; but couldn't
I understand that 'twas all planned out for her by Providence and that
everlastin' Seer? Just let me watch and see, that's all.

"What can you do with an idiot like that? I walked off disgusted and
left her. But I cal'lated to watch. I judged 'twould be more fun than
any 'play-actin' show ever I took in.

"And 'twas, in a way. Don't ask me how they got acquainted, 'cause I
can't tell you for sartin. Nigh's I can learn, Susannah and Sim had some
sort of lover's row durin' their buggy ride, and when they got back to
the hotel they was scurcely on speakin' terms. And Sim, who always had a
watch out for'ard for pretty girls, see Effie standin' on the servants'
porch all togged up regardless and gay as a tea-store chromo, and
nothin' to do but he must be introduced. One of the stable hands done
the introducin', I b'lieve, and if he'd have been hung afterwards
'twould have sarved him right.

"Anyhow, inside of a week Butler come round again to take a lady friend
drivin', but this time 'twas Effie, not the housekeeper, that was
passenger. And Susannah glared after 'em like a cat after a sparrow,
and the very next day she was for havin' Effie discharged for
incompetentiveness. I give Jonadab the tip, though, so that didn't go
through. But I cal'late there was a parrot and monkey time among the
help from then on.

"They all sided with Susannah, of course. She was their boss, for one
thing, and 'Lady Evelyn's' high-minded notions wa'n't popular, for
another. But Effie didn't care--bless you, no! She and that Butler sport
was together more and more, and the next thing I heard was that they was
engaged. I snum, if it didn't look as if the Oriental man knew his job
after all.

"I spoke to the stable hand about it.

"'Look here,' says I, 'is this business betwixt that pool player and our
Effie serious?'

"He laughed. 'Serious enough, I guess,' he says. 'They're goin' to
be married pretty soon, I hear. It's all 'cordin' to the law and the
prophets. Ain't you heard about the fortune tellin' and how 'twas
foretold she'd marry a Butler?'

"I'd heard, but I didn't s'pose he had. However, it seemed that Effie
hadn't been able to keep it to herself no longer. Soon as she'd hooked
her man she'd blabbed the whole thing. The fo'mast hands wa'n't talkin'
of nothin' else, so this feller said.

"'Humph!' says I. 'Is it the prophecy that Butler's bankin' on?'

"He laughed again. 'Not so much as on Lady Evelyn's nine hundred, I
cal'late,' says he. Sim likes Susannah the best of the two, so we all
reckon, but she ain't rich and Effie is. And yet, if the Debs woman
should win that lawsuit of hers against the railroad she'd have pretty
nigh twice as much. Butler's a fool not to wait, I think,' he says.

"This was of a Monday. On Friday evenin' Effie comes around to see me. I
was alone in the office.

"'Mr. Wingate,' she says, 'I'm goin' to leave to-morrer night. I'm goin'
to be married on Sunday.'

"I'd been expecting it, but I couldn't help feelin' sorry for her.

"'Don't do nothin' rash, Effie,' I told her. 'Are you sure that Butler
critter cares anything about you and not your money?'

"She flared up like a tar barrel. 'The idea!' she says, turnin' red. 'I
just come in to give you warnin'. Good-by.'

"'Hold on,' I sung out to her. 'Effie, I've thought consider'ble about
you lately. I've been tryin' to help you a little on the sly. I realized
that 'twa'n't pleasant for you workin' here under Susannah Debs, and
I've been tryin' to find a nice place for you. I wrote about you to Bob
Van Wedderburn; he's the rich banker chap who stopped here one summer.
"Jonesy," we used to call him. I know him and his wife fust rate, and
he'd do 'most anything as a favor to me. I told him what a neat, handy
girl you was, and he writes that he'll give you the job of second girl
at his swell New York house, if you want it. Now you just hand that Sim
Butler his clearance papers and go work for Bob's wife. The wages are
double what you get here, and--'

"She didn't wait to hear the rest. Just sailed out of the room with her
nose in the air. In a minute, though, back she come and just put her
head in the door.

"'I'm much obliged to you, Mr. Wingate,' says she. 'I know you mean
well. But you ain't had your fate foretold, same's I have. It's all
been arranged for me, and I couldn't stop it no more'n Jonah could help
swallerin' the whale. I--I kind of wish you'd be on hand at the back
door on Sunday mornin' when Simeon comes to take me away. You--you're
about the only real friend I've got,' she says.

"And off she went, for good this time. I pitied her, in spite of her
bein' such a dough head. I knew what sort of a husband that pool-room
shark would make. However, there wa'n't nothin' to be done. And next day
Cap'n Jonadab was round, madder'n a licked pup. Seems Susannah's lawyer
at Orham had sent for her to come right off and see him. Somethin' about
the suit, it was. And she was goin' in spite of everything. And with
Effie's leavin' at the same time, what was we goin' to do over Sunday?
and so forth and so on.

"Well, we had to do the best we could, that's all. But that Saturday
was busy, now I tell you. Sunday mornin' broke fine and clear and, after
breakfast was over, I remembered Effie and that 'twas her weddin' day.
On the back steps I found her, dressed in all her grandeur, with her
packed trunk ready, waitin' for the bridegroom.

"'Ain't come yet, hey, Effie?' says I.

"'No,' says she, smilin' and radiant. 'It's a little early for him yet,
I guess.'

"I went off to 'tend to the boarders. At half past ten, when I made the
back steps again, she was still there. T'other servants was peekin' out
of the kitchen windows, grinnin' and passin' remarks.

"'Hello!' I calls out. 'Not married yet? What's the matter?'

"She'd stopped smilin', but she was as chipper as ever, to all
appearances.

"'I--I guess the horse has gone lame or somethin',' says she. 'He'll be
here any time now.'

"There was a cackle from the kitchen windows. I never said nothin'.
She'd made her nest; now let her roost on it.

"But at twelve Butler hadn't hove in sight. Every hand, male and female,
on the place, that wa'n't busy, was hangin' around the back of the
hotel, waitin' and watchin' and ridiculin' and havin' a high time. Them
that had errands made it a p'int to cruise past that way. Lots of the
boarders had got wind of the doin's, and they was there, too.

"Effie was settin' on her trunk, tryin' hard to look brave. I went up
and spoke to her.

"'Come, my girl,' says I. 'Don't set here no longer. Come into the house
and wait. Hadn't you better?'

"'No!' says she, loud and defiant like. 'No, sir! It's all right. He's a
little late, that's all. What do you s'pose I care for a lot of jealous
folks like those up there?' wavin' her flipper scornful toward the
kitchen.

"And then, all to once, she kind of broke down, and says to me, with a
pitiful sort of choke in her voice:

"'Oh, Mr. Wingate! I can't stand this. Why DON'T he come?'

"I tried hard to think of somethin' comfortin' to say, but afore I
could h'ist a satisfyin' word out of my hatches I heard the noise of a
carriage comin'. Effie heard it, too, and so did everybody else. We all
looked toward the gate. 'Twas Sim Butler, sure enough, in his buggy and
drivin' the same old horse; but settin' alongside of him on the seat was
Susannah Debs, the housekeeper. And maybe she didn't look contented with
things in gen'ral!

"Butler pulled up his horse by the gate. Him and Susannah bowed to all
hands. Nobody said anything for a minute. Then Effie bounced off the
trunk and down them steps.

"'Simmie' she sung out, breathless like, 'Simeon Butler, what does this
mean?'

"The Debs woman straightened up on the seat. 'Thank you, marm,' says
she, chilly as the top section of an ice chest, 'I'll request you not to
call my husband by his first name.'

"It was so still you could have heard yourself grow. Effie turned white
as a Sunday tablecloth.

"'Your--husband?' she gasps. 'Your--your HUSBAND?'

"'Yes, marm,' purrs the housekeeper. 'My husband was what I said. Mr.
Butler and me have just been married.'

"'Sorry, Effie, old girl,' puts in Butler, so sassy I'd love to have
preached his fun'ral sermon. 'Too bad, but fust love's strongest, you
know. Susie and me was engaged long afore you come to town.'

"THEN such a haw-haw and whoop bust from the kitchen and fo'castle as
you never heard. For a jiffy poor Effie wilted right down. Then she
braced up and her black eyes snapped.

"'I wish you joy of your bargain, marm,' says she to Susannah. 'You'd
ought to be proud of it. And as for YOU,' she says, swingin' round
toward the rest of the help, 'I--'

"'How 'bout that prophet?' hollers somebody.

"'Three cheers for the Oriental!' bellers somebody else.

"'When you marry the right Butler fetch him along and let us see him!'
whoops another.

"She faced 'em all, and I gloried in her spunk.

"'When I marry him I WILL come back,' says she. 'And when I do you'll
have to get down on your knees and wait on me. You--and you--Yes, and
YOU, too!'

"The last two 'yous' was hove at Sim and Susannah. Then she turned and
marched into the hotel. And the way them hired hands carried on was
somethin' scandalous--till I stepped in and took charge of the deck.

"That very afternoon I put Effie and her trunk aboard the train. I
paid her fare to New York and give her directions how to locate the Van
Wedderburns.

"'So long, Effie,' says I to her. 'It's all right. You're enough sight
better off. All you want to do now is to work hard and forget all that
fortune-tellin' foolishness.'

"She whirled on me like a top.

"'Forget it!' she says. 'I GUESS I shan't forget it! It's comin' true,
I tell you--same as all the rest come true. You said yourself there was
ten thousand Butlers in the world. Some day the right one--the handsome,
high-ranked, distinguished one--will come along, and I'll get him. You
wait and see, Mr. Wingate--just you wait and see.'"




CHAPTER XV

THE "HERO" AND THE COWBOY


"So that was the end of it, hey?" said Captain Bailey. "Well, it's what
you might expect, but it wa'n't much to be so anxious to tell; and as
for PROVIN' anything about fortune tellin'--why--"

"It AIN'T the end," shouted the exasperated Barzilla. "Not nigh the end.
'Twas the beginnin'. The housekeeper left us that day, of course, and
for the rest of that summer the servant question kept me and Jonadab
from thinkin' of other things. Course, the reason for the Butler scamp's
sudden switch was plain enough. Susannah's lawyer had settled the case
with the railroad and, even after his fee was subtracted, there was
fifteen hundred left. That was enough sight better'n nine hundred, so
Sim figgered when he heard of it; and he hustled to make up with his old
girl.

"Fifteen hundred dollars doesn't last long with some folks. At the
beginnin' of the next spring season both of 'em was round huntin' jobs.
Susannah was a fust-rate waitress, so we hired her for that--no more
housekeeper for hers, and served her right. As for her husband, we took
him on in the stable. He wouldn't have been wuth his salt if it hadn't
been for her. She said she'd keep him movin' and she did. She nagged and
henpecked him till I'd have been sorry if 'twas anybody else; as 'twas,
I got consider'ble satisfaction out of it.

"I got one letter from Effie pretty soon after she left, sayin' she
liked her new job and that the Van Wedderburns liked her. And that's all
I did hear, though Bob himself wrote me in May, sayin' him and
Mabel, his wife, had bought a summer cottage in Wapatomac, and me and
Jonadab--especially me--must be sure and come to see it and them. He
never mentioned his second girl, and I almost forgot her myself.

"But one afternoon in early July a big six-cylinder automobile come
sailin' down the road and into the Old Home House yard. A shofer--I
b'lieve that's what they call the tribe--was at the helm of it, and on
the back seat, lollin' luxurious against the upholstery, was a man and
a woman, got up regardless in silk dusters and goggles and veils and
prosperity. I never expect to see the Prince of Wales and his wife, but
I know how they'd look--after seein' them two.

"Jonadab was at the bottom step to welcome 'em, bowin' and scrapin' as
if his middle j'int had just been iled. I wa'n't fur astern, and every
boarder on deck was all eyes and envy.

"The shofer opens the door of the after cockpit of the machine, and the
man gets out fust, treadin' gingerly but grand, as if he was doin' the
ground a condescension by steppin' on it. Then he turns to the woman and
she slides out, her duds rustlin' like the wind in a scrub oak. The pair
sails up the steps, Jonadab and me backin' and fillin' in front of 'em.
All the help that could get to a window to peek had knocked off work to
do it.

"'Ahem!' says the man, pompous as Julius Caesar--he was big and
straight and fine lookin' and had black side whiskers half mast on his
cheeks--ahem!' says he. 'I say, good people, may we have dinner here?'

"Well, they tell us time and tide waits for no man, but prob'ly that
don't include the nobility. Anyhow, although 'twas long past our reg'lar
dinner time, I heard Jonadab tellin' 'em sure and sartin they could. If
they wouldn't mind settin' on the piazza or in the front parlor for a
spell, he'd have somethin' prepared in a jiffy. So up to the piazza they
paraded and come to anchor in a couple of chairs.

"'You can have your automobile put right into the barn,' I says, 'if you
want to.'

"'I don't know as it will be necessary--' began the big feller, but the
woman interrupted him. She was starin' through her thick veil at the
barn door. Sim Butler, in his overalls and ragged shirt sleeves, was
leanin' against that door, interested as the rest of us in what was
goin' on.

"'I would have it put there, I think,' says the woman, lofty and
superior. 'It is rather dusty, and I think the wheels ought to be
washed. Can that man be trusted to wash 'em?' she asks, pointin' kind of
scornful at Simeon.

"'Yes, marm, I cal'late so,' I says. 'Here, Sim!' I sung out, callin'
Butler over to the steps. 'Can you wash the dust off them wheels?'

"He said course he could, but he didn't act joyful over the job. The
woman seemed some doubtful.

"'He looks like a very ignorant, common person,' says she, loud and
clear, so that everybody, includin' the 'ignorant person' himself, could
hear her. 'However, James'll superintend. James,' she orders the shofer,
'you see that it is well done, won't you? Make him be very careful.'

"James looked Butler over from head to foot. 'Humph!' he sniffs,
contemptuous, with a kind of half grin on his face. 'Yes, marm, I'll
'tend to it.'

"So he steered the auto into the barn, and Simeon got busy. Judgin' by
the sharp language that drifted out through the door, 'twas plain that
the shofer was superintendin' all right.

"Jonadab heaves in sight, bowin', and makes proclamation that dinner
is served. The pair riz up majestic and headed for the dinin' room. The
woman was a little astern of her man, and in the hall she turns brisk to
me.

"'Mr. Wingate,' she whispers, 'Mr. Wingate.'

"I stared at her. Her voice had sounded sort of familiar ever sence I
heard it, but the veil kept a body from seein' what she looked like.

"'Hey?' I sings out. 'Have I ever--'

"'S-s-h-h!' she whispers. 'Say, Mr. Wingate, that--that Susannah thing
is here, ain't she? Have her wait on us, will you, please?'

"And she swept the veil off her face. I choked up and staggered bang!
against the wall. I swan to man if it wa'n't Effie! EFFIE, in silks and
automobiles and gorgeousness!

"Afore I could come to myself the two of 'em marched into that dining
room. I heard a grunt and a 'Land of love!' from just ahead of me. That
was Jonadab. And from all around that dinin' room come a sort of gasp
and then the sound of whisperin'. That was the help.

"They took a table by the window, which had been made ready. Down they
set like a king and a queen perchin' on thrones. One of the waiter girls
went over to em.

"But I'd come out of my trance a little mite. The situation was miles
ahead of my brain, goodness knows, but the joke of it all was gettin' a
grip on me. I remembered what Effie had asked and I spoke up prompt.

"'Susannah,' says I, 'this is a particular job and we're anxious to
please. You'd better do the waitin' yourself.'

"I wish you could have seen the glare that ex-housekeeper give me. For
a second I thought we'd have open mutiny. But her place wa'n't any too
sartin and she didn't dare risk it. Over she walked to that table, and
the fun began.

"Jonadab had laid himself out to make that meal a success, but they ate
it as if 'twas pretty poor stuff and not by no means what they fed on
every day. They found fault with 'most everything, but most especial
with Susannah's waitin'. My! how they did order her around--a mate on a
cattle boat wa'n't nothin' to it. And when 'twas all over and they got
up to go, Effie says, so's all hands can hear:

"'The food here is not so bad, but the service--oh, horrors! However,
Albert,' says she to the side-whiskered man, 'you had better give the
girl our usual tip. She looks as if she needed it, poor thing!'

"Then they paraded out of the room, and I see Susannah sling the half
dollar the man had left on the table clear to Jericho, it seemed like.

"The auto was waitin' by the piazza steps. The shofer and Butler was
standin' by it. And when Sim see Effie with her veil throwed back he
pretty nigh fell under the wheels he'd been washin' so hard. And he
looked as if he wisht they'd run over him.

"'Oh, dear!' sighs Effie, lookin' scornful at the wheels. 'Not half
clean, just as I expected. I knew by the looks of that--that PERSON that
he wouldn't do it well. Don't give him much, Albert; he ain't earned
it.'

"They climbed into the cockpit, the shofer took the helm, and they was
ready to start. But I couldn't let 'em go that way. Out I run.

"'Say--say, Effie!' I whispers, eager. 'For the goodness' sakes, what's
all this mean? Is that your--your--'

"'My husband? Yup,' she whispers back, her eyes shinin'. 'Didn't I tell
you to look out for my prophecy? Ain't he handsome and distinguished,
just as I said? Good-by, Mr. Wingate; maybe I'll see you again some
day.'

"The machinery barked and they got under way. I run along for two steps
more.

"'But, Effie,' says I, 'tell me--is his name--?'

"She didn't answer. She was watchin' Sim Butler and his wife. Sim had
stooped to pick up the quarter the Prince of Wales had hove at him. And
that was too much for Susannah, who was watchin' from the window.

"'Don't you touch that money!' she screams. 'Don't you lay a finger on
it! Ain't you got any self-respect at all, you miser'ble, low-lived--'
and so forth and so on. All the way to the front gate I see Effie
leanin' out, lookin' and listenin' and smilin'.

"Then the machine buzzed off in a typhoon of dust and I went back to
Jonadab, who was a livin' catechism of questions which neither one of us
could answer."

"So THAT'S the end!" exclaimed Captain Bailey. "Well--"

"No, it ain't the end--not even yet. Maybe it ought to be, but it ain't.
There's a little more of it.

"A fortni't later I took a couple of days off and went up to Wapatomac
to visit the Van Wedderburns, same as I'd promised. Their 'cottage' was
pretty nigh big enough for a hotel, and was so grand that I, even if I
did have on my Sunday frills, was 'most ashamed to ring the doorbell.

"But I did ring it, and the feller that opened the door was big and
solemn and fine lookin' and had side whiskers. Only this time he wore a
tail coat with brass buttons on it.

"How do you do, Mr. Wingate?' says he. Step right in, sir, if you
please. Mr. and Mrs. Van Wedderburn are out in the auto, but they'll be
back shortly, and very glad to see you, sir, I'm sure. Let me take
your grip and hat. Step right into the reception room and wait, if you
please, sir. Perhaps,' he says, and there was a twinkle in his port eye,
though the rest of his face was sober as the front door of a church,
'perhaps,' says he, 'you might wish to speak with my wife a moment. I'll
take the liberty of sendin' her to you, sir.'

"So, as I sat on the gunwale of a blue and gold chair, tryin' to settle
whether I was really crazy or only just dreamin', in bounces Effie,
rigged up in a servant's cap and apron. She looked polite and demure,
but I could see she was just bubblin' with the joy of the whole
bus'ness.

"'Effie,' says I, 'Effie, what--what in the world--?'

"She giggled. 'Yup,' she says, 'I'm chambermaid here and they treat me
fine. Thank you very much for gettin' me the situation.'

"'But--but them doin's the other day? That automobile--and them silks
and satins--and--?'

"'Mr. Van Wedderburn lent 'em to me,' she said, 'him an' his wife. And
he lent us the auto and the shofer, too. I told him about my troubles
at the Old Home House and he thought 'twould be a great joke for me
to travel back there like a lady. He's awful fond of a joke--Mr. Van
Wedderburn is.'

"'But that man?' I gasps. 'Your husband? That's what you said he was.'

"'Yes,' says she, 'he is. We've been married 'most six months now. My
prophecy's all come true. And DIDN'T I rub it in on that Susannah Debs
and her scamp of a Sim? Ho! ho!'

"She clapped her hands and pretty nigh danced a jig, she was so tickled.

"'But is he a Butler?' I asks.

"'Yup,' she nods, with another giggle. 'He's A butler, though his name's
Jenkins; and a butler's high rank--higher than chambermaid, anyhow. You
see, Mr. Wingate,' she adds, ''twas all my fault. When that Oriental
Seer man at the show said I was to marry a butler, I forgot to ask him
whether you spelt it with a big B or a little one.'"

The unexpected manner in which Effie's pet prophecy had been fulfilled
amused Captain Sol immensely. He laughed so heartily that Issy McKay
looked in at the door with an expression of alarm on his face. The
depot master had laughed little during the past few days, and Issy was
surprised.

But Captain Stitt was ready with a denial. He claimed that the prophecy
was NOT fulfilled and therefore all fortune telling was fraudulent.
Barzilla retorted hotly, and the argument began again. The two were
shouting at each other. Captain Sol stood it for a while and then
commanded silence.

"Stop your yellin'!" he ordered. "What ails you fellers? Think you can
prove it better by screechin'? They can hear you half a mile. There's
Cornelius Rowe standin' gawpin' on the other side of the street this
minute. He thinks there's a fire or a riot, one or t'other. Let's change
the subject. See here, Bailey, didn't you start to tell us somethin'
last time you was in here about your ridin' in an automobile?"

"I started to--yes. But nobody'd listen. I rode in one and I sailed in
one. You see--"

"I'm goin' outdoor," declared Barzilla.

"No, you're not. Bailey listened to you. Now you do as much for him. I
heard a little somethin' about the affair at the time it happened and
I'd like to hear the rest of it. How was it, Bailey?"

Captain Stitt knocked the ashes from his pipe.

"Well," he began, "I didn't know the critter was weak in his top riggin'
or I wouldn't have gone with him in the fust place. And he wa'n't
real loony, nuther. 'Twas only when he got aboard that--that ungodly,
kerosene-smellin', tootin', buzzin', Old Harry's gocart of his that the
craziness begun to show. There's so many of them weak-minded city folks
from the Ocean House comes perusin' 'round summers, nowadays, that
I cal'lated he was just an average specimen, and never examined him
close."

"Are all the Ocean House boarders weak-minded nowadays?" asked the depot
master.

Mr. Wingate answered the question.

"My land!" he snapped; "would they board at the Ocean House if they
WA'N'T weak-minded?"

Captain Bailey did not deign to reply to this jibe. He continued calmly:

"This feller wa'n't an Ocean Houser, though. He was young Stumpton's
automobile skipper-shover, or shofer, or somethin' they called him. He
answered to the hail of Billings, and his home port was the Stumpton
ranch, 'way out in Montana. He'd been here in Orham only a couple of
weeks, havin' come plumb across the United States to fetch his boss the
new automobile. You see, 'twas early October. The Stumptons had left
their summer place on the Cliff Road, and was on their way South for
the winter. Young Stumpton was up to Boston, but he was comin' back in
a couple of days, and then him and the shover was goin' automobilin' to
Florida. To Florida, mind you! In that thing! If it was me I'd buy my
ticket to Tophet direct and save time and money.

"Well, anyhow, this critter Billings, he ain't never smelt salt water
afore, and he don't like the smell. He makes proclamations that Orham is
nothin' but sand, slush, and soft drinks. He won't sail, he can't
swim, he won't fish; but he's hankerin' to shoot somethin', havin' been
brought up in a place where if you don't shoot some of the neighbors
every day or so folks think you're stuck up and dissociable. Then
somebody tells him it's the duckin' season down to Setuckit P'int, and
he says he'll spend his day off, while the boss is away, massycreein'
the coots there. This same somebody whispers that I know so much about
ducks that I quack when I talk, and he comes cruisin' over in the buzz
cart to hire me for guide. And--would you b'lieve it?--it turns out that
he's cal'latin' to make his duckin' v'yage in that very cart. I was for
makin' the trip in a boat, like a sensible man, but he wouldn't hear of
it.

"'Land of love!' says I. 'Go to Setuckit in a automobile?'

"'Why not?' he says. 'The biscuit shooter up at the hotel tells me
there's a smart chance of folks goes there a-horseback. And where a hoss
can travel I reckon the old gal here'--slappin' the thwart of the auto
alongside of him--'can go, too!'

"'But there's the Cut-through,' says I.

"''Tain't nothin' but a creek when the freshet's over, they tell me,'
says he. 'And me and the boss have forded four foot of river in this
very machine.'

"By the 'freshet' bein' over I judged he meant the tide bein' out. And
the Cut-through ain't but a little trickle then, though it's a quarter
mile wide and deep enough to float a schooner at high water. It's the
strip of channel that makes Setuckit Beach an island, you know. The
gov'ment has had engineers down dredgin' of it out, and pretty soon fish
boats'll be able to save the twenty-mile sail around the P'int and into
Orham Harbor at all hours.

"Well, to make a long story short, I agreed to let him cart me to
Setuckit P'int in that everlastin' gas carryall. We was to start at four
o'clock in the afternoon, 'cause the tide at the Cut-through would be
dead low at half-past four. We'd stay overnight at my shanty at the
P'int, get up airly, shoot all day, and come back the next afternoon.

"At four prompt he was on hand, ready for me. I loaded in the guns and
grub and one thing or 'nother, and then 'twas time for me to get aboard
myself.

"'You'll set in the tonneau,' says he, indicatin' the upholstered after
cockpit of the concern. I opened up the shiny hatch, under orders from
him, and climbed in among the upholstery. 'Twas soft as a feather bed.

"'Jerushy!' says I, lollin' back luxurious. This is fine, ain't it?'

"'Cost seventy-five hundred to build,' he says casual. 'Made to order
for the boss. Lightest car of her speed ever turned out.'

"'Go 'way! How you talk! Seventy-five hundred what? Not dollars?'

"'Sure,' he says. Then he turns round--he was in the bow, hangin' on to
the steerin' wheel--and looks me over, kind of interested, but superior.
'Say,' he says, 'I've been hearin' things about you. You're a hero,
ain't you?'

"Durn them Orham gabblers! Ever sence I hauled that crew of seasick
summer boarders out of the drink a couple of years ago and the gov'ment
gave me a medal, the minister and some more of his gang have painted out
the name I was launched under and had me entered on the shippin' list
as 'The Hero.' I've licked two or three for callin' me that, but I can't
lick a parson, and he was the one that told Billings.

"'Oh, I don't know!' I answers pretty sharp. 'Get her under way, why
don't you?'

"All he done was look me over some more and grin.

"'A hero! A real live gov'ment-branded hero!' he says. 'Ain't scared of
nothin', I reckon--hey?'

"I never made no answer. There's some things that's too fresh to eat
without salt, and I didn't have a pickle tub handy.

"'Hum!' he says again, reverend-like. 'A sure hero; scared of nothin'!
Never rode in an auto afore, did you?'

"'No,' says I, peppery; 'and I don't see no present symptom of ridin' in
one now. Cast off, won't you?'

"He cast off. That is to say, he hauled a nickel-plated marlinespike
thing toward him, shoved another one away from him, took a twist on the
steerin' wheel, the gocart coughed like a horse with the heaves, started
up some sort of buzz-planer underneath, and then we begun to move.

"From the time we left my shanty at South Orham till we passed the pines
at Herrin' Neck I laid back in that stuffed cockpit, feelin' as grand
and tainted as old John D. himself. The automobile rolled along smooth
but swift, and it seemed to me I had never known what easy trav'lin' was
afore. As we rounded the bend by the pines and opened up the twelve-mile
narrow white stretch of Setuckit Beach ahead of us, with the ocean on
one side and the bay on t'other, I looked at my watch. We'd come that
fur in thirteen minutes.

"'Land sakes!' I says. 'This is what I call movin' right along!'

"He turned round and sized me up again, like he was surprised.

"'Movin'?' says he. 'Movin'? Why, pard, we've been settin' down to rest!
Out our way, if a lynchin' party didn't move faster than we've done so
fur, the center of attraction would die on the road of old age. Now, my
heroic college chum,' he goes on, callin' me out of my name, as usual,
'will you be so condescendin' as to indicate how we hit the trail?'

"'Hit--hit which? Don't hit nothin', for goodness' sake! Goin' the way
we be, it would--'

"'Which way do we go?'

"'Right straight ahead. Keep on the ocean side, 'cause there's more hard
sand there, and--hold on! Don't do that! Stop it, I tell you!'

"Them was the last rememberable words said by me durin' the next quarter
of an hour. That shover man let out a hair-raisin' yell, hauled the
nickel marlinespike over in its rack, and squeezed a rubber bag that was
spliced to the steerin' wheel. There was a half dozen toots or howls or
honks from under our bows somewheres, and then that automobile hopped
off the ground and commenced to fly. The fust hop landed me on my knees
in the cockpit, and there I stayed. 'Twas the most fittin' position
fur my frame of mind and chimed in fust-rate with the general religious
drift of my thoughts.

"The Cut-through is two mile or more from Herrin' Neck. 'Cordin' to my
count we hit terra cotta just three times in them two miles. The fust
hit knocked my hat off. The second one chucked me up so high I looked
back for the hat, and though we was a half mile away from it, it hadn't
had time to git to the ground. And all the while the horn was a-honkin',
and Billings was a-screechin, and the sand was a-flyin'. Sand! Why,
say! Do you see that extra bald place on the back of my head? Yes? Well,
there was a two-inch thatch of hair there afore that sand blast ground
it off.

"When I went up on the third jounce I noticed the Cut-through just
ahead. Billings see it, too, and--would you b'lieve it?--the lunatic
stood up, let go of the wheel with one hand, takes off his hat and waves
it, and we charge down across them wet tide flats like death on the
woolly horse, in Scriptur'.

"'Hi, yah! Yip!' whoops Billings. 'Come on in, fellers! The water's
fine! Yow! Y-e-e-e! Yip!'

"For a second it left off rainin' sand, and there was a typhoon of
mud and spray. I see a million of the prettiest rainbows--that is, I
cal'lated there was a million; it's awful hard to count when you're
bouncin' and prayin' and drowndin' all to once. Then we sizzed out of
the channel, over the flats on t'other side, and on toward Setuckit.

"Never mind the rest of the ride. 'Twas all a sort of constant changin'
sameness. I remember passin' a blurred life-savin' station, with
three--or maybe thirty--blurred men jumpin' and laughin' and hollerin'.
I found out afterwards that they'd been on the lookout for the bombshell
for half an hour. Billings had told around town what he was goin' to
do to me, and some kind friend had telephoned it to the station. So the
life-savers was full of anticipations. I hope they were satisfied. I
hadn't rehearsed my part of the show none, but I feel what the parson
calls a consciousness of havin' done my best.

"'Whoa, gal!' says Billings, calm and easy, puttin' the helm hard down.
The auto was standin' still at last. Part of me was hangin' over the lee
rail. I could see out of the part, so I knew 'twas my head. And there
alongside was my fish shanty at the P'int, goin' round and round in
circles.

"I undid the hatch of the cockpit and fell out on the sand. Then I
scrambled up and caught hold of the shanty as it went past me. That fool
shover watched me, seemin'ly interested.

"'Why, pard,' says he, 'what's the matter? Do you feel pale? Are you
nervous? It ain't possible that you're scared? Honest, now, pard, if it
weren't that I knew you were a genuine gold-mounted hero I'd sure think
you was a scared man.'

"I never said nothin'. The scenery and me was just turnin' the mark buoy
on our fourth lap.

"'Dear me, pard!' continues Billings. 'I sure hope I ain't scared you
none. We come down a little slow this evenin', but to-morrow night, when
I take you back home, I'll let the old girl out a little.'

"I sensed some of that. And as the shanty had about come to anchor, I
answered and spoke my mind.

"'When you take me back home!' I says. 'When you do! Why, you
crack-brained, murderin' lunatic, I wouldn't cruise in that hell wagon
of yours again for the skipper's wages on a Cunarder. No, nor the mate's
hove in!'

"And that shover he put his head back and laughed and laughed and
laughed."




CHAPTER XVI

THE CRUISE OF THE RED CAR


"I don't wonder he laughed," observed Wingate, who seemed to enjoy
irritating his friend. "You must have been good as a circus."

"Humph!" grunted the depot master. "If I remember right you said YOU
wa'n't any ten-cent side show under similar circumstances, Barzilla.
Heave ahead, Bailey!"

Captain Stitt, unruffled, resumed:

"I tell you, I had to take it that evenin'," he said. "All the time I
was cookin' and while he was eatin' supper, Billings was rubbin' it
into me about my bein' scared. Called me all the saltwater-hero names
he could think of--'Hobson' and 'Dewey' and the like of that, usin' em
sarcastic, of course. Finally, he said he remembered readin' in school,
when he was little, about a girl hero, name of Grace Darlin'. Said he
cal'lated, if I didn't mind, he'd call me Grace, 'cause it was heroic
and yet kind of fitted in with my partic'lar brand of bravery. I didn't
answer much; he had me down, and I knew it. Likewise I judged he was
more or less out of his head; no sane man would yell the way he done
aboard that automobile.

"Then he commenced to spin yarns about himself and his doin's, and
pretty soon it come out that he'd been a cowboy afore young Stumpton
give up ranchin' and took to automobilin'. That cleared the sky line
some, of course; I'd read consider'ble about cowboys in the ten-cent
books my nephew fetched home when he was away to school. I see right off
that Billings was the livin' image of Deadwood Dick and Wild Bill and
the rest in them books; they yelled and howled and hadn't no regard for
life and property any more'n he had. No, sir! He wa'n't no crazier'n
they was; it was in the breed, I judged.

"'I sure wish I had you on the ranch, Grace,' says he. 'Why don't you
come West some day? That's where a hero like you would show up strong.'

"'Godfrey mighty!' I sings out. 'I wouldn't come nigh such a nest of
crazy murderers as that fur no money! I'd sooner ride in that automobile
of yours, and St. Peter himself couldn't coax me into THAT again, not if
'twas fur a cruise plumb up the middle of the golden street!'

"I meant it, too, and the next afternoon when it come time to start
for home he found out that I meant it. We'd shot a lot of ducks, and
Billings was havin' such a good time that I had to coax and tease him
as if he was a young one afore he'd think of quittin'. It was quarter
of six when he backed the gas cart out of the shed. I was uneasy, 'cause
'twas past low-water time, and there was fog comin' on.

"'Brace up, Dewey!' says he. 'Get in.'

"'No, Mr. Billings,' says I. 'I ain't goin' to get in. You take that
craft of yourn home, and I'll sail up alongside in my dory.'

"'In your which?' says he.

"'In my dory,' I says. 'That's her hauled up on the beach abreast the
shanty.'

"He looked at the dory and then at me.

"'Go on!' says he. 'You ain't goin' to pack yourself twelve mile on THAT
SHINGLE?'

"'Sartin I am! says I. 'I ain't takin' no more chances.'

"Do you know, he actually seemed to think I was crazy then. Seemed to
figger that the dory wa'n't big enough; and she's carried five easy
afore now. We had an argument that lasted twenty minutes more, and the
fog driftin' in nigher all the time. At last he got sick of arguin',
ripped out somethin' brisk and personal, and got his tin shop to movin'.

"'You want to cross over to the ocean side,' I called after him. 'The
Cut-through's been dredged at the bay end, remember.'

"'Be hanged!' he yells, or more emphatic. And off he whizzed. I see him
go, and fetched a long breath. Thanks to a merciful Providence, I'd come
so fur without bein' buttered on the undercrust of that automobile or
scalped with its crazy shover's bowie knife.

"Ten minutes later I was beatin' out into the bay in my dory. All
around was the fog, thin as poorhouse gruel so fur, but thickenin' every
minute. I was worried; not for myself, you understand, but for that
cowboy shover. I was afraid he wouldn't fetch t'other side of the
Cut-through. There wa'n't much wind, and I had to make long tacks. I
took the inshore channel, and kept listenin' all the time. And at last,
when 'twas pretty dark and I was cal'latin' to be about abreast of the
bay end of the Cut-through, I heard from somewheres ashore a dismal
honkin' kind of noise, same as a wild goose might make if 'twas chokin'
to death and not resigned to the worst.

"'My land!' says I. 'It's happened!' And I come about and headed
straight in for the beach. I struck it just alongside the gov'ment
shanty. The engineers had knocked off work for the week, waitin' for
supplies, but they hadn't took away their dunnage.

"'Hi!' I yells, as I hauled up the dory. 'Hi-i-i! Billings, where be
you?'

"The honkin' stopped and back comes the answer; there was joy in it.

"'What? Is that Cap'n Stitt?'

"'Yes,' I sings out. 'Where be you?'

"'I'm stuck out here in the middle of the crick. And there's a flood on.
Help me, can't you?'

"Next minute I was aboard the dory, rowin' her against the tide up the
channel. Pretty quick I got where I could see him through the fog and
dark. The auto was on the flat in the middle of the Cut-through, and
the water was hub high already. Billings was standin' up on the for'ard
thwart, makin' wet footmarks all over them expensive cushions.

"'Lord,' says he, 'I sure am glad to see you, pard! Can we get to land,
do you think?'

"'Land?' says I, makin' the dory fast alongside and hoppin' out into the
drink. ''Course we can land! What's the matter with your old derelict?
Sprung a leak, has it?'

"He went on to explain that the automobile had broke down when he struck
the flat, and he couldn't get no farther. He'd been honkin' and howlin'
for ten year at least, so he reckoned.

"'Why in time,' says I, 'didn't you mind me and go up the ocean side?
And why in nation didn't you go ashore and--But never mind that now. Let
me think. Here! You set where you be.'

"As I shoved off in the dory again he turned loose a distress signal.

"'Where you goin'?' he yells. 'Say, pard, you ain't goin' to leave me
here, are you?'

"'I'll be back in a shake,' says I, layin' to my oars. 'Don't holler so!
You'll have the life-savers down here, and then the joke'll be on us.
Hush, can't you? I'll be right back!'

"I rowed up channel a little ways, and then I sighted the place I
was bound for. Them gov'ment folks had another shanty farther up the
Cut-through. Moored out in front of it was a couple of big floats, for
their stone sloops to tie up to at high water. The floats were made of
empty kerosene barrels and planks, and they'd have held up a house easy.
I run alongside the fust one, cut the anchor cable with my jackknife,
and next minute I was navigatin' that float down channel, steerin' it
with my oar and towin' the dory astern.

"'Twas no slouch of a job, pilotin' that big float, but part by steerin'
and part by polin' I managed to land her broadside on to the auto. I
made her fast with the cable ends and went back after the other float.
This one was a bigger job than the fust, but by and by that gas wagon,
with planks under her and cable lashin's holdin' her firm, was restin'
easy as a settin' hen between them two floats. I unshipped my mast,
fetched it aboard the nighest float, and spread the sail over the
biggest part of the brasswork and upholstery.

"'There,' says I, 'if it rains durin' the night she'll keep pretty
dry. Now I'll take the dory and row back to the shanty after some spare
anchors there is there.'

"'But what's it fur, pard?' asks Billings for the nine hundred and
ninety-ninth time. 'Why don't we go where it's dry? The flood's risin'
all the time.'

"'Let it rise,' I says. 'I cal'late when it gets high enough them
floats'll rise with it and lift the automobile up, too. If she's
anchored bow and stern she'll hold, unless it comes on to blow a gale,
and to-morrow mornin' at low tide maybe you can tinker her up so she'll
go.'

"'Go?' says he, like he was astonished. 'Do you mean to say you're
reckonin' to save the CAR?'

"'Good land!' I says, starin' at him. 'What else d'you s'pose? Think I'd
let seventy-five hundred dollars' wuth of gilt-edged extravagance go to
the bottom? What did you cal'late I was tryin' to save--the clam flat?
Give me that dory rope; I'm goin' after them anchors. Sufferin' snakes!
Where IS the dory? What have you done with it?'

"He'd been holdin' the bight of the dory rodin'. I handed it to him so's
he'd have somethin' to take up his mind. And, by time, he'd forgot all
about it and let it drop! And the dory had gone adrift and was out of
sight.

"'Gosh!' says he, astonished-like. 'Pard, the son of a gun has slipped
his halter!'

"I was pretty mad--dories don't grow on every beach plum bush--but there
wa'n't nothin' to say that fitted the case, so I didn't try.

"'Humph!' says I. 'Well, I'll have to swim ashore, that's all, and go up
to the station inlet after another boat. You stand by the ship. If she
gets afloat afore I come back you honk and holler and I'll row after
you. I'll fetch the anchors and we'll moor her wherever she happens to
be. If she shouldn't float on an even keel, or goes to capsize, you jump
overboard and swim ashore. I'll--'

"'Swim?' says he, with a shake in his voice. 'Why, pard, I can't swim!'

"I turned and looked at him. Shover of a two-mile-a-minute gold-plated
butcher cart like that, a cowboy murderer that et his friends for
breakfast--and couldn't swim! I fetched a kind of combination groan and
sigh, turned back the sail, climbed aboard the automobile, and lit up my
pipe.

"'What are you settin' there for?' says he. 'What are you goin' to do?'

"'Do?' says I. 'Wait, that's all--wait and smoke. We won't have to wait
long.'

"My prophesyin' was good. We didn't have to wait very long. It was pitch
dark, foggy as ever, and the tide a-risin' fast. The floats got to be
a-wash. I shinned out onto 'em, picked up the oar that had been left
there, and took my seat again. Billings climbed in, too, only--and
it kind of shows the change sence the previous evenin'--he was in the
passenger cockpit astern, and I was for'ard in the pilot house. For a
reckless daredevil he was actin' mighty fidgety.

"And at last one of the floats swung off the sand. The automobile tipped
scandalous. It looked as if we was goin' on our beam ends. Billings let
out an awful yell. Then t'other float bobbed up and the whole shebang,
car and all, drifted out and down the channel.

"My lashin's held--I cal'lated they would. Soon's I was sure of that I
grabbed up the oar and shoved it over the stern between the floats. I
hoped I could round her to after we passed the mouth of the Cut-through,
and make port on the inside beach. But not in that tide. Inside of five
minutes I see 'twas no use; we was bound across the bay.

"And now commenced a v'yage that beat any ever took sence Noah's time,
I cal'late; and even Noah never went to sea in an automobile, though
the one animal I had along was as much trouble as his whole menagerie.
Billings was howlin' blue murder.

"'Stop that bellerin'!' I ordered. 'Quit it, d'you hear! You'll have the
station crew out after us, and they'll guy me till I can't rest. Shut
up! If you don't, I'll--I'll swim ashore and leave you.'

"I was takin' big chances, as I look at it now. He might have drawed a
bowie knife or a lasso on me; 'cordin' to his yarns he'd butchered folks
for a good sight less'n that. But he kept quiet this time, only gurglin'
some when the ark tilted. I had time to think of another idee. You
remember the dory sail, mast and all, was alongside that cart. I clewed
up the canvas well as I could and managed to lash the mast up straight
over the auto's bows. Then I shook out the sail.

"'Here!' says I, turnin' to Billings. 'You hang on to that sheet. No,
you needn't nuther. Make it fast to that cleat alongside.'

"I couldn't see his face plain, but his voice had a funny tremble to it;
reminded me of my own when I climbed out of that very cart after he'd
jounced me down to Setuckit the day before.

"'What?' he says. 'Wh-what? What sheet? I don't see any sheet. What do
you want me to do?'

"'Tie this line to that cleat. That cleat there! CLEAT, you lubber!
CLEAT! That knob! MAKE IT FAST! Oh, my gosh t'mighty! Get out of my
way!'

"The critter had tied the sheet to the handle of the door instead of the
one I meant, and the pull of the sail hauled the door open and pretty
nigh ripped it off the hinges. I had to climb into the cockpit and
straighten out the mess. I was losin' my temper; I do hate bunglin'
seamanship aboard a craft of mine.

"'But what'll become of us?' begs Billings. 'Will we drown?'

"'What in tunket do we want to drown for? Ain't we got a good sailin'
breeze and the whole bay to stay on top of--fifty foot of water and
more?'

"'Fifty foot!' he yells. 'Is there fifty foot of water underneath us
now? Pard, you don't mean it!'

"'Course I mean it. Good thing, too!'

"'But fifty foot! It's enough to drown in ten times over!'

"'Can't drown but once, can you? And I'd just as soon drown in fifty
foot as four--ruther, 'cause 'twouldn't take so long.'

"He didn't answer out loud; but I heard him talkin' to himself pretty
constant.

"We was well out in the bay by now, and the seas was a little mite more
rugged--nothin' to hurt, you understand, but the floats was all foam,
and once in a while we'd ship a little spray. And every time that
happened Billings would jump and grab for somethin' solid--sometimes
'twas the upholstery and sometimes 'twas me. He wa'n't on the thwart,
but down in a heap on the cockpit floor.

"'Let go of my leg!' I sings out, after we'd hit a high wave and that
shover had made a more'n ordinary savage claw at my underpinnin'. 'You
make me nervous. Drat this everlastin' fog! somethin'll bump into us if
we don't look out. Here, you go for'ard and light them cruisin' lights.
They ain't colored 'cordin' to regulations, but they'll have to do. Go
for'ard! What you waitin' for?'

"Well, it turned out that he didn't like to leave that cockpit. I was
mad.

"'Go for'ard there and light them lights!' I yelled, hangin' to the
steerin' oar and keepin' the ark runnin' afore the wind.

"'I won't!' he says, loud and emphatic. 'Think I'm a blame fool? I sure
would be a jack rabbit to climb over them seats the way they're buckin'
and light them lamps. You're talkin' through your hat!'

"Well, I hadn't no business to do it, but, you see, I was on salt water,
and skipper, as you might say, of the junk we was afloat in; and if
there's one thing I never would stand it's mutiny. I hauled in the oar,
jumped over the cockpit rail, and went for him. He see me comin', stood
up, tried to get out of the way, and fell overboard backwards. Part of
him lit on one of the floats, but the biggest part trailed in the water
between the two. He clawed with his hands, but the planks was slippery,
and he slid astern fast. Just as he reached the last plank and slid off
and under I jumped after him and got him by the scruff of the neck. I
had hold of the lashin' end with one hand, and we tailed out behind the
ark, which was sloppin' along, graceful as an elephant on skates.

"I was pretty well beat out when I yanked him into that cockpit
again. Neither of us said anything for a spell, breath bein' scurce as
di'monds. But when he'd collected some of his, he spoke.

"'Pard,' he says, puffin', 'I'm much obleeged to you. I reckon I sure
ain't treated you right. If it hadn't been for you that time I'd--'

"But I was b'ilin' over. I whirled on him like a teetotum.

"'Drat your hide!' I says. 'When you speak to your officer you say sir!
And now you go for'ard and light them lights. Don't you answer back!
If you do I'll fix you so's you'll never ship aboard another vessel!
For'ard there! Lively, you lubber, lively!'

"He went for'ard, takin' consider'ble time and hangin' on for dear life.
But somehow or 'nuther he got the lights to goin'; and all the time
I hazed him terrible. I was mate on an Australian packet afore I went
fishin' to the Banks, and I can haze some. I blackguarded that shover
awful.

"'Ripperty-rip your everlastin' blankety-blanked dough head!' I roared
at him. 'You ain't wuth the weight to sink you. For'ard there and get
that fog horn to goin'! And keep it goin'! Lively, you sculpin! Don't
you open your mouth to me!'

"Well, all night we sloshed along, straight acrost the bay. We must
have been a curious sight to look at. The floats was awash, so that the
automobile looked like she was ridin' the waves all by her lonesome; the
lamps was blazin' at either side of the bow; Billings was a-tootin'
the rubber fog horn as if he was wound up; and I was standin' on the
cushions amidships, keepin' the whole calabash afore the wind.

"We never met another craft the whole night through. Yes, we did meet
one. Old Ezra Cahoon, of Harniss, was out in his dory stealin' quahaugs
from Seth Andrews's bed over nigh the Wapatomac shore. Ezra stayed long
enough to get one good glimpse of us as we bust through the fog; then he
cut his rodin' and laid to his oars, bound for home and mother. We could
hear him screech for half an hour after he left us.

"Ez told next day that the devil had come ridin' acrost the bay after
him in a chariot of fire. Said he could smell the brimstone and hear
the trumpet callin' him to judgment. Likewise he hove in a lot of
particulars concernin' the personal appearance of the Old Boy himself,
who, he said, was standin' up wavin' a red-hot pitchfork. Some folks
might have been flattered at bein' took for such a famous character; but
I wa'n't; I'm retirin' by nature, and besides, Ez's description
wa'n't cal'lated to bust a body's vanity b'iler. I was prouder of the
consequences, the same bein' that Ezra signed the Good Templars' pledge
that afternoon, and kept it for three whole months, just sixty-nine days
longer than any previous attack within the memory of man had lasted.

"And finally, just as mornin' was breakin', the bows of the floats slid
easy and slick up on a hard, sandy beach. Then the sun riz and the
fog lifted, and there we was within sight of the South Ostable
meetin'-house. We'd sailed eighteen miles in that ark and made a better
landin' blindfold than we ever could have made on purpose.

"I hauled down the sail, unshipped the mast, and jumped ashore to find
a rock big enough to use for a makeshift anchor. It wa'n't more'n three
minutes after we fust struck afore my boots hit dry ground, but Billings
beat me one hundred and seventy seconds, at that. When I had time to
look at that shover man he was a cable's length from high-tide mark,
settin' down and grippin' a bunch of beach grass as if he was afeard the
sand was goin' to slide from under him; and you never seen a yallerer,
more upset critter in your born days.

"Well, I got the ark anchored, after a fashion, and then we walked up to
the South Ostable tavern. Peleg Small, who runs the place, he knows me,
so he let me have a room and I turned in for a nap. I slept about three
hours. When I woke up I started out to hunt the automobile and Billings.
Both of 'em looked consider'ble better than they had when I see 'em
last. The shover had got a gang of men and they'd got the gas cart
ashore, and Billings and a blacksmith was workin' over--or rather
under--the clockwork.

"'Hello!' I hails, comin' alongside.

"Billings sticks his head out from under the tinware.

"'Hi, pard!' says he. I noticed he hadn't called me 'Grace' nor 'Dewey'
for a long spell. Hi, pard,' he says, gettin' to his feet, 'the old gal
ain't hurt a hair. She'll be good as ever in a couple of hours. Then you
and me can start for Orham.'

"'In HER?' says I.

"'Sure,' he says.

"'Not by a jugful!' says I, emphatic. 'I'll borrer a boat to get to
Orham in, when I'm ready to go. You won't ketch me in that man killer
again; and you can call me a coward all you want to!'

"'A coward?' says he. 'You a coward? And--Why, you was in that car all
night!'

"'Oh!' I says. 'Last night was diff'rent. The thing was on water then,
and when I've got enough water underneath me I know I'm safe.'

"'Safe!' he sings out. 'SAFE! Well, by--gosh! Pard, I hate to say it,
but it's the Lord's truth--you had me doin' my "Now I lay me's"!'

"For a minute we looked at each other. Then says I, sort of thinkin' out
loud, 'I cal'late,' I says, 'that whether a man's brave or not depends
consider'ble on whether he's used to his latitude. It's all accordin'.
It lays in the bringin' up, as the duck said when the hen tried to
swim.'

"He nodded solemn. 'Pard,' says he, 'I sure reckon you've called the
turn. Let's shake hands on it.'

"So we shook; and . . ."

Captain Bailey stopped short and sprang from his chair. "There's my
train comin'," he shouted. "Good-by, Sol! So long, Barzilla! Keep away
from fortune tellers and pretty servant girls or YOU'LL be gettin'
married pretty soon. Good-by."

He darted out of the waiting room and his companions followed. Mr.
Wingate, having a few final calls to make, left the station soon
afterwards and did not return until evening. And that evening he heard
news which surprised him.

As he and Captain Sol were exchanging a last handshake on the platform,
Barzilla said:

"Well, Sol, I've enjoyed loafin' around here and yarnin' with you, same
as I always do. I'll be over again in a month or so and we'll have some
more."

The Captain shook his head. "I may not be here then, Barzilla," he
observed.

"May not be here? What do you mean by that?"

"I mean that I don't know exactly where I shall be. I shan't be depot
master, anyway."

"Shan't be depot master? YOU won't? Why, what on airth--"

"I sent in my resignation four days ago. Nobody knows it, except you,
not even Issy, but the new depot master for East Harniss will be here to
take my place on the mornin' of the twelfth, that's two days off."

"Why! Why! SOL!"

"Yes. Keep mum about it. I'll--I'll let you know what I decide to do. I
ain't settled it myself yet. Good-by, Barzilla."




CHAPTER XVII

ISSY'S REVENGE


The following morning, at nine o'clock, Issy McKay sat upon the heap of
rusty chain cable outside the blacksmith's shop at Denboro, reading,
as usual, a love story. Issy was taking a "day off." He had begged
permission of Captain Sol Berry, the permission had been granted,
and Issy had come over to Denboro, the village eight miles above East
Harniss, in his "power dory," or gasoline boat, the Lady May. The Lady
May was a relic of the time before Issy was assistant depot master, when
he gained a precarious living by quahauging, separating the reluctant
bivalve from its muddy house on the bay bottom with an iron rake, the
handle of which was forty feet long. Issy had been seized with a desire
to try quahauging once more, hence his holiday. The rake was broken
and he had put in at Denboro to have it fixed. While the blacksmith was
busy, Issy laboriously spelled out the harrowing chapters of "Vivian,
the Shop Girl; or Lord Lyndhurst's Lowly Love."

A grinning, freckled face peered cautiously around the corner of the
blacksmith's front fence. Then an overripe potato whizzed through the
air and burst against the shop wall a few inches from the reader's head.
Issy jumped.

"You--you everlastin' young ones, you!" he shouted fiercely. "If I
git my hands onto you, you'll wish you'd--I see you hidin' behind that
fence."

Two barefooted little figures danced provokingly in the roadway and two
shrill voices chanted in derision:

     "Is McKay--Is McKay--
     Makes the Injuns run away!

"Scalped anybody lately, Issy?"

Alas for the indiscretions of youth! The tale of Issy's early expedition
in search of scalps and glory was known from one end of Ostable County
to the other. It had made him famous, in a way.

"If I git a-holt of you kids, I'll bet there'll be some scalpin' done,"
retorted the persecuted one, rising from the heap of cable.

A second potato burst like a bombshell on the shingles behind him.
McKay was a good general, in that he knew when it was wisest to retreat.
Shoving the paper novel into his overalls pocket, he entered the shop.

"What's the matter, Is?" inquired the grinning blacksmith. Most people
grinned when they spoke to Issy. "Gittin' too hot outside there, was it?
Why don't you tomahawk 'em and have 'em for supper?"

"Humph!" grunted the offended quahauger. "Don't git gay now, Jake
Larkin. You hurry up with that rake."

"Oh, all right, Is. Don't sculp ME; I ain't done nothin'. What's the
news over to East Harniss?"

"Oh, I don't know. Not much. Sam Bartlett, he started for Boston this
mornin'."

"Who? Sam Bartlett? I want to know! Thought he was down for six weeks.
You sure about that, Is?"

"Course I'm sure. I was up to the depot and see him buy his ticket and
git on the cars."

"Did, hey? Humph! So Sam's gone. Gertie Higgins still over to her Aunt
Hannah's at Trumet?"

Issy looked at his questioner. "Why, yes," he said suspiciously.
"I s'pose she's there. Fact, I know she is. Pat Starkey's doin' the
telegraphin' while she's away. What made you ask that?"

The blacksmith chuckled. "Oh, nothin'," he said. "How's her dad's
dyspepsy? Had any more of them sudden attacks of his? I cal'late they'll
take the old man off some of these days, won't they? I hear the doctor
thinks there's more heart than stomach in them attacks."

But the skipper of the Lady May was not to be put off thus. "What you
drivin' at, Jake?" he demanded. "What's Sam Bartlett's goin' away got to
do with Gertie Higgins?"

In his eagerness he stepped to Mr. Larkin's side. The blacksmith caught
sight of the novel in his customer's pocket. He snatched it forth.

"What you readin' now, Is?" he demanded. "More blood and brimstone?
'Vivy Ann, the Shop Girl!' Gee! Wow!"

"You gimme that book, Jake Larkin! Gimme it now!"

Fending the frantic quahauger off with one mighty arm, the blacksmith
proceeded to read aloud:

"'Darlin',' cried Lord Lyndhurst, strainin' the beautiful and blushin'
maid to his manly bosom, 'you are mine at last. Mine! No--' Jerushy! a
love story! Why, Issy! I didn't know you was in love. Who's the lucky
girl? Send me an invite to your weddin', won't you?"

Issy's face was a fiery red. He tore the precious volume from its
desecrator's hand, losing the pictured cover in the struggle.

"You--you pesky fool!" he shouted. "You mind your own business."

The blacksmith roared in glee. "Oh, ho!" he cried. "Issy's in love and
I never guessed it. Aw, say, Is, don't be mean! Who is she? Have you
strained her to your manly bosom yit? What's her name?"

"Shut up!" shrieked Issy, and strode out of the shop. His tormentor
begged him not to "go off mad," and shouted sarcastic sympathy after
him. But Mr. McKay heeded not. He stalked angrily along the sidewalk.
Then espying just ahead of him the boys who had thrown the potatoes,
he paused, turned, and walking down the carriageway at the side of the
blacksmith's place of business, sat down upon a sawhorse under one of
its rear windows. He could, at least, be alone here and think; and he
wanted to think.

For Issy--although he didn't look it--was deeply interested in another
love story as well as that in his pocket. This one was printed upon
his heart's pages, and in it he was the hero, while the heroine--the
unsuspecting heroine--was Gertie Higgins, daughter of Beriah Higgins,
once a fisherman, now the crotchety and dyspeptic proprietor of the
"general store" and postmaster at East Harniss.

This story began when Issy first acquired the Lady May. The Higgins home
stood on the slope close to the boat landing, and when Issy came in from
quahauging, Gertie was likely to be in the back yard, hanging out the
clothes or watering the flower garden. Sometimes she spoke to him of her
own accord, concerning the weather or other important topics. Once
she even asked him if he were going to the Fourth of July ball at the
town-hall. It took him until the next morning--like other warriors, Issy
was cursed with shyness--to summon courage enough to ask her to go to
the ball with him. Then he found it was too late; she was going with
her cousin, Lennie Bloomer. But he felt that she had offered him the
opportunity, and was happy and hopeful accordingly.

This, however, was before she went to Boston to study telegraphy. When
she returned, with a picture hat and a Boston accent, it was to preside
at the telegraph instrument in the little room adjoining the post office
at her father's store. When Issy bowed blushingly outside the window
of the telegraph room, he received only the airiest of frigid nods. Was
there what Lord Lyndhurst would have called "another"? It would seem
not. Old Mr. Higgins, her father, encouraged no bows nor attentions from
young men, and Gertie herself did not appear to desire them. So Issy
gave up his tales of savage butchery for those of love and blisses,
adored in silence, and hoped--always hoped.

But why had the blacksmith seemed surprised at the departure of Sam
Bartlett, the "dudey" vacationist from the city, whose father had, years
ago, been Beriah Higgins's partner in the fish business? And why had he
coupled the Bartlett name with that of Gertie, who had been visiting her
father's maiden sister at Trumet, the village next below East Harniss,
as Denboro is the next above it? Issy's suspicions were aroused, and he
wondered.

Suddenly he heard voices in the shop above him. The window was open and
he heard them plainly.

"Well! WELL!" It was the blacksmith who uttered the exclamation. "Why,
Bartlett, how be you? What you doin' over here? Thought you'd gone back
to Boston. I heard you had."

Slowly, cautiously, the astonished quahauger rose from the sawhorse and
peered over the window sill. There were two visitors in the shop. One
was Ed Burns, proprietor of the Denboro Hotel and livery stable. The
other was Sam Bartlett, the very same who had left East Harniss that
morning, bound, ostensibly, for Boston. Issy sank back again and
listened.

"Yes, yes!" he heard Sam say impatiently; "I know, but--see here, Jake,
where can I hire a horse in this God-forsaken town?"

"Well, well, Sam!" continued Larkin. "I was just figurin' that Beriah
had got the best of you after all, and you'd had to give it up for this
time. Thinks I, it's too bad! Just because your dad and Beriah Higgins
had such a deuce of a row when they bust up in the fish trade, it's a
shame that he won't hark to your keepin' comp'ny with Gertie. And you
doin' so well; makin' twenty dollars a week up to the city--Ed told me
that--and--"

"Yes, yes! But never mind that. Where can I get a horse? I've got to be
in Trumet by eight to-night sure."

"Trumet? Why, that's where Gertie is, ain't it?"

"Look a-here, Jake," broke in the livery-stable keeper. "I'll tell you
how 'tis. Oh, it's all right, Sam! Jake knows the most of it; I told
him. He can keep his mouth shut, and he don't like old crank Higgins any
better'n you and me do. Jake, Sam here and Gertie had fixed it up to run
off and git married to-night. He was to pretend to start for Boston this
mornin'. Bought a ticket and all, so's to throw Beriah off the scent.
He was to get off the train here at Denboro and I was to let him have a
horse 'n' buggy. Then, this afternoon, he was goin' to drive through the
wood roads around to Trumet and be at the Baptist Church there at eight
to-night sharp. Gertie's Aunt Hannah, she's had her orders, and bein' as
big a crank as her brother, she don't let the girl out of her sight. But
there's a fair at the church and Auntie's tendin' a table. Gertie, she
steps out to the cloak room to git a handkerchief which she's forgot;
see? And she hops into Sam's buggy and away they go to the minister's.
After they're once hitched Old Dyspepsy can go to pot and see the kittle
bile."

"Bully! By gum, that's fine! Won't Beriah rip some, hey?"

"Yes, but there's the dickens to pay. I've only got two horses in the
stable to-day. The rest are let. And the two I've got--one's old Bill,
and he couldn't go twenty mile to save his hide. And t'other's the gray
mare, and blamed if she didn't git cast last night and use up her off
hind leg so's she can't step. And Sam's GOT to have a horse. Where can I
git one?"

"Hum! Have you tried Haynes's?"

"Yes, yes! And Lathrop's and Eldredge's. Can't git a team for love nor
money."

"Sho! And he can't go by train?"

"What? With Beriah postmaster at East Harniss and always nosin' through
every train that stops there? You can't fetch Trumet by train without
stoppin' at East Harniss and--What was that?"

"I don't know. What was it?"

"Sounded like somethin' outside that back winder."

The two ran to the window and looked out. All they saw was an overturned
sawhorse and two or three hens scratching vigorously.

"Guess 'twas the chickens, most likely," observed the blacksmith. Then,
striking his blackened palms together, he exclaimed:

"By time! I've thought of somethin'! Is McKay is in town to-day. Come
over in the Lady May. She's a gasoline boat. Is would take Sam to Trumet
for two or three dollars, I'll bet. And he's such a fool head that he
wouldn't ask questions nor suspicion nothin'. 'Twould be faster'n a
horse and enough sight less risky."

And just then the "fool head," his brain whirling under its carroty
thatch, was hurrying blindly up the main street, bound somewhere, he
wasn't certain where.

A mushy apple exploded between his shoulders, but he did not even turn
around. So THIS was what the blacksmith meant! This was why Mr. Higgins
watched his daughter so closely. This was why Gertie had been sent off
to Trumet. She had met the Bartlett miscreant in Boston; they had been
together there; had fallen in love and--He gritted his teeth and shook
his fists almost in the face of old Deacon Pratt, who, knowing the
McKay penchant for slaughter, had serious thoughts of sending for the
constable.

Beriah Higgins must be warned, of course, but how? To telegraph was
to put Pat Starkey in possession of the secret, and Pat was too good a
friend of Gertie's to be trusted. There was no telephone at the store.
Issy entered the combination grocery store and post office.

"Has the down mail closed yet?" he panted.

The postmaster looked out of his little window.

"Yes," he replied. "Why? Got a letter you want to go? Take it up to the
depot. The train's due, but 'tain't here yit. If you run you can make
it."

Issy took a card from his pocket. It was the business card of the firm
to whom he sold his quahaugs. On the back of the card he wrote in pencil
as follows:

"Mr. Beriah Higgins, your daughter Gertrude is going to meet Sam'l
Bartlett at the Baptist Church in Trumet at 8 P.M. to-night and get
married to him. LOOK OUT!!!"

After an instant's consideration he signed it "A True Friend," this
being in emulation of certain heroes of the Deadwood Dick variety. Then
he put the card into an envelope and ran at top speed to the railway
station. The train came in as he reached the platform. The baggage
master was standing in the door of his car.

"Here, mister!" panted Issy. "Jest hand this letter to Beriah Higgins
when he takes the mail bag at East Harniss, won't you? It's mighty
important. Don't forgit. Thanks."

The train moved off. Issy stared after it, grinning malevolently.
Higgins would get that note in ample time to send word to the watchful
Aunt Hannah. When the unsuspecting eloper reached the Trumet church, it
would be the aunt, not the niece, who awaited him. Still grinning, Mr.
McKay walked off the platform, and into the arms of Ed Burns, the stable
keeper, and Sam Bartlett, his loathed and favored rival.

"Here he is!" shouted Burns. "Now we've got him."

The foiler of the plot turned pale. Was his secret discovered? But no;
his captors began talking eagerly, and gradually the sense of their
pleadings became plain. They wanted him--HIM, of all people--to convey
Bartlett to Trumet in the Lady May.

"You see, it's a business meetin'," urged Burns. "Sam's got to be there
by ha'f past seven or he'll--he won't win on the deal, will you, Sam?
Say yes, Issy; that's a good feller. He'll give you--I don't know's he
won't give you five dollars."

"Ten," cried Bartlett. "And I'll never forget it, either. Will you, Is?"

A mighty "No!" was trembling on Issy's tongue. But before it was uttered
Burns spoke again.

"McKay's got the best boat in these parts," he urged. "She's got a
tiptop engine in her, and--"

The word "engine" dropped into the whirlpool of Issy's thoughts with a
familiar sound. In the chapter of "Vivian" that he had just finished,
the beautiful shopgirl was imprisoned on board the yacht of the
millionaire kidnaper, while the hero, in his own yacht, was miles
astern. But the hero's faithful friend, disguised as a stoker, was
tampering with the villain's engine. A vague idea began to form in
Issy's brain. Once get the would-be eloper aboard the Lady May, and,
even though the warning note should remain undelivered, he--

Issy smiled, and the ghastliness of that smile was unnoticed by his
companions.

"I--I'll do it," he cried. "By mighty! I WILL do it. You be at the wharf
here at four o'clock. I wouldn't do it for everybody, Sam Bartlett, but
for you I'd do consider'ble, just now. And I don't want your ten dollars
nuther."


Doctoring an engine may be easy enough--in stories. But to doctor a
gasoline engine so that it will run for a certain length of time and
THEN break down is not so easy. Three o'clock came and the problem was
still unsolved. Issy, the perspiration running down his face, stood
up in the Lady May's cockpit and looked out across the bay, smooth and
glassy in the afternoon sun.

The sky overhead was clear and blue, but along the eastern and southern
horizon was a gray bank of cloud, heaped in tumbled masses.

A sunburned lobsterman in rubber boots and a sou'wester was smoking on
the wharf.

"What time you goin' to start for home, Is?" he asked.

"Oh, in an hour or so," was the absent-minded reply.

"Humph! You'd better cast off afore that or you'll be fog bound. It'll
be thicker'n dock mud toward sundown, and you'll fetch up in Waptomac
'stead of East Harniss, 'thout you've got a good compass."

"Oh, my compass is all right," began Issy, and stopped short.
The lobsterman made other attempts at conversation, but they were
unproductive. McKay was gazing at the growing fog bank and thinking
hard. To doctor an engine may be difficult, but to get lost in a fog--He
took the compass from the glass-lidded binnacle by the wheel, and
carrying it into the little cabin, placed it in the cuddy forward.

It was nearer five than four when the Lady May, her engine barking
aggressively, moved out of Denboro Harbor. Mr. Bartlett, the passenger,
had been on time and had fumed and fretted at the delay. But Issy was
deliberation itself. He had forgotten his quahaug rake, and the lapse
of memory entailed a trip to the blacksmith's. Then the gasoline tank
needed filling and the battery had to be overhauled.

"Are you sure you can make it?" queried Sam anxiously. "It's important,
I tell you. Mighty important."

The skipper snorted in disgust. "Make it?" he repeated. "If the Lady May
can't make fourteen mile in two hours--let alone two'n a ha'f--then I
don't know her. She's one of them boats you read about, she is."

The Cape makes a wide bend between Denboro and Trumet. The distance
between these towns is twenty long, curved miles over the road; by water
it is reduced to a straight fourteen. And midway between the two, at the
center of the curve, is East Harniss.

The Lady May coughed briskly on. There was no sea, and she sent long,
widening ripples from each side of her bow. Bartlett, leaning over the
rail, gazed impatiently ahead. Issy, sprawled on the bench by the wheel,
was muttering to himself. Occasionally he glanced toward the east. The
gray fog bank was now half way to the zenith and approaching rapidly.
The eastern shore had disappeared.

"Is! Hi, Is! What are you doing? Don't kill him before my eyes."

Issy came out of his trance with a start.

"What--what's that?" he asked. His passenger was grinning broadly.

"What? Kill who?"

"Why, the big chief, or whoever you had under your knee just then.
You've been rolling your eyes and punching air with your fist for the
last five minutes. I was getting scared. You're an unmerciful sinner
when you get started, ain't you, Is? Who was the victim that time? 'Man
Afraid of Hot Water'? or who?"

The skipper scowled. He shoved the fist into his pocket.

"Naw," he growled. "'Twa'n't."

"So? Not an Indian? Then it must have been a white man. Some fellow
after your girl, perhaps. Hey?"

The disconcerted Issy was speechless. His companion's chance shot had
scored a bull's-eye. Sam whooped.

"That's it!" he crowed. "Sure thing! Give it to him, Is! Don't spare
him."

Mr. McKay chokingly admitted that he "wa'n't goin' to."

"Ho, ho! That's the stuff! But who's SHE, Is? When are you going to
marry her?"

Issy grunted spitefully. "You ain't married yourself--not yit," he
observed, with concealed sarcasm.

The unsuspecting Bartlett laughed in triumph. "No," he said. "I'm not,
that's a fact; but maybe I'm going to be some of these days. It looked
pretty dubious for a while, but now it's all right."

"'Tis, hey? You're sure about that, be you?"

"Guess I am. Great Scott! what's that? Fog?"

A damp breath blew across the boat. The clouds covered the sky overhead
and the bay to port. The fog was pouring like smoke across the water.

"Fog, by thunder!" exclaimed Bartlett.

Issy smiled. "Hum! Yes, 'tis fog, ain't it?" he observed.

"But what'll we do? It'll be here in a minute, won't it?"

"Shouldn't be a mite surprised. Looks 's if twas here now."

The fog came on. It reached the Lady May, passed over her, and shut her
within gray, wet walls. It was impossible to see a length from her side.
Sam swore emphatically. The skipper was provokingly calm. He stepped to
the engine, bent over it, and then returned to the wheel.

"What are you doing?" demanded Bartlett.

"Slowin' down, of course. Can't run more'n ha'f speed in a fog like
this. 'Tain't safe."

"Safe! What do I care? I want to get to Trumet."

"Yes? Well, maybe we'll git there if we have luck."

"You idiot! We've GOT to get there. How can you tell which way to steer?
Get your compass, man! get your compass!"

"Ain't got no compass," was the sulky answer. "Left it to home."

"Why, no, you didn't. I--"

"I tell you I did. 'Twas careless of me, I know, but--"

"But I say you didn't. When you went uptown after that quahaug rake I
explored this craft of yours some. The compass is in that little closet
at the end of the cabin. I'll get it."

He rose to his feet. Issy sprang forward and seized him by the arm.

"Set down!" he yelled. "Who's runnin' this boat, you or me?"

The astounded passenger stared at his companion.

"Why, you are," he replied. "But that's no reason--What's the matter
with you, anyway? Have your dime novels driven you loony?"

Issy hesitated. For a moment chagrin and rage at this sudden upset of
his schemes had gotten the better of his prudence. But Bartlett was
taller than he and broad in proportion. And valor--except of the
imaginative brand--was not Issy's strong point.

"There, there, Sam!" he explained, smiling crookedly. "You mustn't mind
me. I'm sort of nervous, I guess. And you mustn't hop up and down in a
boat that way. You set still and I'll fetch the compass."

He stumbled across the cockpit and disappeared in the dusk of the cabin.
Finding that compass took a long time. Sam lost patience.

"What's the matter?" he demanded. "Can't you find it? Shall I come?"

"No, no!" screamed Issy vehemently. "Stay where you be. Catch a-holt of
that wheel. We'll be spinnin' circles if you don't. I'm a-comin'."

But it was another five minutes before he emerged from the cabin,
carrying the compass box very carefully with both hands. He placed it in
the binnacle and closed the glass lid.

"'Twas catched in a bluefish line," he explained. "All snarled up,
'twas."

Sam peered through the glass at the compass.

"Thunder!" he exclaimed. "I should say we had spun around. Instead of
north being off here where I thought it was, it's 'way out to the right.
Queer how fog'll mix a fellow up. Trumet's about northeast, isn't it?"

"No'theast by no'th's the course. Keep her just there."

The Lady May, still at half speed, kept on through the mist. Time
passed. The twilight, made darker still by the fog, deepened. They lit
the lantern in order to see the compass card. Issy had the wheel now.
Sam was forward, keeping a lookout and fretting at the delay.

"It's seven o'clock already," he cried. "For Heaven's sake, how late
will you be? I've got to be there by quarter of eight. D'you hear? I've
GOT to."

"Well, we're gittin' there. Can't expect to travel so fast with part of
the power off. You'll be where you're goin' full as soon as you want to
be, I cal'late."

And he chuckled.

Another half hour and, through the wet dimness, a light flashed,
vanished, and flashed again. Issy saw it and smiled grimly. Bartlett saw
it and shouted.

"'What's that light?" he cried. "Did you see it? There it is, off
there."

"I see it. There's a light at Trumet Neck, ain't there?"

"Humph! It's been years since I was there, but I thought Trumet light
was steady. However--"

"Ain't that the wharf ahead?"

Sure enough, out of the dark loomed the bulk of a small wharf, with
catboats at anchor near it. Higher up, somewhere on the shore, were the
lighted windows of a building.

"By thunder, we're here!" exclaimed Sam, and drew a long breath.

Issy shut off the power altogether, and the Lady May slid easily up to
the wharf. Feverishly her skipper made her fast.

"Yes, sir!" he cried exultantly. "We're here. And no Black Rover nor
anybody else ever done a better piece of steerin' than that, nuther."

He clambered over the stringpiece, right at the heels of his impatient
but grateful passenger. Sam's thanks were profuse and sincere.

"I'll never forget it, Is," he declared. "I'll never forget it. And
you'll have to let me pay you the--What makes you shake so?"

Issy pulled his arm away and stepped back.

"I'll never forget it, Is," continued Sam. "I--Why! What--?"

He was standing at the shore end of the wharf, gazing up at the lighted
windows. They were those of a dwelling house--an old-fashioned house
with a back yard sloping down to the landing.

And then Issy McKay leaned forward and spoke in his ear.

"You bet you won't forgit it, Sam Bartlett!" he crowed, in trembling but
delicious triumph. "You bet you won't! I've fixed you just the same as
the Black Rover fixed the mutineers. Run off with my girl, will ye? And
marry her, will ye? I--"

Sam interrupted him. "Why! WHY!" he cried. "That's--that's Gertie's
house! This isn't Trumet! IT'S EAST HARNISS!"

The next moment he was seized from behind. The skipper's arms were
around his waist and the skipper's thin legs twisted about his own. They
fell together upon the sand and, as they rolled and struggled, Issy's
yells rose loud and high.

"Mr. Higgins!" he shrieked. "Mr. Higgins! Come on! I've got him! I've
got the feller that's tryin' to steal your daughter! Come on! I've got
him! I'm hangin' to him!"

A door banged open. Some one rushed down the walk. And then a girl's
voice cried in alarm:

"What is it? Who is it? What IS the matter?"

And from the bundle of legs and arms on the ground two voices exclaimed:
"GERTIE!"

"But where IS your father?" asked Sam. Issy asked nothing. He merely sat
still and listened.

"Why, he's at Trumet. At least I suppose he is. Mrs. Jones--she's gone
to telephone to him now--says that he came home this morning with one
of those dreadful 'attacks' of his. And after dinner he seemed so sick
that, when she went for the doctor, she wired me at Auntie's to come
home. I didn't want to come--you know why--but I COULDN'T let him die
alone. And so I caught the three o'clock train and came. I knew you'd
forgive me. But it seems that when Mrs. Jones came back with the doctor
they found father up and dressed and storming like a crazy man. He had
received some sort of a letter; he wouldn't say what. And, in spite of
all they could do, he insisted on going out. And Cap'n Berry--the depot
master--says he went to Trumet on the afternoon freight. We must have
passed each other on the way. And I'm so--But why are you HERE? And what
were you and Issy doing? And--"

Her lover broke in eagerly. "Then you're alone now?" he asked.

"Yes, but--"

"Good! Your father can't get a train back from Trumet before to-morrow
morning. I don't know what this letter was--but never mind. Perhaps
friend McKay knows more about it. It may be that Mr. Higgins is waiting
now outside the Baptist church. Gertie, now's our chance. You come with
me right up to the minister's. He's a friend of mine. He understands.
He'll marry us, I know. Come! We mustn't lose a minute. Your dad may
take a notion to drive back."

He led her off up the lane, she protesting, he urging. At the corner of
the house he turned.

"I say, Is!" he called. "Don't you want to come to the wedding? Seems
to me we owe you that, considering all you've done to help it along. Or
perhaps you want to stay and fix that compass of yours."

Issy didn't answer. Some time after they had gone he arose from the
ground and stumbled home. That night he put a paper novel into the
stove. Next morning, before going to the depot, he removed an iron spike
from the Lady May's compass box. The needle swung back to its proper
position.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE MOUNTAIN AND MAHOMET


The eleventh of July. The little Berry house stood high on its joists
and rollers, in the middle of the Hill Boulevard, directly opposite
the Edwards lot. Close behind it loomed the big "Colonial." Another
twenty-four hours, and, even at its one-horse gait, the depot master's
dwelling would be beyond the strip of Edwards fence. The "Colonial"
would be ready to move on the lot, and Olive Edwards, the widow, would
be obliged to leave her home. In fact, Mr. Williams had notified
her that she and her few belongings must be off the premises by the
afternoon of the twelfth.

The great Williams was in high good-humor. He chuckled as he talked with
his foreman, and the foreman chuckled in return. Simeon Phinney did
not chuckle. He was anxious and worried, and even the news of Gertie
Higgins's runaway marriage, brought to him by Obed Gott, who--having
been so recently the victim of another unexpected matrimonial
alliance--was wickedly happy over the postmaster's discomfiture, did not
interest him greatly.

"Well, I wonder who'll be the next couple," speculated Obed. "First
Polena and old Hardee, then Gertie Higgins and Sam Bartlett! I declare,
Sim, gettin' married unbeknownst to anybody must be catchin', like the
measles. Nobody's safe unless they've got a wife or husband livin'. Me
and Sol Berry are old baches--we'd better get vaccinated or WE may come
down with the disease. Ho! ho!"

After dinner Mr. Phinney went from his home to the depot. Captain Sol
was sitting in the ticket office, with the door shut. On the platform,
forlornly sprawled upon the baggage truck, was Issy McKay, the picture
of desolation. He started nervously when he heard Simeon's step. As
yet Issy's part in the Bartlett-Higgins episode was unknown to the
townspeople. Sam and Gertie had considerately kept silence. Beriah had
not learned who sent him the warning note, the unlucky missive which had
brought his troubles to a climax. But he was bound to learn it, he would
find out soon, and then--No wonder Issy groaned.

"Come in here, Sim," said the depot master. Phinney entered the ticket
office.

"Shut the door," commanded the Captain. The order was obeyed. "Well,
what is it?" asked Berry.

"Why, I just run in to see you a minute, Sol, that's all. What are you
shut up in here all alone for?"

"'Cause I want to be alone. There's been more than a thousand folks in
this depot so far to-day, seems so, and they all wanted to talk. I don't
feel like talkin'."

"Heard about Gertie Higgins and--"

"Yes."

"Who told you?"

"Hiram Baker told me first. He's a fine feller and he's so tickled, now
that his youngster's 'most well, that he cruises around spoutin' talk
and joy same as a steamer's stack spouts cinders. He told me. Then Obed
Gott and Cornelius Rowe and Redny Blount and Pat Starkey, and land knows
how many more, came to tell me. I cut 'em short. Why, even the Major
himself condescended to march in, grand and imposin' as a procession, to
make proclamations about love laughin' at locksmiths, and so on. Since
he got Polena and her bank account he's a bigger man than the President,
in his own estimate."

"Humph! Well, he better make the best of it while it lasts. P'lena ain't
Hetty Green, and her money won't hold out forever."

"That's a fact. Still Polena's got sense. She'll hold Hardee in check,
I cal'late. I wouldn't wonder if it ended by her bossin' things and the
Major actin' as a sort of pet poodle dog--nice and pretty to walk out
with, but always kept at the end of a string."

"You didn't go to Higgins's for dinner to-day, did you?"

"No. Nor I shan't go for supper. Beriah's bad enough when he's got
nothin' the matter with him but dyspepsy. Now that his sufferin's are
complicated with elopements, I don't want to eat with him."

"Come and have supper with us."

"I guess not, thank you, Sim. I'll get some crackers and cheese and such
at the store. I--I ain't very hungry these days."

He turned his head and looked out of the window. Simeon fidgeted.

"Sol," he said, after a pause, "we'll be past Olive's by to-morrer
night."

No answer. Sim repeated his remark.

"I know it," was the short reply.

"Yes--yes, I s'posed you did, but--"

"Sim, don't bother me now. This is my last day here at the depot, and
I've got things to do."

"Your last day? Why, what--?"

Captain Sol told briefly of his resignation and of the coming of the new
depot master.

"But you givin' up your job!" gasped Phinney. "YOU! Why, what for?"

"For instance, I guess. I ain't dependent on the wages, and I'm sick of
the whole thing."

"But what'll you do?"

"Don't know."

"You--you won't leave town, will you? Lawsy mercy, I hope not!"

"Don't know. Maybe I'll know better by and by. I've got to think things
out. Run along now, like a good feller. Don't say nothin' about my
quittin'. All hands'll know it to-morrow, and that's soon enough."

Simeon departed, his brain in a whirl. Captain Solomon Berry no longer
depot master! The world must be coming to an end.

He remained at his work until supper time. During the meal he ate and
said so little that his wife wondered and asked questions. To avoid
answering them he hurried out. When he returned, about ten o'clock, he
was a changed man. His eyes shone and he fairly danced with excitement.

"Emeline!" he shouted, as he burst into the sitting room. "What do you
think? I've got the everlastin'est news to tell!"

"Good or bad?" asked the practical Mrs. Phinney.

"Good! So good that--There! let me tell you. When I left here I went
down to the store and hung around till the mail was sorted. Pat Starkey
was doin' the sortin', Beriah bein' too upsot by Gertie's gettin'
married to attend to anything. Pat called me to the mail window and
handed me a letter.

"'It's for Olive Edwards,' he says. 'She's been expectin' one for a
consider'ble spell, she told me, and maybe this is it. P'r'aps you'd
just as soon go round by her shop and leave it.'

"I took the letter and looked at it. Up in one corner was the printed
name of an Omaha firm. I never said nothin', but I sartinly hustled on
my way up the hill.

"Olive was in her little settin' room back of the shop. She was pretty
pale, and her eyes looked as if she hadn't been doin' much sleepin'
lately. Likewise I noticed--and it give me a queer feelin' inside--that
her trunk was standin', partly packed, in the corner."

"The poor woman!" exclaimed Mrs. Phinney.

"Yes," went on her husband. "Well, I handed over the letter and started
to go, but she told me to set down and rest, 'cause I was so out of
breath. To tell you the truth, I was crazy to find out what was in that
envelope and, being as she'd give me the excuse, I set.

"She took the letter over to the lamp and looked at it for much as
a minute, as if she was afraid to open it. But at last, and with her
fingers shakin' like the palsy, she fetched a long breath and tore off
the end of the envelope. It was a pretty long letter, and she read it
through. I see her face gettin' whiter and whiter and, when she reached
the bottom of the last page, the letter fell onto the floor. Down went
her head on her arms, and she cried as if her heart would break. I never
felt so sorry for anybody in my life.

"'Don't, Mrs. Edwards,' I says. 'Please don't. That cousin of yours is
a darn ungrateful scamp, and I'd like to have my claws on his neck this
minute.'

"She never even asked me how I knew about the cousin. She was too much
upset for that.

"'Oh! oh!' she sobs. 'What SHALL I do? Where shall I go? I haven't got a
friend in the world!'

"I couldn't stand that. I went acrost and laid my hand on her shoulder.

"'Mrs. Edwards,' says I, 'you mustn't say that. You've got lots of
friends. I'm your friend. Mr. Hilton's your friend. Yes, and there's
another, the best friend of all. If it weren't for him, you'd have been
turned out into the street long before this.'"

Mrs. Phinney nodded. "I'm glad you told her!" she exclaimed. "She'd
ought to know."

"That's what I thought," said Simeon.

"Well, she raised her head then and looked at me.

"'You mean Mr. Williams?' she asks.

"That riled me up. 'Williams nothin'!' says I. 'Williams let you stay
here 'cause he could just as well as not. If he'd known that this other
friend was keepin' him from gettin' here, just on your account, he'd
have chucked you to glory, promise or no promise. But this friend, this
real friend, he don't count cost, nor trouble, nor inconvenience. Hikes
his house--the house he lives in--right out into the road, moves it to a
place where he don't want to go, and--'

"'Mr. Phinney,' she sighs out, 'what do you mean?'

"And then I told her. She listened without sayin' a word, but her eyes
kept gettin' brighter and brighter and she breathed short.

"'Oh!' she says, when I'd finished. 'Did he--did he--do that for ME?'

"'You bet!' says I. 'He didn't tell me what he was doin' it for--that
ain't Sol's style; but I'm arithmetiker enough to put two and two
together and make four. He did it for you, you can bet your last red on
that.'

"She stood up. 'Oh!' she breathes. 'I--I must go and thank him. I--'

"But, knowin' Sol, I was afraid. Fust place, there was no tellin' how
he'd act, and, besides, he might not take it kindly that I'd told her.

"'Wait a jiffy,' I says. 'I'll go out and see if he's home. You stay
here. I'll be back right off.'

"Out I put, and over to the Berry house, standin' on its rollers in the
middle of the Boulevard. And, just as I got to it, somebody says:

"'Ahoy, Sim! What's the hurry? Anybody on fire?'

"'Twas the Cap'n himself, settin' on a pile of movin' joist and smokin'
as usual. I didn't waste no time.

"'Sol,' says I, 'I've just come from Olive's. She's got that letter from
the Omaha man. Poor thing! all alone there--'

"He interrupted me sharp. 'Well?' he snaps. 'What's it say? Will the
cousin help her?'

"'No,' I says, 'drat him, he won't!'

"The answer I got surprised me more'n anything I ever heard or ever will
hear.

"'Thank God!' says Sol Berry. 'That settles it.'

"And I swan to man if he didn't climb down off them timbers and march
straight across the street, over to the door of Olive Edwards's home,
open it, and go in! I leaned against the joist he'd left, and swabbed my
forehead with my sleeve."

"He went to HER!" gasped Mrs. Phinney.

"Wait," continued her husband. "I must have stood there twenty minutes
when I heard somebody hurryin' down the Boulevard. 'Twas Cornelius Rowe,
all red-faced and het up, but bu'stin' with news.

"''Lo, Sim!' says he to me. 'Is Cap'n Sol home? Does he know?'

"'Know? Know what?" says I.

"'Why, the trick Mr. Williams put up on him? Hey? You ain't heard? Well,
Mr. Williams's fixed him nice, HE has! Seems Abner Payne hadn't answered
Sol's letter tellin' him he'd accept the offer to swap lots, and
Williams went up to Wareham where Payne's been stayin' and offered him a
thumpin' price for the land on Main Street, and took it. The deed's all
made out. Cap'n Sol can't move where he was goin' to, and he's left with
his house on the town, as you might say. Ain't it a joke, though? Where
is Sol? I want to be the fust to tell him and see how he acts. Is he to
home?'

"I was shook pretty nigh to pieces, but I had some sense left.

"'No, he ain't,' says I. 'I see him go up street a spell ago.'"

"Why, Simeon!" interrupted Mrs. Phinney once more. "Was that true? How
COULD you see him when--"

"Be still! S'pose I was goin' to tell him where Sol HAD gone? I'd have
lied myself blue fust. However, Cornelius was satisfied.

"'That so?' he grunts. 'By jings! I'm goin' to find him.'

"Off he went, and the next thing I knew the Edwards door opened, and
I heard somebody callin' my name. I went acrost, walkin' in a kind of
daze, and there, in the doorway, with the lamp shinin' on 'em, was Cap'n
Sol and Olive. The tears was wet on her cheeks, but she was smilin' in
a kind of shy, half-believin' sort of way, and as for Sol, he was one
broad, satisfied grin.

"'Cap'n,' I begun, 'I just heard the everlastin'est news that--'

"'Shut up, Sim!' he orders, cheerful. 'You've been a mighty good friend
to both of us, and I want you to be the fust to shake hands.'

"'Shake hands?' I stammers, lookin' at 'em. 'WHAT? You don't mean--'

"'I mean shake hands. Don't you want to?'

"Want to! I give 'em both one more look, and then we shook, up to the
elbows; and my grin had the Cap'n's beat holler.

"'Sim,' he says, after I'd cackled a few minutes, 'I cal'late maybe that
white horse is well by this time. P'r'aps we might move a little faster.
I'm kind of anxious to get to Main Street.'

"Then I remembered. 'Great gosh all fish-hooks!' I sings out. 'Main
Street? Why, there AIN'T no Main Street!'

"And I gives 'em Cornelius's news. The widow's smile faded out.

"'Oh!' says she. 'O Solomon! And I got you into all this trouble!'

"Cap'n Sol didn't stop grinnin', but he scratched his head. 'Huh!' says
he. 'Mark one up for King Williams the Great. Humph!'

"He thought for a minute and then he laughed out loud. 'Olive,' he says,
'if I remember right, you and I always figgered to live on the Shore
Road. It's the best site in town. Sim, I guess if that white horse IS
well, you can move that shanty of mine right to Cross Street, down that,
and back along the Shore Road to the place where it come from. THAT
land's mine yet,' says he.

"If that wa'n't him all over! I couldn't think what to say, except that
folks would laugh some, I cal'lated.

"'Not at us, they won't,' says he. 'We'll clear out till the laughin' is
over. Olive, to-morrer mornin' we'll call on Parson Hilton and then take
the ten o'clock train. I feel's if a trip to Washin'ton would be about
right just now.'

"She started and blushed and then looked up into his face. 'Solomon,'
she says, low, 'I really would like to go to Niagara.'

"He shook his head. 'Old lady,' says he, 'I guess you don't quite
understand this thing. See here'--p'intin' to his house loomin' big and
black in the roadway--'see! the mountain has come to Mahomet.'"

Mrs. Phinney had heard enough. She sprang from her chair and seized her
husband's hands.

"Splendid!" she cried, her face beaming. "Oh, AIN'T it lovely! Ain't you
glad for 'em, Simeon?"

"Glad! Say, Emeline; there's some of that wild-cherry bounce down
cellar, ain't there? Let's break our teetotalism for once and drink a
glass to Cap'n and Mrs. Solomon Berry. Jerushy! I got to do SOMETHIN' to
celebrate."


On the Hill Boulevard the summer wind stirred the silverleaf poplars.
The thick, black shadows along the sidewalks were heavy with the perfume
of flowers. Captain Sol, ex-depot master of East Harniss, strolled on
in the dark, under the stars, his hands in his pockets, and in his heart
happiness complete and absolute.

Behind him twinkled the lamp in the window of the Edwards house, so soon
to be torn down. Before him, over the barberry hedge, blazed the windows
of the mansion the owner of which was responsible for it all. The
windows were open, and through them sounded the voices of the mighty
Ogden Hapworth Williams and his wife, engaged in a lively altercation.
It was an open secret that their married life was anything but peaceful.

"What are you grumbling about now?" demanded 'Williams. "Don't I give
you more money than--"

"Nonsense!" sneered Mrs. Williams, in scornful derision. "Nonsense,
I say! Money is all there is to you, Ogden. In other things, the real
things of this world, those you can't buy with money, you're a perfect
imbecile. You know nothing whatever about them."

Captain Sol, alone on the walk by the hedge, glanced in the direction
of the shrill voice, then back at the lamp in Olive's window. And he
laughed aloud.

========================================
========================================

KEZIAH COFFIN

by Joseph C. Lincoln




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I.--    IN WHICH KEZIAH HEARS OF TWO PROPOSALS AND THE BEGINNING OF A THIRD

II.--   IN WHICH KEZIAH UNEARTHS A PROWLER

III.--  IN WHICH KEZIAH ASSUMES A GUARDIANSHIP

IV.--   IN WHICH KEZIAH'S PARSON DECIDES TO RUN IT BLINDFOLD

V.--    IN WHICH THE PARSON CRUISES IN STRANGE WATERS

VI.--   IN WHICH OLD FRIENDS MEET

VII.--  IN WHICH CAPTAIN NAT PICKS UP A DERELICT

VIII.-- IN WHICH THE PARSON AND MR. PEPPER DECLARE THEIR INDEPENDENCE

IX.--   IN WHICH MISS DANIELS DETERMINES TO FIND OUT

X.--    IN WHICH KEZIAH'S TROUBLES MULTIPLY

XI.--   IN WHICH CAPEN EBEN RECEIVES A CALLER

XII.--  IN WHICH CAPTAIN EBEN MAKES PORT

XIII.-- IN WHICH KEZIAH BREAKS THE NEWS

XIV.--  IN WHICH THE SEA MIST SAILS

XV.--   IN WHICH TRUMET TALKS OF CAPTAIN NAT

XVI--   IN WHICH THE MINISTER BOARDS THE SAN JOSE

XVII.-- IN WHICH EBENEZER CAPEN IS SURPRISED

XVIII.--IN WHICH KEZIAH DECIDES TO FIGHT

XIX.--  IN WHICH A RECEPTION IS CALLED OFF

XX.--   IN WHICH THE MINISTER RECEIVES A LETTER

XXI.--  IN WHICH MR. STONE WASHES HIS HANDS

XXII.-- IN WHICH KEZIAH'S PARSON PREACHES ONCE MORE




KEZIAH COFFIN

by Joseph C. Lincoln




CHAPTER I

IN WHICH KEZIAH HEARS TWO PROPOSALS AND THE BEGINNING OF A THIRD


Trumet in a fog; a fog blown in during the night by the wind from the
wide Atlantic. So wet and heavy that one might taste the salt in it.
So thick that houses along the main road were but dim shapes behind
its gray drapery, and only the gates and fences of the front yards
were plainly in evidence to the passers-by. The beach plum and bayberry
bushes on the dunes were spangled with beady drops. The pole on Cannon
Hill, where the beacon was hoisted when the packet from Boston dropped
anchor in the bay, was shiny and slippery. The new weathervane, a
gilded whale, presented to the "Regular" church by Captain Zebedee Mayo,
retired whaler, swam in a sea of cloud. The lichened eaves of the little
"Come-Outer" chapel dripped at sedate intervals. The brick walk leading
to the door of Captain Elkanah Daniels's fine residence held undignified
puddles in its hollows. And, through the damp stillness, the muttered
growl of the surf, three miles away at the foot of the sandy bluffs by
the lighthouse, sounded ominously.

Directly opposite Captain Elkanah's front gate, on the other side of the
main road, stood the little story-and-a-half house, also the captain's
property, which for fourteen years had been tenanted by Mrs. Keziah
Coffin and her brother, Solomon Hall, the shoemaker. But Solomon had,
the month before, given up his fight with debt and illness and was
sleeping quietly in Trumet's most populous center, the graveyard. And
Keziah, left alone, had decided that the rent and living expenses were
more than her precarious earnings as a seamstress would warrant, and,
having bargained with the furniture dealer in Wellmouth for the sale of
her household effects, was now busy getting them ready for the morrow,
when the dealer's wagon was to call. She was going to Boston, where a
distant and condescending rich relative had interested himself to the
extent of finding her a place as sewing woman in a large tailoring
establishment.

The fog hung like a wet blanket over the house and its small yard, where
a few venerable pear trees, too conservative in their old age to venture
a bud even though it was almost May, stood bare and forlorn. The day was
dismal. The dismantled dining room, its tables and chairs pushed into a
corner, and its faded ingrain carpet partially stripped from the floor,
was dismal, likewise. Considering all things, one might have expected
Keziah herself to be even more dismal. But, to all outward appearances,
she was not. A large portion of her thirty-nine years of life had been
passed under a wet blanket, so to speak, and she had not permitted
the depressing covering to shut out more sunshine than was absolutely
necessary. "If you can't get cream, you might as well learn to love your
sasser of skim milk," said practical Keziah.

She was on her knees, her calico dress sleeves, patched and darned, but
absolutely clean, rolled back, uncovering a pair of plump, strong arms,
a saucer of tacks before her, and a tack hammer with a claw head in
her hand. She was taking up the carpet. Grace Van Horne, Captain Eben
Hammond's ward, who had called to see if there was anything she might do
to help, was removing towels, tablecloths, and the like from the drawers
in a tall "high-boy," folding them and placing them in an old and
battered trunk. The pair had been discussing the subject which all
Trumet had discussed for three weeks, namely, the "calling" to the
pastorate of the "Regular" church of the Rev. John Ellery, the young
divinity student, who was to take the place of old Parson Langley,
minister in the parish for over thirty years. Discussion in the village
had now reached a critical point, for the Reverend John was expected
by almost any coach. In those days, the days of the late fifties, the
railroad down the Cape extended only as far as Sandwich; passengers made
the rest of their journey by stage. Many came direct from the city by
the packet, the little schooner, but Mr. Ellery had written that he
should probably come on the coach.

"They say he's very nice-looking," remarked Miss Van Horne soberly,
but with a MISCHIEVOUS glance under her dark lashes at Keziah. The lady
addressed paused long enough to transfer several tacks from the floor to
the saucer, and then made answer.

"Humph!" she observed. "A good many years ago I saw a theater show up
to Boston. Don't be shocked; those circumstances we hear so much tell
of--the kind you can't control--have kept me from goin' to theaters
much, even if I wanted to. But I did see this entertainment, and a fool
one 'twas, too, all singin' instead of talkin'--op'ra, I believe they
called it. Well, as I started to say, one of the leadin' folks in it was
the Old Harry himself, and HE was pretty good-lookin'."

Grace laughed, even though she had been somewhat shocked.

"Why, Aunt Keziah!" she exclaimed--those who knew Keziah Coffin
best usually called her aunt, though real nephews and nieces she had
none--"why, Aunt Keziah! What do you mean by comparing the--the person
you just mentioned with a MINISTER!"

"Oh, I wasn't comparin' 'em; I'll leave that for you Come-Outers to do.
Drat this carpet! Seems's if I never saw such long tacks; I do believe
whoever put 'em down drove 'em clean through the center of the earth and
let the Chinymen clinch 'em on t'other side. I haul up a chunk of the
cellar floor with every one. Ah, hum!" with a sigh, "I cal'late
they ain't any more anxious to leave home than I am. But, far's the
minister's concerned, didn't I hear of your Uncle Eben sayin' in prayer
meetin' only a fortni't or so ago that all hands who wa'n't Come-Outers
were own children to Satan? Mr. Ellery must take after his father some.
Surprisin', ain't it, what a family the old critter's got."

The girl laughed again. For one brought up, since her seventh year,
in the strictest of Come-Outer families, she laughed a good deal. Many
Come-Outers considered it wicked to laugh. Yet Grace did it, and hers
was a laugh pleasant to hear and distinctly pleasant to see. It made her
prettier than ever, a fact which, if she was aware of it, should have
been an additional preventive, for to be pretty smacks of vanity.
Perhaps she wasn't aware of it.

"What do you think Uncle Eben would say if he heard that?" she asked.

"Say I took after my father, too, I presume likely. Does your uncle know
you come here to see me so often? And call me 'aunt' and all that?"

"Of course he does. Aunt Keziah, you mustn't think Uncle Eben doesn't
see the good in people simply because they don't believe as he does.
He's as sweet and kind as--"

"Who? Eben Hammond? Land sakes, child, don't I know it? Cap'n Eben's the
salt of the earth. I'm a Regular and always have been, but I'd be glad
if my own society was seasoned with a few like him. 'Twould taste better
to me of a Sunday." She paused, and then added quizzically: "What d'you
s'pose Cap'n Elkanah and the rest of our parish committee would say if
they heard THAT?"

"Goodness knows! Still, I'm glad to hear you say it. And uncle says you
are as good a woman as ever lived. He thinks you're misled, of course,
but that some day you'll see the error of your ways."

"Humph! I'll have to hurry up if I want to see 'em without spectacles.
See my errors! Land sakes! much as I can do to see the heads of these
tacks. Takin' up carpets is as hard a test of a body's eyesight as 'tis
of their religion."

Her companion put down the tablecloth she was folding and looked
earnestly at the other woman. To an undiscerning eye the latter would
have looked much as she always did--plump and matronly, with brown hair
drawn back from the forehead and parted in the middle; keen brown eyes
with a humorous twinkle in them--this was the Keziah Coffin the later
generation of Trumet knew so well.

But Grace Van Horne, who called her aunt and came to see her so
frequently, while her brother was alive and during the month following
his death, could see the changes which the month had wrought. She saw
the little wrinkles about the eyes and the lines of care about the
mouth, the tired look of the whole plucky, workaday New England figure.
She shook her head.

"Religion!" she repeated. "I do believe, Aunt Keziah, that you've got
the very best religion of anybody I know. I don't care if you don't
belong to our church. When I see how patient you've been and how
cheerful through all your troubles, it--"

Mrs. Coffin waved the hammer deprecatingly. "There! there!" she
interrupted. "I guess it's a good thing I'm goin' away. Here's you and I
praisin' up each other's beliefs, just as if that wasn't a crime here
in Trumet. Sometimes when I see how the two societies in this little
one-horse place row with each other, I declare if it doesn't look as if
they'd crossed out the first word of 'Love your neighbor' and wrote in
'Fight,' instead. Yet I'm a pretty good Regular, too, and when it comes
to whoopin' and carryin' on like the Come-Outers, I--Well! well!
never mind; don't begin to bristle up. I won't say another word about
religion. Let's pick the new minister to pieces. ANY kind of a Christian
can do that."

But the new minister was destined to remain undissected that morning,
in that house at least. Grace was serious now and she voiced the matter
which had been uppermost in her mind since she left home.

"Aunt Keziah," she said, "why do you go away? What makes you? Is it
absolutely necessary?"

"Why do I go? Why, for the same reason that the feller that was hove
overboard left the ship--cause I can't stay. You've got to have vittles
and clothes, even in Trumet, and a place to put your head in nights.
Long's Sol was alive and could do his cobblin' we managed to get along
somehow. What I could earn sewin' helped, and we lived simple. But when
he was taken down and died, the doctor's bills and the undertaker's used
up what little money I had put by, and the sewin' alone wouldn't keep
a healthy canary in bird seed. Dear land knows I hate to leave the old
house I've lived in for fourteen years and the town I was born in, but
I've got to, for all I see. Thank mercy, I can pay Cap'n Elkanah his
last month's rent and go with a clear conscience. I won't owe anybody,
that's a comfort, and nobody will owe me; though I could stand that, I
guess," she added, prying at the carpet edge.

"I don't care!" The girl's dark eyes flashed indignantly. "I think it's
too bad of Cap'n Elkanah to turn you out when--"

"Don't talk that way. He ain't turnin' me out. He ain't lettin' houses
for his health and he'll need the money to buy his daughter's summer
rigs. She ain't had a new dress for a month, pretty near, and here's
a young and good-lookin' parson heavin' in sight. Maybe Cap'n Elkanah
would think a minister was high-toned enough even for Annabel to marry."

"He's only twenty-three, they say," remarked Grace, a trifle
maliciously. "Perhaps she'll adopt him."

Annabel was the only child of Captain Elkanah Daniels, who owned the
finest house in town. She was the belle of Trumet, and had been for a
good many years.

Keziah laughed.

"Well," she said, "anyhow I've got to go. Maybe I'll like Boston first
rate, you can't tell. Or maybe I won't. Ah, hum! 'twouldn't be the first
thing I've had to do that I didn't like."

Her friend looked at her.

"Aunt," she said, "I want to make a proposal to you, and you mustn't be
cross about it."

"A proposal! Sakes alive! What'll I say? 'This is so sudden!' That's
what Becky Ryder, up to the west part of the town, said when Jim Baker,
the tin peddler, happened to ask her if she'd ever thought of gettin'
married. 'O James! this is so sudden!' says Becky. Jim said afterwards
that the suddenest thing about it was the way he cleared out of that
house. And he never called there afterwards."

Grace smiled, but quickly grew grave.

"Now, auntie," she said, "please listen. I'm in earnest. It seems to me
that you might do quite well at dressmaking here in town, if you had
a little--well, ready money to help you at the start. I've got a few
hundred dollars in the bank, presents from uncle, and my father's
insurance money. I should love to lend it to you, and I know uncle
would--"

Mrs. Coffin interrupted her.

"Cat's foot!" she exclaimed. "I hope I haven't got where I need to
borrow money yet a while. Thank you just as much, deary, but long's I've
got two hands and a mouth, I'll make the two keep t'other reasonably
full, I wouldn't wonder. No, I shan't think of it, so don't say another
word. NO."

The negative was so decided that Grace was silenced. Her disappointment
showed in her face, however, and Keziah hastened to change the subject.

"How do you know," she observed, "but what my goin' to Boston may be the
best thing that ever happened to me? You can't tell. No use despairin',
Annabel ain't given up hope yet; why should I? Hey? Ain't that somebody
comin'?"

Her companion sprang to her feet and ran to the window. Then she broke
into a smothered laugh.

"Why, it's Kyan Pepper!" she exclaimed. "He must be coming to see you,
Aunt Keziah. And he's got on his very best Sunday clothes. Gracious! I
must be going. I didn't know you expected callers."

Keziah dropped the tack hammer and stood up.

"Kyan!" she repeated. "What in the world is that old idiot comin' here
for? To talk about the minister, I s'pose. How on earth did Laviny ever
come to let him out alone?"

Mr. Pepper, Mr. Abishai Pepper, locally called "Kyan" (Cayenne) Pepper
because of his red hair and thin red side whiskers, was one of Trumet's
"characters," and in his case the character was weak. He was born in the
village and, when a youngster, had, like every other boy of good family
in the community, cherished ambitions for a seafaring life. His sister,
Lavinia, ten years older than he, who, after the death of their parents,
had undertaken the job of "bringing up" her brother, did not sympathize
with these ambitions. Consequently, when Kyan ran away she followed him
to Boston, stalked aboard the vessel where he had shipped, and collared
him, literally and figuratively. One of the mates venturing to offer
objection, Lavinia turned upon him and gave him a piece of her mind, to
the immense delight of the crew and the loungers on the wharf. Then she
returned with the vagrant to Trumet. Old Captain Higgins, who skippered
the packet in those days, swore that Lavinia never stopped lecturing her
brother from the time they left Boston until they dropped anchor behind
the breakwater.

"I give you my word that 'twas pretty nigh a stark calm, but there was
such a steady stream of language pourin' out of the Pepper stateroom
that the draught kept the sails filled all the way home," asserted
Captain Higgins.

That was Kyan's sole venture, so far as sailoring was concerned, but he
ran away again when he was twenty-five. This time he returned of his
own accord, bringing a wife with him, one Evelyn Gott of Ostable. Evelyn
could talk a bit herself, and her first interview with Lavinia ended
with the latter's leaving the house in a rage, swearing never to set
foot in it again. This oath she broke the day of her sister-in-law's
funeral. Then she appeared, after the ceremony, her baggage on the wagon
with her. The bereaved one, who was sitting on the front stoop of his
dwelling with, so people say, a most resigned expression on his meek
countenance, looked up and saw her.

"My land! Laviny," he exclaimed, turning pale. "Where'd you come from?"

"Never mind WHERE I come from," observed his sister promptly. "You just
be thankful I've come. If ever a body needed some one to take care of
'em, it's you. You can tote my things right in," she added, turning to
her grinning driver, "and you, 'Bishy, go right in with 'em. The idea
of your settin' outside takin' it easy when your poor wife ain't been
buried more'n an hour!"

"But--but--Laviny," protested poor Kyan, speaking the truth unwittingly,
"I couldn't take it easy AFORE she was buried, could I?"

"Go right in," was the answer. "March!"

Abishai marched, and had marched under his sister's orders ever since.
She kept house for him, and did it well, but her one fear was that some
female might again capture him, and she watched him with an eagle
eye. He was the town assessor and tax collector, but when he visited
dwellings containing single women or widows, Lavinia always accompanied
him, "to help him in his figgerin'," she said.

Consequently, when he appeared, unchaperoned, on the walk leading to the
side door of the Coffin homestead, Keziah and her friend were surprised.

"He's dressed to kill," whispered Grace, at the window. "Even his tall
hat; and in this fog! I do believe he's coming courting, Aunt Keziah."

"Humph!" was the ungracious answer. "He's come to say good-by, I s'pose,
and to find out where I'm goin' and how much pay I'm goin' to get and if
my rent's settled, and a few other little things that ain't any of
his business. Laviny put him up to it, you see. She'll be along pretty
quick. Well, I'll fix him so he won't talk much. He can help us take
down that stovepipe. I said 'twas a job for a man, and a half one's
better than none--Why, how d'ye do, 'Bishy? Come right in. Pretty thick
outside, isn't it?"

Mr. Pepper entered diffidently.

"Er--er--how d'ye do, Keziah?" he stammered. "I thought I'd just run in
a minute and--"

"Yes, yes. Glad to see you. Take off your hat. My sakes! it's pretty
wet. How did Laviny come to let you--I mean how'd you come to wear a
beaver such a mornin's this?"

Kyan removed the silk hat and inspected its limp grandeur ruefully.

"I--I--" he began. "Well, the fact is, I come out by myself. You see,
Laviny's gone up to Sarah B.'s to talk church doin's. I--I--well, I kind
of wanted to speak with you about somethin', Keziah, so--Oh! I didn't
see you, Gracie. Good mornin'."

He didn't seem overjoyed to see Miss Van Horne, as it was. In fact,
he reddened perceptibly and backed toward the door. The girl, her eyes
twinkling, took up her jacket and hat.

"Oh! I'm not going to stop, Mr. Pepper," she said. "I was only helping
Aunt Keziah a little, that's all. I must run on now."

"Run on--nonsense!" declared Keziah decisively. "You're goin' to stay
right here and help us get that stovepipe down. And 'Bishy'll help, too.
Won't you, 'Bish?"

The stovepipe was attached to the "air-tight" in the dining room.
It--the pipe--rose perpendicularly for a few feet and then extended
horizontally, over the high-boy, until it entered the wall. Kyan looked
at it and then at his "Sunday clothes."

"Why, I'd be glad to, of course," he declared with dubious enthusiasm.
"But I don't know's I'll have time. Perhaps I'd better come later and do
it. Laviny, she--"

"Oh, Laviny can spare you for a few minutes, I guess; 'specially as she
don't know you're out. Better take your coat off, hadn't you? Grace,
fetch one of those chairs for Ky--for 'Bishy to stand in."

Grace obediently brought the chair. It happened to be the one with a
rickety leg, but its owner was helping the reluctant Abishai remove the
long-tailed blue coat which had been his wedding garment and had adorned
his person on occasions of ceremony ever since. She did not notice the
chair.

"It's real good of you to offer to help," she said. "Grace and I didn't
hardly dast to try it alone. That pipe's been up so long that I wouldn't
wonder if 'twas chock-full of soot. If you're careful, though, I don't
believe you'll get any on you. Never mind the floor; I'm goin' to wash
that before I leave."

Reluctantly, slowly, the unwilling Mr. Pepper suffered himself to be led
to the chair. He mounted it and gingerly took hold of the pipe.

"Better loosen it at the stove hole first," advised Keziah. "What was it
you wanted to see me about, 'Bish?"

"Oh, nothin', nothin'," was the hasty response. "Nothin' of any
account--that is to say--"

He turned redder than ever and wrenched at the pipe. It loosened at its
lower end and the wires holding it in suspension shook.

"I guess," observed the lady of the house, "that you'd better move that
chest of drawers out so's you can get behind it. Grace, you help me.
There! that's better. Now move your chair."

Kyan stepped from the chair and moved the latter to a position between
the high-boy and the wall. Then he remounted and gripped the pipe in the
middle of its horizontal section.

"Seems to stick in the chimney there, don't it?" queried Keziah. "Wiggle
it back and forth; that ought to loosen it. What was it you wanted to
say, 'Bish?"

Apparently, Mr. Pepper had nothing to say. The crimson tide had reached
his ears, which, always noticeable because of their size and spread,
were now lit up like a schooner's sails at sunset. His hands trembled on
the pipe.

"Nothin', nothin', I tell you," he faltered. "I--I just run in to say
how d'ye do, that's all."

"Really, I think I'd better be going," said Grace, glancing from Kyan's
embarrassed face to that of the unsuspecting Mrs. Coffin. "I'm afraid
I'm in the way."

"No, no!" shouted the occupant of the chair. "No, no, you ain't!"

"But I'm afraid I am. And they'll be expecting me at home. Aunt Keziah,
I--"

"Don't be in such a hurry," interrupted Keziah. "Does stick in the
chimney, don't it? Tell you what you can do, Grace; you can go in the
woodshed and fetch the hammer that's in the table drawer. Hurry up,
that's a good girl."

Kyan protested that he did not need the hammer, but his protest was
unheeded. With one more glance at the couple, Grace departed from the
kitchen, biting her lips. She shut the door carefully behind her. Mr.
Pepper labored frantically with the pipe.

"No use to shake it any more till you get the hammer," advised Keziah.
"Might's well talk while you're waitin'. What was it you wanted to tell
me?"

Abishai drew one hand across his forehead, leaving a decorative smooch
of blacking on his perspiring countenance. He choked, swallowed, and
then, with a look at the closed door, seemed to reach a desperate
resolve.

"Keziah," he whispered hurriedly, "you've known me quite a spell, ain't
you?"

"Known you? Known you ever since you were born, pretty nigh. What of
it?"

"Yes, yes. And I've known you, you know. Fact is, we've known each
other."

"Hear the man! Land sakes! don't everybody in Trumet know everybody
else? What ARE you drivin' at?"

"Keziah, you're a single woman."

His companion let go of the chair, which she had been holding in place,
and stepped back.

"I'm a single woman?" she repeated sharply. "What do you mean by that?
Did--did anybody say I wasn't?"

"No, no! 'Course not. But you're a widow, so you BE single, you know,
and--"

"Well? Did you think I was twins? Get down off there this minute. You've
gone crazy. I thought so when I saw that beaver. Either that or you've
been drinkin'. Grace! What DOES make her so long gettin' that hammer?"

Finding the hammer did seem to take a long time. There was no sound from
the kitchen. Kyan, steadying himself with one hand on the pipe, waved
the other wildly.

"S-s-sh! s-sh-h!" he hissed. "Hush! be still! Don't get her in here.
Keziah, you're single and so am I. You ain't got nobody to take care of
you and I ain't, neither--that is, I don't want to be took care of--I
mean, I've been took care of too much."

Mrs. Coffin took another step in the direction of the kitchen.

"He IS loony!" she exclaimed under her breath. "I--"

"No, no! I ain't loony. I want to make a proposal to you. I want to see
if you won't marry me. I'm sick of Laviny. Let's you and me settle down
together. I could have some peace then. And I think a whole lot of you,
too," he added, apparently as an afterthought.

Keziah's face was red now, and growing redder every instant.

"Kyan Pepper!" she cried in amazed incredulity. "Kyan Pepper, do you--"

"Hurry up!" pleaded Abishai, in agitated impatience. "Say yes quick.
She'll be back in a minute."

"Say YES! Why, you--"

"Don't stop to argue, Keziah. I've got 'most fifteen hundred dollars in
the bank. Laviny keeps the pass book in her bureau, but you could get it
from her. I own my house. I'm a man of good character. You're poor,
but I don't let that stand in the way. Anyhow, you're a first-rate
housekeeper. And I really do think an awful lot of you."

Mrs. Coffin stepped no farther in the direction of the kitchen. Instead,
she strode toward the rickety chair and its occupant. Kyan grasped the
pipe with both hands.

"You poor--miserable--impudent--" began the lady.

"Why, Keziah, don't you WANT to?" He spoke as if the possibility of
a refusal had never entered his mind. "I cal'lated you'd be glad.
You wouldn't have to go away then, nor--My soul and body! some one's
knockin' at the door! AND THIS DUMMED PIPE'S FETCHED LOOSE!"

The last sentence was a smothered shriek. Keziah heeded not. Neither
did she heed the knock at the door. Her hands were opening and closing
convulsively.

"Be glad!" she repeated. "Glad to marry a good-for-nothin' sand-peep
like you! You sassy--GET down off that chair and out of this house! Get
down this minute!"

"I can't! This stovepipe's loose, I tell you! Be reason'ble, Keziah.
Do--don't you touch me! I'll fall if you do. Pl-e-ase, Keziah!--O Lordy!
I knew it. LAVINY!"

The door opened. On the threshold, arms akimbo and lips set tight, stood
Lavinia Pepper. Her brother's knees gave way; in their collapse they
struck the chair back; the rickety leg wabbled. Kyan grasped at the pipe
to save himself and, the next moment, chair, sections of stovepipe, and
Mr. Pepper disappeared with a mighty crash behind the high-boy. A cloud
of soot arose and obscured the view.

Keziah, too indignant even to laugh, glared at the wreck. In the doorway
of the kitchen Grace Van Horne, hammer in hand, leaned against the jamb,
her handkerchief at her mouth and tears in her eyes. Lavinia, majestic
and rigid, dominated the scene. From behind the high-boy came coughs,
sneezes, and emphatic ejaculations.

Miss Pepper was the first to speak.

"Abishai Pepper," she commanded, "come out of that this minute."

Her answer was a tremendous sneeze. Then from the dusky cloud by the
wall sounded a voice feebly protesting.

"Now, Laviny," began poor Kyan, "I never in my life--"

"Do you hear me? Come out of that!"

There was a sound of scrambling. More soot floated in the air. Then
around the corner of the high-boy appeared Mr. Pepper, crawling on his
hands and knees. His hair was streaked with black; his shirt front and
collar and shirt sleeves were spotted and smeared with black; and from
his blackened cheeks his red whiskers flamed like the last glowing
embers in a fire-scarred ruin.

"Laviny," he panted, "I never was so surprised and upsot in all my life
afore."

This was too much for Grace. She collapsed in a chair and laughed
hysterically. Even the wrathful Keziah smiled. But Lavinia did not
smile. For that matter, neither did her brother.

"Hum!" sneered Miss Pepper. "Upsot! Yes, I see you're upsot. Get up, and
try to look as much like a Christian as you can!"

Kyan rose from his knees to his feet and rubbed his back. He glanced
reproachfully at Grace, then fearfully at his sister.

"I was just tryin' to help Keziah take down her stovepipe," he
explained. "You see, she didn't have no man to--"

"Yes, I see. Well, I judge you got it down. Now you go out to the sink
and wash your face. Heavens and earth! Look at them clothes!"

"I do hope you didn't hurt yourself, Abishai," said the sympathetic
Keziah. Then, as remembrance of what had led to the upset came to her,
she added: "Though I will say 'twas your own fault and nobody else's."

Lavinia whirled on her.

"His own fault, was it?" she repeated, her voice shrill and trembling.
"Thank you very much, marm. I cal'late 'twas his own fault comin'
here, too, wa'n't it? Nobody led him on, I s'pose. Nobody put him up to
riggin' out in his best bib and tucker and sneakin' here the minute I
was out of the house. No, nobody did! Of COURSE not!"

"No, nobody did," said Keziah briskly. "And you may know what you're
hintin' at, but I don't."

"Dear me! Ain't we innocent! We've got plenty of money, WE have.
Widowers with property ain't no attraction to US. Everybody knows
that--oh, yes! And they never talk of such a thing--oh, no! Folks don't
say that--that--Well," with a snarl in the direction of the kitchen,
"are you anywheres nigh clean yet? Get your coat and hat on and come
home with me."

She jerked her brother into the blue coat, jammed the tall hat down upon
his head, and, seizing him by the arm, stalked to the door.

"Good day, marm," she said. "I do hope the next widower you get to take
down your stovepipe--yes, indeed! ha! ha!--I hope you'll have better
luck with him. Though I don't know who 'twould be; there ain't no more
idiots in town that I know of. Good day, and thank you kindly for your
attentions to our family."

She pulled the door open and was on the step; but Mrs. Coffin did not
intend to let her go in just that way.

"Laviny Pepper," she declared, her eyes snapping, "I don't know what
you're talkin' about, but if you dare to mean that I want any of your
money, or your brother's money, you're mistaken--'cause I don't. And I
don't want your brother either--Lord help him, poor thing! And I tell
you right now that there's nobody that does; though some kind-hearted
folks have said 'twould be a Christian act to poison him, so's to put
him out of his misery. There! Good mornin' to you."

She slammed the door. Lavinia was speechless. As for her brother, but
one remark of his reached Grace, who was watching from the window.

"Laviny," pleaded Kyan, "just let me explain."

At nine o'clock that night he was still "explaining."

Keziah turned from the door she had closed behind her visitor.

"Well!" she ejaculated. "WELL!"

Her friend did not look at her. She was still gazing out of the window.
Occasionally she seemed to choke.

Keziah eyed her suspiciously.

"Humph!" she mused. "'Twas funny, wasn't it?"

"Oh, dreadfully!" was the hurried answer.

"Yes. Seems to me you took an awful long time findin' that hammer."

"It was away back in the drawer. I didn't see it at first."

"Hum! Grace Van Horne, if I thought you heard what that--that THING said
to me, I'd--I'd--Good land of mercy! somebody ELSE is comin'."

Steps, measured, dignified steps, sounded on the walk. From without came
a "Hum--ha!" a portentous combination of cough and grunt. Grace dodged
back from the window and hastily began donning her hat and jacket.

"It's Cap'n Elkanah," she whispered. "I must go. This seems to be your
busy morning, Aunt Keziah. I"--here she choked again--"really, I didn't
know you were so popular."

Keziah opened the door. Captain Elkanah Daniels, prosperous, pompous,
and unbending, crossed the threshold. Richest man in the village,
retired shipowner, pillar of the Regular church and leading member of
its parish committee, Captain Elkanah looked the part. He removed
his hat, cleared his throat behind his black stock, and spoke with
impressive deliberation.

"Good morning, Keziah. Ah--er--morning, Grace." Even in the tone given
to a perfunctory salutation like this, the captain differentiated
between Regular and Come-Outer. "Keziah, I--hum, ha!--rather expected to
find you alone."

"I was just going, Cap'n Daniels," explained the girl. The captain bowed
and continued.

"Keziah," he said, "Keziah, I came to see you on a somewhat important
matter. I have a proposal I wish to make you."

He must have been surprised at the effect of his words. Keziah's face
was a picture, a crimson picture of paralyzed amazement. As for Miss Van
Horne, that young lady gave vent to what her friend described afterwards
as a "squeal," and bolted out of the door and into the grateful
seclusion of the fog.


CHAPTER II

IN WHICH KEZIAH UNEARTHS A PROWLER


The fog was cruel to the gossips of Trumet that day. Mrs. Didama Rogers,
who lived all alone, except for the society of three cats, a canary,
and a white poodle named "Bunch," in the little house next to Captain
Elkanah's establishment, never entirely recovered from the chagrin
and disappointment caused by that provoking mist. When one habitually
hurries through the morning's household duties in order to sit by the
front window and note each passer-by, with various fascinating surmises
as to his or her errand and the reasons for it, it is discouraging to be
able to see only one's own front fence and a scant ten feet of sidewalk.
And then to learn afterwards of a dozen most exciting events, each
distinctly out of the ordinary, which might have been used as excuses
for two dozen calls and as many sensations! As Captain Zeb Mayo, the
irreverent ex-whaler, put it, "That fog shook Didama's faith in the
judgment of Providence. 'Tain't the 'all wise,' but the 'all seein''
kind she talks about in meetin' now."

The fog prevented Mrs. Rogers's noting the entrance of Mr. Pepper at the
Coffin front gate. Also his exit, under sisterly arrest. It shut from
her view the majestic approach of Captain Elkanah Daniels and Grace's
flight, her face dimpled with smiles and breaking into laughter
at frequent intervals. For a young lady, supposed to be a devout
Come-Outer, to hurry along the main road, a handkerchief at her mouth
and her eyes sparkling with fun, was a circumstance calculated to
furnish material for enjoyable scandal. And Didama missed it.

Other happenings she missed, also. Not knowing of Captain Daniels's call
upon Keziah, she was deprived of the pleasure of wonder at the length of
his stay. She did not see him, in company with Mrs. Coffin, go down
the road in the opposite direction from that taken by Grace. Nor their
return and parting at the gate, two hours later. She did not see--but
there! she saw nothing, absolutely nothing--except the scraggy spruce
tree in her tiny front yard and the lonely ten feet of walk bordering
it. No one traversed that section of walk except old Mrs. Tinker, who
was collecting subscriptions for new hymn books for the Come-Outer
chapel. And Didama was particularly anxious NOT to see her.

The dismal day dragged on. The silver-leaf trees dripped, the hedges
were shining with moisture. Through the stillness the distant surf along
the "ocean side" of the Cape growled and moaned and the fog bell at the
lighthouse clanged miserably. Along the walk opposite Didama's--the
more popular side of the road--shadowy figures passed at long intervals,
children going to and from school, people on errands to the store, and
the like. It was three o'clock in the afternoon before a visitor came
again to the Coffin front gate, entered the yard and rapped at the side
door.

Keziah opened the door.

"Halloa!" she exclaimed. "Back, are you? I begun to think you'd been
scared away for good."

Grace laughed as she entered.

"Well, auntie," she said, "I don't wonder you thought I was scared.
Truly, I didn't think it was proper for me to stay. First Kyan and then
Cap'n Elkanah, and both of them expressing their wishes to see you alone
so--er--pointedly. I thought it was time for me to go. Surely, you give
me credit for a little delicacy."

Keziah eyed her grimly.

"Humph!" she sniffed. "If you'd been a little less delicate about
fetchin' that hammer, we might have been spared at least one smash-up. I
don't s'pose Laviny'll ever speak to me again. Oh, dear! I guess likely
I'll never get the memory of that--that Kyan thing out of my mind. I
never was so set back in my born days. Yes, you can laugh!"

She laughed herself as she said it. As for Grace, it was sometime before
that young lady became coherent.

"He DID look so funny!" she gasped. "Hopping up and down on that shaky
chair and holding on to that pipe and--and--O Aunt Keziah, if you could
have seen your face when I opened that door!"

"Yes; well, I will say you was sometime gettin' it open. And then, on
top of the whole fool business, in parades Elkanah Daniels and--"

She paused. Her companion looked delightedly expectant.

"Yes," she cried eagerly. "Then Cap'n Elkanah came and the very first
thing he said was--I almost laughed in his face."

"Almost! Humph! that's no exaggeration. The way you put out of that door
was a caution."

"Yes, but what did the cap'n mean? Is it a secret? Ahem! shall I
congratulate you, auntie?"

"Grace Van Horne! there's born fools enough in this town without your
tryin' to be one. You know 'twa'n't THAT. Though what 'twas was surprise
enough, I will say," she added. "Grace, I ain't goin' away to-morrow."

"You're not? Oh, splendid! Has the cap'n decided to let you stay here?"

"I guess his decidin' wouldn't influence me, if twas stayin' in his
house he meant. The only way I could live here would be on his charity,
and that would be as poor fodder as sawdust hasty puddin', even if I
was fond of charity, which I ain't. He said to me--Well, you take your
things off and I'll tell you about it. You can stay a little while,
can't you?"

"Yes, I was going to stay all the afternoon and for supper, if you'd let
me. I knew you had so much to do and I wanted to help. I told uncle and
he said certainly I ought to come. He said he should try to see you and
say good-by before you left tomorrow."

"You don't say! And me a Regular! Well, I'm much obliged, though I guess
your Uncle Eben won't see me to-morrow--nor speak to me again, when he
knows what I AM going to do. Grace, I ain't goin' to leave Trumet, not
for the present, anyhow. I've got a way of earnin' my livin' right here.
I'm goin' to keep house for the new minister."

The girl turned, her hat in her hand.

"Oh!" she cried in utter astonishment.

Keziah nodded. "Yes," she affirmed. "That was what Elkanah's proposal
amounted to. Ha! ha! Deary me! When he said 'proposal,' I own up for
a minute I didn't know WHAT was comin'. After Kyan I was prepared
for 'most anything. But he told me that Lurany Phelps, who the parish
committee had counted on to keep house for Mr. Ellery, had sent word her
sister was sick and couldn't be left, and that somebody must be hired
right off 'cause the minister's expected by day after to-morrow's coach.
And they'd gone over every likely candidate in town till it simmered
down to Mehitable Burgess. And Cap'n Zeb Mayo spoke right up in the
committee meetin' and gave out that if Mehitable kept house for Mr.
Ellery he, for one, wouldn't come to church. Said he didn't want to hear
sermons that was inspired by HER cookin'. Seems she cooked for the Mayos
one week when Mrs. Mayo had gone to Boston, and Cap'n Zeb declares his
dreams that week was somethin' awful. 'And I'm a man with no nerves and
mighty little imagination,' he says. 'Land knows what effect a dose of
Mehitable's biscuits might have on a MINISTER.'

"And so," continued Keziah, "they decided Mehitable wouldn't do, and
finally somebody thought of me. I have a notion 'twas Zeb, although
Cap'n Elkanah did his best to make me think 'twas himself. And the cap'n
was made a delegate to come and see me about it. Come he did, and we
settled it. I went down to the parsonage with him before dinner and
looked the place over. There's an awful lot of sweepin' and dustin' to
be done afore it's fit for a body to live in. I did think that when I'd
finished with this house I could swear off on that kind of dissipation
for a while, but I guess, judgin' by the looks of that parsonage, what
I've done so far is only practice." She paused, glanced keenly at her
friend and asked: "Why! what's the matter? You don't act nigh so glad as
I thought you'd be."

Grace said of course she was glad; but she looked troubled,
nevertheless.

"I can hardly make it seem possible," she said. "Is it really
settled--your salary and everything? And what will you do about your
position in Boston?"

"Oh, I'll write Cousin Abner and tell him. Lord love you, HE won't care.
He'll feel that he did his duty in gettin' me the Boston chance and if I
don't take it 'tain't his fault. HIS conscience'll be clear. Land sakes!
if I could clean house as easy as some folks clear their consciences I
wouldn't have a backache this minute. Yes, the wages are agreed on, too.
And totin' them around won't make my back ache any worse, either," she
added drily.

Grace extended her hand.

"Well, Aunt Keziah," she said, "I'm ever and ever so glad for you.
I know you didn't want to leave Trumet and I'm sure everyone will be
delighted when they learn that you're going to stay."

"Humph! that includes Laviny Pepper, of course. I cal'late Laviny's
delight won't keep her up nights. But I guess I can stand it if she can.
Now, Grace, what is it? You AIN'T real pleased? Why not?"

The girl hesitated.

"Auntie," she said, "I'm selfish, I guess. I'm glad for your sake; you
mustn't think I'm not. But I almost wish you were going to do something
else. You are going to live in the Regular parsonage and keep house
for, of all persons, a Regular minister. Why, so far as my seeing you is
concerned, you might as well be in China. You know Uncle Eben."

Keziah nodded understandingly.

"Yes," she said, "I know him. Eben Hammond thinks that parsonage is
the presence chamber of the Evil One, I presume likely. But, Grace, you
mustn't blame me, and if you don't call I'll know why and I shan't blame
you. We'll see each other once in a while; I'll take care of that. And,
deary, I HAD to do it--I just had to. If you knew what a load had been
took off my mind by this, you'd sympathize with me and understand. I've
been happier in Trumet than I ever was anywhere else, though I've seen
some dark times here, too. I was born here; my folks used to live here.
My brother Sol lived and died here. His death was a heavy trouble to
me, but the heaviest came to me when I was somewheres else and--well,
somehow I've had a feelin' that, if there was any real joys ever planned
out for me while I'm on this earth, they'd come to me here. I don't know
when they'll come. There's times when I can't believe they ever will
come, but--There! there! everybody has to bear burdens in this life, I
cal'late. It's a vale of tears, 'cordin' to you Come-Outer folks, though
I've never seen much good in wearin' a long face and a crape bathin'
suit on that account. Hey? What are you listenin' to?"

"I thought I heard a carriage stop, that was all."

Mrs. Coffin went to the window and peered into the fog.

"Can't see anything," she said. "'Tain't anybody for here, that's sure.
I guess likely 'twas Cap'n Elkanah. He and Annabel were goin' to drive
over to Denboro this afternoon. She had some trimmin' to buy. Takes more
than fog to separate Annabel Daniels from dressmakin'. Well, there's a
little more packin' to do; then I thought I'd go down to that parsonage
and take a whack at the cobwebs. I never saw so many in my born days.
You'd think all the spiders from here to Ostable had been holdin' camp
meetin' in that shut-up house."

The packing took about an hour. When it was finished, the carpet rolled
up, and the last piece of linen placed in the old trunk, Keziah turned
to her guest.

"Now, Gracie," she said, "I feel as though I ought to go to the
parsonage. I can't do much more'n look at the cobwebs to-night, but
to-morrow those spiders had better put on their ascension robes. The
end of the world's comin' for them, even though it missed fire for the
Millerites when they had their doin's a few years ago. You can stay
here and wait, if 'twon't be too lonesome. We'll have supper when I get
back."

Grace looked tempted.

"I've a good mind to go with you," she said. "I want to be with you as
much as I can, and HE isn't there yet. I'm afraid uncle might not like
it, but--"

"Sho! Come along. Eben Hammond may be a chronic sufferer from acute
Come-Outiveness, but he ain't a ninny. Nobody'll see you, anyway. This
fog's like charity, it'll cover a heap of sins. Do come right along.
Wait till I get on my things."

She threw a shawl over her shoulders, draped a white knitted "cloud"
over her head, and took from a nail a key, attached by a strong cord to
a block of wood eight inches long.

"Elkanah left the key with me," she observed. "No danger of losin' it,
is there. Might as well lose a lumber yard. Old Parson Langley tied it
up this way, so he wouldn't miss his moorin's, I presume likely. The
poor old thing was so nearsighted and absent-minded along toward the
last that they say he used to hire Noah Myrick's boy to come in and look
him over every Sunday mornin' before church, so's to be sure he hadn't
got his wig on stern foremost. That's the way Zeb Mayo tells the yarn,
anyhow."

They left the house and came out into the wet mist. Then, turning to
the right, in the direction which Trumet, with unconscious irony, calls
"downtown," they climbed the long slope where the main road mounts the
outlying ridge of Cannon Hill, passed Captain Mayo's big house--the
finest in Trumet, with the exception of the Daniels mansion--and
descended into the hollow beyond. Here, at the corner where the
"Lighthouse Lane" begins its winding way over the rolling knolls and
dunes to the light and the fish shanties on the "ocean side," stood
the plain, straight-up-and-down meeting house of the Regular society.
Directly opposite was the little parsonage, also very straight up and
down. Both were painted white with green blinds. This statement is
superfluous to those who remember Cape architecture at this period;
practically every building from Sandwich to Provincetown was white and
green.

They entered the yard, through the gap in the white fence, and went
around the house, past the dripping evergreens and the bare, wet lilac
bushes, to the side door, the lock of which Keziah's key fitted. There
was a lock on the front door, of course, but no one thought of meddling
with that. That door had been opened but once during the late pastor's
thirty-year tenantry. On the occasion of his funeral the mourners came
and went, as was proper, by that solemn portal.

Mrs. Coffin thrust the key into the keyhole of the side door and essayed
to turn it.

"Humph!" she muttered, twisting to no purpose; "I don't see why--This
must be the right key, because--Well, I declare, if it ain't unlocked
already! That's some of Cap'n Elkanah's doin's. For a critter as fussy
and particular about some things, he's careless enough about others.
Mercy we ain't had any tramps around here lately. Come in."

She led the way into the dining room of the parsonage. Two of the blinds
shading the windows of that apartment had been opened when she and
Captain Daniels made their visit, and the dim gray light made the room
more lonesome and forsaken in appearance than a deeper gloom could
possibly have done. The black walnut extension table in the center,
closed to its smallest dimensions because Parson Langley had eaten alone
for so many years; the black walnut chairs set back against the wall at
regular intervals; the rag carpet and braided mats--homemade donations
from the ladies of the parish--on the green painted floor; the dolorous
pictures on the walls; "Death of Washington," "Stoning of Stephen," and
a still more deadly "fruit piece" committed in oils years ago by a now
deceased boat painter; a black walnut sideboard with some blue-and-white
crockery upon it; a gilt-framed mirror with another outrage in oils
emphasizing its upper half; dust over everything and the cobwebs
mentioned by Keziah draping the corners of the ceiling; this was the
dining room of the Regular parsonage as Grace saw it upon this, her
first visit. The dust and cobwebs were, in her eyes, the only novelties,
however. Otherwise, the room was like many others in Trumet, and, if
there had been one or two paintings of ships, would have been typical of
the better class.

"Phew!" exclaimed Keziah, sniffing disgustedly. "Musty and shut up
enough, ain't it? Down here in the dampness, and 'specially in the
spring, it don't take any time for a house to get musty if it ain't
aired out regular. Mr. Langley died only three months ago, but we've
been candidatin' ever since and the candidates have been boarded round.
There's been enough of 'em, too; we're awful hard to suit, I guess.
That's it. Do open some more blinds and a window. Fresh air don't hurt
anybody--unless it's spiders," with a glare at the loathed cobwebs.

The blinds and a window being opened, more light entered the room. Grace
glanced about it curiously.

"So this is going to be your new home now, Aunt Keziah," she observed.
"How queer that seems."

"Um--h'm. Does seem queer, don't it? Must seem queer to you to be so
near the headquarters of everything your uncle thinks is wicked. Smell
of brimstone any, does it?" she asked with a smile.

"No, I haven't noticed it. You've got a lot of cleaning to do. I wish I
could help. Look at the mud on the floor."

Keziah looked.

"Mud?" she exclaimed. "Why, so 'tis! How in the world did that come
here? Wet feet, sure's you're born. Man's foot, too. Cap'n Elkanah's,
I guess likely; though the prints don't look hardly big enough for his.
Elkanah's convinced that he's a great man and his boots bear him out
in it, don't they? Those marks don't look broad enough for his
understandin', but I guess he made 'em; nobody else could. Here's the
settin' room."

She threw open another door. A room gloomy with black walnut and
fragrant with camphor was dimly visible.

"Cheerful's a tomb, ain't it?" was Mrs. Coffin's comment. "Well, we'll
get some light and air in here pretty soon. Here's the front hall and
there's the front stairs. The parlor's off to the left. We won't bother
with that yet a while. This little place in here is what Mr. Langley
used to call his 'study.' Halloa! how this door sticks!"

The door did stick, and no amount of tugging could get it open, though
Grace added her efforts to those of Keziah.

"'Tain't locked," commented Mrs. Coffin, "cause there ain't any lock on
it. I guess it's just swelled and stuck from the damp. Though it's odd,
I don't remember--Oh, well! never mind. Let's sweeten up this settin'
room a little. Open a window or two in here. We'll have to hurry if we
want to do anything before it gets dark. I'm goin' into the kitchen to
get a broom."

She hurried out, returning in a moment or two with a broom and a most
disgusted expression.

"How's a body goin' to sweep with that?" she demanded, exhibiting the
frayed utensil, the business end of which was worn to a stub. "More
like a shovel, enough sight. Well, there's pretty nigh dust enough for
a shovel, so maybe this'll take off the top layers. S'pose I'll ever get
this house fit for Mr. Ellery to live in before he comes? I wonder if
he's a particular man?"

Grace, who was struggling with a refractory window, paused for breath.

"I'm sure I don't know," she replied. "I've never seen him."

"Nor I either. Sol was so bad the Sunday he preached that I couldn't go
to meetin'. They say his sermon was fine; all about those who go down to
the sea in ships. That's what got the parish committee, I guess; they're
all old salts. I wonder if he's as fine-lookin' as they say?"

Miss Van Horne tossed her head. She was resting, prior to making another
assault on the window.

"I don't know," she said. "And I'm sure I don't care. I don't like
good-looking ministers."

"Deary me! You're different from most females in this town, then. And
you spoke of his good looks yourself this very mornin'. Why don't you
like the good-lookin' ones?"

"Oh, because they're always conceited and patronizing and superior--and
spoiled. I can just imagine this Mr. Ellery of yours strutting about in
sewing circle or sociables, with Annabel and Georgianna Lothrop and the
rest simpering and gushing and getting in his way: 'O Mr. Ellery, I did
so enjoy that sermon of yours Sunday!' and 'O Mr. Ellery, it was SO good
of you to come this afternoon!' Pooh! I'm glad I'm a Come-Outer. Not
that I would simper over him if I wasn't. He couldn't patronize me--not
more than once, at any rate."

Keziah was greatly amused.

"Sakes alive!" she chuckled. "You're awfully high and mighty, seems to
me. And changeable since mornin'. You was willin' enough to talk about
him then. Now, Gracie, you mustn't take a spite against poor Mr. Ellery
just because I've got to keep house for him. 'Tain't his fault; he don't
even know it yet."

"I don't care. I know he'll be a conceited little snippet and I shall
hate the sight of him. There! there! Auntie, you mustn't mind me. I
told you I was a selfish pig. But don't you ask me to LIKE this precious
minister of yours, because I shan't do it. He has no business to come
and separate me from the best friend I've got. I'd tell him so if he was
here--What was that?"

Both women looked at each other with startled faces. They listened
intently.

"Why, wa'n't that funny!" whispered Keziah. "I thought I heard--"

"You DID hear. So did I. What do you suppose--"

"S-s-s-h-h! It sounded from the front room somewhere. And yet there
can't be anybody in there, because--My soul! there 'tis again. I'm goin'
to find out."

She grasped the stubby broom by the handle and moved determinedly toward
the front hall. Grace seized her by the arm.

"Don't you do it, auntie!" she whispered frantically. "Don't you DO it!
It may be a tramp."

"I don't care. Whoever or whatever it is, it has no business in this
house, and I'll make that plain in a hurry. Just like as not it's a cat
got in when Elkanah was here this forenoon. Don't be scared, Grace. Come
right along."

The girl came along, but not with enthusiasm. They tiptoed through the
dark, narrow hall and peered into the parlor. This apartment was dim and
still and gloomy, as all proper parlors should be, but there was no sign
of life.

"Humph!" sniffed Keziah. "It might have been upstairs, but it didn't
sound so. What did it sound like to you?"

"Like a footstep at first; and then like something falling--and
rustling. Oh, what is the matter?"

Mrs. Coffin was glancing back down the hall with a strange expression on
her face. Her grip upon the broom handle tightened.

"What IS it?" pleaded the girl in an agonized whisper.

"Grace," was the low reply, "I've just remembered somethin'. That study
door isn't stuck from the damp, because--well, because I remember now
that it was open this mornin'."

Before her companion could fully grasp the import of this paralyzing
fact, Keziah strode down the hall and seized the knob of the study door.

"Whoever you are in there," she commanded sternly, "open this door and
come out this minute. Do you hear? I'm orderin' you to come out."

There was an instant of silence; then a voice from within made answer, a
man's voice, and its tone indicated embarrassment.

"Madam," it said, "I--I am--I will be out in another minute. If you will
just be patient--"

Grace interrupted with a smothered shriek. Keziah brandished the broom.

"Patient!" she repeated sharply. "Well, I like that! What do you mean
by--Open that door! Grace, run out and get the--the constable."

This command was delivered entirely for effect. The office of constable
in Trumet is, generally speaking, a purely honorary one. Its occupant
had just departed for a week's cruise as mate of a mackerel schooner.
However, the effect was instantaneous. From behind the door came sounds
of hurry and commotion.

"Don't get the police on my account, please," said the voice. "If you
will be patient until I get this--I'm just as anxious to come out as you
can be to have me. Of all the ridiculous--"

"Come out then!" snapped Keziah. "Come out! If you're so everlastin'
anxious, then come out. Patience! Of all the cheek! Why don't you come
out NOW?"

The answer was brisk and to the point. Evidently, the unknown's stock of
the virtue which he demanded of others was diminishing.

"Well, to be frank, since you insist," snapped the voice, "I'm not fully
dressed."

This was a staggerer. For once Keziah did not have a reply ready.
She looked at Grace and the latter at her. Then, without words, they
retreated to the sitting room.

"Shall--shall I go for help?" whispered the girl. "Hadn't we better
leave him here and--He doesn't sound like a tramp, does he. What DO you
suppose--"

"I hope you won't be alarmed," continued the voice, broken by panting
pauses, as if the speaker was struggling into a garment. "I know this
must seem strange. You see, I came on the coach as far as Bayport
and then we lost a wheel in a rut. There was a--oh, dear! where IS
that--this is supremely idiotic!--I was saying there happened to be a
man coming this way with a buggy and he offered to help me along. He was
on his way to Wellmouth. So I left my trunk to come later and took my
valise. It rained on the way and I was wet through. I stopped at Captain
Daniels's house and the girl said he had gone with his daughter to the
next town, but that they were to stop here at the parsonage on their
way. So--there! that's right, at last!--so I came, hoping to find them.
The door was open and I came in. The captain and his daughter were not
here, but, as I was pretty wet, I thought I would seize the opportunity
to change my clothes. I had some dry--er--things in my valise and
I--well, then you came, you see, and--I assure you I--well, it was the
most embarrassing--I'm coming now."

The door opened. The two in the sitting room huddled close together,
Keziah holding the broom like a battle-ax, ready for whatsoever might
develop. From the dimness of the tightly shuttered study stepped the
owner of the voice, a stranger, a young man, his hair rumpled, his
tie disarranged, and the buttons of his waistcoat filling the wrong
buttonholes. Despite this evidence of a hasty toilet in semidarkness, he
was not unprepossessing. Incidentally, he was blushing furiously.

"I'm--I'm sure I beg your pardon, ladies," he stammered. "I scarcely
know what to say to you. I--"

His eyes becoming accustomed to the light in the sitting room, he was
now able to see his captors more clearly. He looked at Keziah, then at
Miss Van Horne, and another wave of blushes passed from his collar up
into the roots of his hair. Grace blushed, too, though, as she perfectly
well knew, there was no reason why she should.

Mrs. Coffin did not blush. This young fellow, although evidently not a
tramp or a burglar, had caused her some moments of distinct uneasiness,
and she resented the fact.

"Well," she observed rather tartly, "I'm sorry you don't know what to
say, but perhaps you might begin by telling us who you are and what you
mean by makin' a--er--dressin' room of a house that don't belong to
you, just because you happened to find the door unlocked. After that
you might explain why you didn't speak up when we first come, instead
of keepin' so mighty quiet. That looks kind of suspicious to me, I must
say."

The stranger's answer was prompt enough now. It was evident he resented
the suspicion.

"I didn't speak," he said, "because you took me by surprise and I
wasn't, as I explained--er--presentable. Besides, I was afraid of
frightening you. I assure you I hurried as fast as I could, quietly, and
when you began to talk"--his expression changed and there was a twitch
at the corner of his mouth--"I tried to hurry still faster, hoping you
might not hear me and I could make my appearance--or my escape--sooner.
As for entering the house--well, I considered it, in a way, my house; at
least, I knew I should live in it for a time, and--"

"Live in it?" repeated Keziah. "LIVE in it? Why! mercy on us! you don't
mean to say you're--"

She stopped to look at Grace. That young lady was looking at her with
an expression which, as it expressed so very much, is beyond ordinary
powers of description.

"My name is Ellery," said the stranger. "I am the minister--the new
minister of the Regular society."

Then even Keziah blushed.


CHAPTER III

IN WHICH KEZIAH ASSUMES A GUARDIANSHIP


Didama would have given her eyeteeth--and, for that matter, the entire
upper set--to have been present in that parsonage sitting room when the
Rev. John Ellery made his appearance. But the fates were against Didama
that day and it was months afterwards before she, or any of what
Captain Zeb Mayo called the "Trumet Daily Advertisers," picked up a hint
concerning it. Keziah and Grace, acquainted with the possibilities of
these volunteer news gatherers, were silent, and the Reverend John,
being in some respects a discreet young man with a brand-new ministerial
dignity to sustain, refrained from boasting of the sensation he had
caused. He thought of it very often, usually at most inconvenient times,
and when, by all the requirements of his high calling, his thought
should have been busy with different and much less worldly matters.

"I declare!" said Mrs. Thankful Payne, after the new minister's first
call at her residence, a week after his arrival at Trumet, "if Mr.
Ellery ain't the most sympathetic man. I was readin' out loud to him
the poem my cousin Huldy B.--her that married Hannibal Ellis over to
Denboro--made up when my second husband was lost to sea, and I'd just
got to the p'int in the ninth verse where it says:

          'The cruel billows crash and roar,
             And the frail craft is tempest-tossed,
           But the bold mariner thinks not of life, but says,
             "It is the fust schooner ever I lost."'

And 'twas, too, and the last, poor thing! Well, I just got fur as this
when I looked up and there was the minister lookin' out of the window
and his face was just as red, and he kept scowlin' and bitin' his
lips. I do believe he was all but sheddin' tears. Sympathy like that I
appreciate."

As a matter of fact, Mr. Ellery had just seen Grace Van Horne pass that
window. She had not seen him, but for the moment he was back in that
disgusting study, making a frenzied toilet in the dusk and obliged to
overhear remarks pointedly personal to himself.

Grace left the parsonage soon after the supposed tramp disclosed
his identity. Her farewells were hurried and she firmly refused Mrs.
Coffin's not too-insistent appeal to return to the house "up street"
and have supper. She said she was glad to meet Mr. Ellery. The young
minister affirmed his delight in meeting her. Then she disappeared in
the misty twilight and John Ellery surreptitiously wiped his perspiring
forehead with his cuff, having in his late desire for the primal
necessities forgotten such a trifling incidental as a handkerchief.

"Well, Mr. Ellery," observed Keziah, turning to her guest, or employer,
or incumbrance--at present she was more inclined to consider him the
latter--"well, Mr. Ellery, this has been kind of unexpected for all
hands, ain't it? If I'd known you was comin' to-day, I'd have done my
best to have things ready, but Cap'n Elkanah said not before day after
to-morrow and--but there, what's the use of talkin' that way? I didn't
know I was goin' to keep house for you till this very forenoon. Mercy
me, what a day this has been!"

The minister smiled rather one-sidedly.

"It's been something of a day for me," he admitted. "I am ahead of time
and I've made a lot of trouble, I'm afraid. But yesterday afternoon I
was ready and, to tell the truth, I was eager to come and see my new
home and get at my work. So I started on the morning train. Then the
stage broke down and I began to think I was stranded at Bayport.
But this kind-hearted chap from Wellmouth--I believe that's where he
lived--happened to pull up to watch us wrestling with the smashed wheel,
and when he found I was in a hurry to get to Trumet, offered to give me
a lift. His name was--was Bird. No, that wasn't it, but it was something
like Bird, or some kind of a bird."

"Bird?" repeated Keziah thoughtfully. "There's no Birds that I know of
in Wellmouth. Hum! Hey? 'Twa'n't Sparrow, was it?"

"That was it--Sparrow."

"Good land! Emulous Sparrow. Run consider'ble to whiskers and tongue,
didn't he?"

"Why, yes; he did wear a beard. As for tongue--well, he was
conversational, if that's what you mean."

"That's what I mean. If you rode twelve mile with Emulous, you must have
had an earache for the last six. Did he ask a question or two about your
personal affairs, here and there between times?"

Mr. Ellery laughed.

"Yes, one or two, between times," he admitted.

"I shan't die of surprise. Did you tell him who you was?"

"No-o, to be honest, I didn't. He was so very anxious to find out,
that--well, I dodged. I think he believed I was going to visit Captain
Daniels."

"Good enough! If I was governor of this state I wouldn't send any
Thanksgivin' proclamations down this way. I'd just write Em Peters and
Didama Rogers and a couple more like them and save myself the trouble.
They'd have all I wanted to proclaim spread from one end of the county
to the other in less'n a day, and a peck or two of extrys pitched in
for good measure. I'm awful glad you didn't tell Emulous you was the
minister. You see, Trumet's Trumet, and, considerin' everything, maybe
it's just as well nobody knows about your bein' shut up in that study.
Not but what 'twas all right, you know, but--"

"I understand. I'm not proud of it. Still, some one may have seen me
come here."

"No, no, they didn't. This fog is as thick as Injun-meal puddin'. Nobody
saw you."

"Well," with some hesitation, "the young lady who was here with you--"

"Oh, Grace Van Horne! She's all right. She won't tell. She ain't that
kind."

"Van Horne? That doesn't sound like a New England name."

"'Tisn't. Her folks come from Jersey somewheres. But she was adopted
by old Cap'n Hammond, who keeps the tavern down on the bay shore by the
packet wharf, and she's lived in Trumet since she was six years old. Her
father was Teunis Van Horne, and he was mate on Cap'n Eben's coastin'
schooner and was drowned off Hatteras. Eben was saved just by the skin
of his teeth and got a broken hip and religion while it happened. His
hip's better except that he's some lame; but his religion's been more
and more feverish ever since. He's one of the head Come-Outers, and
built their chapel with his own money. You mustn't think I'm speakin'
lightly of religion, nor of Cap'n Eben, either. He's a dear good soul as
ever was, but he is the narrowest kind of Come-Outer. His creed is
just about as wide as the chapel door, and that's as narrow as the way
leadin' to salvation; it IS the way, too, so the Come-Outers think."

"What are Come-Outers? Some new sect?"

"Sakes alive! Haven't you heard of Come-Outers? Cat's foot! Well, you'll
hear of 'em often enough from now on. They're folks who used to go to
our church, the Regular, but left because the services was too worldly,
with organs and choir singin', and the road to paradise too easy. No
need for me to tell you any more. You'll learn."

Mr. Ellery was interested. He had been in Trumet but once before, on the
occasion when he preached his trial sermon, and of that memorable
visit remembered little except the sermon itself, the pews filled
with captains and their families, and the awe-inspiring personality of
Captain Elkanah Daniels, who had been his host. To a young man, the ink
upon his diploma from the theological school still fresh, a trial sermon
is a weighty matter, and the preaching of it weightier still. He had
rehearsed it over and over in private, had delivered it almost through
clinched teeth, and had returned to his room in the Boston boarding
house with the conviction that it was an utter failure. Captain Elkanah
and the gracious Miss Annabel, his daughter, had been kind enough to
express gratification, and their praise alone saved him from despair.
Then, to his amazement, the call had come. Of casual conversation at the
church and about the Daniels's table he could recall nothing. So there
was another religious organization in town and that made up of seceders
from his own church. He was surprised.

"Er--this Miss Van Horne?" he asked. "Is she a--Come-Outer?"

Mrs. Coffin nodded.

"Yes," she said. "She's one. Couldn't be anything else and live with her
Uncle Eben, as she calls him."

The minister experienced a curious feeling of disappointment and
chagrin. This young person, already predisposed to regard a clergyman of
his denomination with disapproval, had seen him for the first time under
most humiliating circumstances. And he should never have the opportunity
to regain her favor, or his own self-respect, by his efforts in the
pulpit. No matter how well he might preach she would never hear him.

"Has this Captain Hammond no children of his own?" he asked.

Keziah's answer was short for her.

"Yes," she said. "One."

"Ah! another daughter?"

"No, a son. Name's Nathaniel, and he's a sea captain. He's on his way
from Surinam to New York now. They expect him to make port most any
time, I believe. Now, Mr. Ellery, I s'pose we've got to arrange for your
supper and stayin' overnight; and with this house the way 'tis and all,
I don't see--"

But the minister was still interested in the Hammond household.

"This Nathaniel Hammond?" he asked. "You don't seem enthusiastic over
him. Is he a black sheep?"

This reply also was short, but emphatic.

"No," said Keziah. "He's a fine man."

Then she resumed her semisoliloquy concerning her companion's
entertainment.

"I guess," she said, "that the best thing for you to do will be to go to
Cap'n Elkanah's. They'll be real glad to see you, I know, and you'll
be in time for supper, for Elkanah and Annabel have been to Denboro and
they'll be late home. They can keep you overnight, too, for it's a big
house with lots of rooms. Then, after breakfast to-morrow you come right
here. I'll have things somewhere near shipshape by then, I guess, though
the cleanin'll have to be mainly a lick and a promise until I can really
get at it. Your trunk'll be here on the coach, I s'pose, and that'll be
through early in the forenoon. Get on your hat and coat and I'll go with
you to Elkanah's."

The young man demurred a little at thrusting himself upon the
hospitality of the Daniels's home, but Keziah assured him that his
unexpected coming would cause no trouble. So he entered the now dark
study and came out wearing his coat and carrying his hat and valise in
his hand.

"I'm sure I'm ever so much obliged to you," he said. "And, as we are
going to be more or less together--or at least I guess as much from what
you say--would you mind if I suggest a mutual introduction. I'm John
Ellery; you know that already. And you--"

Keziah stopped short on her way to the door.

"Well, I declare!" she exclaimed. "If I ain't the very worst! Fact is,
you dropped in so ahead of time and in such a irregular sort of way,
that I never once thought of introducin' anybody; and I'm sure Grace
didn't. I'm Keziah Coffin, and Cap'n Elkanah and I signed articles, so
to speak, this mornin', and I'm goin' to keep house for you."

She explained the reason upsetting the former arrangement by which
Lurania Phelps was to have had the position.

"So I'm to keep house for you," she concluded. Adding: "For a spell,
anyhow."

"Why do you say that?" asked the minister.

"Well, you might not like me. You may be particular, you know."

"I think I can run that risk."

"Yes; well, you can't tell. Or I might not like you. You see, I'm pretty
particular myself," she added with a laugh.

At the Daniels's door Keziah turned her new charge over to Matilda Snow,
the hired girl. It was an indication of the family's social position
that they kept "hired help." This was unusual in Trumet in those days,
even among the well to do.

"Good night," said the young man, extending his hand. "Good night,
Miss--or is it Mrs.--Coffin?"

"Mrs. Good night."

"She's a widow," explained Matilda. "Husband died 'fore she come back
here to live. Guess he didn't amount to much; she never mentions his
name."

"There was one thing I meant to tell her," mused the minister,
hesitating on the threshold. "I meant to tell her not to attempt any
cleaning up at the parsonage to-night. To-morrow will do just as well."

"Heavens to Betsy!" sniffed the "hired help," speaking from the depths
of personal conviction, "nobody but a born fool would clean house in the
night, 'specially after the cleanin' she's been doin' at her own place.
I guess you needn't worry."

So Mr. Ellery did not worry. And yet, until three o'clock of the
following morning, the dull light of a whale-oil lantern illuminated the
rooms of the parsonage as Keziah scrubbed and swept and washed, giving
to the musty place the "lick and promise" she had prophesied. If the
spiders had prepared those ascension robes, they could have used them
that night.

After breakfast the wagons belonging to the Wellmouth furniture dealer
drove in at the gate of the little house opposite Captain Elkanah's, and
Keziah saw, with a feeling of homesickness which she hid beneath smiles
and a rattle of conversation, the worn household treasures which had
been hers, and her brother's before her, carried away out of her life.
Then her trunks were loaded on the tailboards of the wagons, to be left
at the parsonage, and with a sigh and a quick brush of her hand across
her eyes, she locked the door for the last time and walked briskly down
the road. Soon afterwards John Ellery, under the eminently respectable
escort of Captain Elkanah and Miss Annabel, emerged from the Daniels's
gate and followed her. Mrs. Didama Rogers, thankful for a clear
atmosphere and an unobstructed view, saw them pass and recognized the
stranger. And, within a quarter of an hour, she, arrayed in a hurried
calling costume, was spreading the news along the main road. The "Trumet
Daily Advertiser" had, so to speak, issued an extra.

Thus the new minister came to Trumet and thus Keziah Coffin became his
housekeeper. She entered upon her duties with the whole-hearted energy
peculiar to her. She was used to hard work, and, as she would have said,
felt lonesome without it. She cleaned that parsonage from top to bottom.
Every blind was thrown open and the spring sunshine poured in upon the
braided mats and the rag carpets. Dust flew in clouds for the first
day or two, but it flew out of windows and doors and was not allowed to
settle within. The old black walnut furniture glistened with oil. The
mirrors and the crockery sparkled from baths of hot water and soap. Even
St. Stephen, in the engravings on the dining-room wall, was forced to a
martyrdom of the fullest publicity, because the spots and smears on the
glass covering his sufferings were violently removed. In the sleeping
rooms upstairs the feather beds were beaten and aired, the sheets and
blankets and patchwork comforters exposed to the light, and the window
curtains dragged down and left to flap on the clothesline. The smell of
musty dampness disappeared from the dining room and the wholesome odors
of outdoors and of good things cooking took its place.

Keziah, in the midst of her labors, found time to coach her employer
and companion in Trumet ways, and particularly in the ways which Trumet
expected its clergymen to travel. On the morning following his first
night in the parsonage, he expressed himself as feeling the need of
exercise. He thought he should take a walk.

"Well," said his housekeeper from her station opposite him at the
breakfast table, "if I was you I wouldn't take too long a one. You'd
better be back here by ten, anyhow. Where was you thinkin' of goin'?"

Mr. Ellery had no particular destination in mind. He would like to see
something of the village and, perhaps, if she could give him the names
of a few of his parishioners, he might make a few calls. Keziah shook
her head.

"Gracious goodness!" she exclaimed. "I wouldn't advise you to do that.
You ain't been here long enough to make forenoon calls. If you should
catch some of the women in this town with aprons and calico on, they'd
never forgive you in this world. Wait till afternoon; they'll be
expectin' you then and they'll be rigged out in their best bibs and
tuckers. S'pose you found Annabel Daniels with her hair done up in
curl papers; what do you think would happen? Mornin's are no time
for ministers' calls. Even old Mr. Langley never made calls in the
forenoon--and he'd been here thirty-odd years."

"All right, you know best. Much obliged for the advice. Then I'll simply
take my walk and leave the calls until later."

"I'd be back by ten, though. Folks'll begin callin' on you by that
time."

"They will? Doesn't the rule work both ways?"

"Not with new ministers it don't. Cat's foot! You don't s'pose Didama
Rogers and Laviny Pepper and their kind'll wait any longer'n they can
help afore they come to see what you look like, do you?"

"Well, they must have seen me when I preached here before. I remember--"

"Mercy on us! that was in meetin'. Meetin's diff'rent. All they could
say to you then was how much they liked your sermon. They say that to
every minister that comes, no matter how they may pick him to pieces
afterwards. But here they can ask you questions; about how you came to
come here and what you think of it far's you've got, and what your views
are on certain points in the creed. Likewise, who your folks were and
whether they was well off, and a few things like that. Then they'll want
to see what kind of clothes you wear and--"

"Whew!" Ellery whistled. "You're unfolding a pleasant prospect for me, I
must say. Am I supposed to be catechized on all of my private affairs?"

"Of course! A minister hasn't got any private affairs; he's a public
character. There!" she laughed, as she poured the coffee, "I mustn't
discourage you. But don't you see that every mother's son--and, for that
matter, every daughter and children's child unto the third and fourth
generation--feel that, so long as they pay pew rent or put a cent in the
collection, they own a share in you. And we always keep a watch on our
investments down this way. That's the Yankee shrewdness you read so much
about, I guess."

The minister absently played with his spoon.

"I'm afraid you're a cynic," he said.

"No, no, I ain't. Though sometimes, considerin' everything, I feel as
though I had excuse enough if I wanted to belong to that tribe. But
you're young. You mustn't mind my sayin' that; if you was old, of
course, I wouldn't talk about ages. But you are young and this is your
first church. So you must start right. I'm no cynic, bless you. I've got
trust in human nature left--most kinds of human nature. If I hadn't, I'd
have more money, I s'pose. Perhaps you've noticed that those who trust a
good deal are usually poor. It's all right, Mr. Ellery; you go and take
your walk. And I'll walk into that pantry closet. It'll be a good deal
like walkin' into the Slough of Despond, but Christian came out on the
other side and I guess likely I will, if the supply of soapsuds holds
out."

When, promptly at ten o'clock, the minister returned from his walk,
he found Mrs. Rogers waiting in the sitting room. It is a prime
qualification of an alert reporter to be first on the scene of
sensation. Didama was seldom beaten. Mr. Ellery's catechism began.
Before it was over Keziah opened the door to admit Miss Pepper and
her brother. "Kyan" was nervous and embarrassed in the housekeeper's
presence. Lavinia was a glacier, moving majestically and freezing as it
moved. Keziah, however, was not even touched by the frost; she greeted
the pair cordially, and begged them to "take off their things."

It was dinner time before the catechizers departed. The catechized came
to the table with an impaired appetite. He looked troubled.

"Don't let it worry you, Mr. Ellery," observed Keziah calmly. "I think
I can satisfy you. Honest and true, I ain't half as bad as you might
think."

The minister looked more troubled than before; also surprised.

"Why, Mrs. Coffin!" he cried. "Could you hear--"

"No, no! I couldn't hear nothin' in that closet except my own opinion
on dirt and dust. But if I was as deaf as the man that set on the
powder keg and dropped his pipe ashes into it, it wouldn't have made any
difference. The man said after they picked him up that they needn't have
been so rough, he'd have moved without bein' pushed if they'd have made
signs they wanted to use the keg. And if I was out in the next lot I'd
have known what you was listenin' to in that sittin' room. They hinted
that they were real sorry for you, but 'twasn't any of THEIR doin's. The
parish committee, bein' just men, was apt to make mistakes in certain
matters. Of course everything MIGHT be well enough, and if you wa'n't
TOO particular about cookin' and so on, why--Anyhow, you mustn't think
that THEY were criticisin'. 'Twas only that they took an interest
and--That was about it, wasn't it?"

"Mrs. Coffin, I--I hope you don't think I paid any attention to their
remarks--of that kind, I mean. Honestly, I did my best to stop them. I
said--"

"Man alive! I'm not worried. Why should you be? We were talkin' about
trust just now--or I was. Well, you and I'll have to take each other on
trust for a while, until we see whether we're goin' to suit. If you see
anything that I'm goin' wrong in, I wish you'd tell me. And I'll do the
same by you, if that's agreeable. You'll hear a lot of things said about
me, but if they're very bad I give you my word they ain't true. And, to
be real frank, I'll probably hear some about you, which I'll take for
what they're worth and considerin' who said 'em. That's a good wholesome
agreement, I think, for both of us. What do you think?"

John Ellery said, with emphasis, that he thought well of it. He began to
realize that this woman, with her blunt common sense, was likely to be
a pilot worth having in the difficult waters which he must navigate as
skipper of the Regular church in Trumet. Also, he began to realize that,
as such a skipper, he was most inexperienced. And Captain Daniels
had spoken highly--condescendingly but highly--of his housekeeper's
qualifications and personality. So the agreement was ratified, with
relief on his part.

The first Sunday came and with it the first sermon. He read that sermon
to Keziah on Saturday evening and she approved of it as a whole, though
she criticised some of its details.

"Don't be afraid to put in plenty of salt," she said. "Where you've
got the Christian life and spirit written down as bein' like a quiet,
peaceful home, free from all distrust, and like that, why don't you
change it to a good safe anchorage, where the soul can ride forever
without fear of breakers or no'theasters or the dangers besettin' the
mariner on a lee shore. They'll understand that; it gets right home to
'em. There's scarcely a man or a woman in your congregation that ain't
been out of sight of land for weeks on a stretch."

The breakfast hour on Sunday would be at nine o'clock, instead of seven,
as on week days, she told him.

"Trumet lays to bed Sunday mornin's," she explained. "It's almost a part
of its religion, as you might say, and lived up to more conscientious
than some other parts, I'm afraid. Six days shalt thou labor and wear
comfort'ble clothes; and on the seventh you must be lazy and dress up.
Likewise you must have baked beans Saturday for supper, as we're havin'
'em, and more beans with fish balls next mornin'. That is, if you want
to be orthodox."

The service began at eleven o'clock. At half past ten the sexton,
old Mr. Jubal Knowles, rang the "first bell," a clanging five-minute
reminder. Twenty minutes later he began on the second and final call.
Mr. Ellery was ready--and nervous--before the first bell had finished
ringing. But Keziah, entering the sitting room dressed in black alpaca
and carrying the hymn book with her name in gilt letters on the cover,
forbade his leaving the parsonage thus early.

"I shall go pretty soon," she said, "but you mustn't. The minister ain't
expected until the last bell's 'most done. Parson Langley used to wait
until the Winslows went in. Gaius Winslow is a widower man who lives up
to the west end of the town and he's got nine children, all boys. You'll
know 'em because they always drive down to meetin' in one carryall with
a white horse. Gaius is as punctual as a boardin'-house dinner. The
old parson used to wait until the last Winslow had toddled up the
meetin'-house steps and then he'd come out of this side door with
his sermon in his hand. It's a pretty good rule to remember and saves
watchin' the clock. Besides, it's what we've been used to, and that goes
a good ways with some folks. Good-by, Mr. Ellery. You'll see me in the
third pew from the back, on the right side, wishin' you luck just as
hard as I can."

So, as in couples or family groups, afoot or in all sorts of vehicles,
the members of Trumet's Regular society came to the church to hear their
new minister, that functionary peeped under the parlor window shade of
the parsonage and waited, fidgetting and apprehensive, for the
Winslows. They arrived at last, and were not hard to recognize, for ten
individuals packed into one carriage are hard to overlook anywhere. As
Gaius, with the youngest in his arms, passed in at the church door, John
Ellery passed out of the parsonage gate. The last bell clanged its final
stroke, the vibrations ceased, the rustle of skirts and the sounds of
decorous coughing subsided and were succeeded by the dry rattle of the
hymn-book pages, the organ, presented by Captain Elkanah and played by
his daughter, uttered its preliminary groan, the service began.

Outside the spring breeze stirred the budding silver-leafs, the distant
breakers grumbled, the crows in the pines near Captain Eben Hammond's
tavern cawed ribald answers to the screaming gulls perched along the top
of the breakwater. And seated on one of the hard benches of the little
Come-Outer chapel, Grace Van Horne heard her "Uncle Eben," who, as
usual, was conducting the meeting, speak of "them who, in purple and
fine linen, with organs and trumpets and vain shows, are gathered
elsewhere in this community to hear a hired priest make a mock of the
gospel." (A-MEN!)

But John Ellery, the "hired priest," knew nothing of this. He did know,
however, that he was the center of interest for his own congregation,
the people among whom he had been called to labor. Their praise or
criticism meant everything to him; therefore he preached for dear life.

And Keziah Coffin, in the third pew from the back, watched him intently,
her mind working in sympathetic unison with his. She was not one to
be greatly influenced by first impressions, but she had been favorably
impressed by this young fellow, and had already begun to feel that sense
of guardianship and personal responsibility which, later on, was to make
Captain Zebedee Mayo nickname the minister "Keziah's Parson."

The sermon was a success.


CHAPTER IV

IN WHICH KEZIAH'S PARSON DECIDES TO RUN IT BLINDFOLD


On Monday afternoon the minister made a few calls. Keziah made out a
short list for him to follow, a "sort of chart of the main channel," she
called it, "with the safe ports marked and the shoals and risky places
labeled dangerous."

"You see," she said, "Trumet ain't a course you can navigate with your
eyes shut. We divide ourselves into about four sets--aristocrats, poor
relations, town folks, and scum. The aristocrats are the big bugs like
Cap'n Elkanah and the other well-off sea captains, afloat or ashore.
They 'most all go to the Regular church and the parish committee is
steered by 'em. The poor relations are mainly widows and such, whose
husbands died or were lost at sea. Most of them are Regulars. The town
folks are those that stay ashore and keep store or run salt works or
somethin'. And the scum work around on odd jobs or go fishin'. So, if
you really want to be safe, you must call on the aristocrats first,
after that on the poor relations, and so on down. You won't be bothered
with scum much; they're mainly Come-Outers."

Ellery took the list from her hand and looked it over.

"Hum!" he said musingly. "Am I supposed to recognize these--er--class
distinctions?"

"Yes. That is, not in meetin' or sewin' circle or anything like that, or
not out and out and open anywhere. But you want to cultivate a sort of
different handshake and how-dy-do for each set, so's to speak. Gush all
you want to over an aristocrat. Be thankful for advice and always SO
glad to see 'em. With the poor relations you can ease up on the gush and
maybe condescend some. Town folks expect condescension and superiority;
give it to 'em. When it comes to scum, why--well, any short kind of a
bow and a 'Mornin' 'll do for them. 'Course the Lord, in His infinite
mercy, made 'em, same as He did potato bugs, but it's necessary to keep
both bugs and them down to their proper place."

She delivered this in the intervals between trips to the kitchen with
the dinner dishes. The minister listened with a troubled expression on
his face.

"Mrs. Coffin," he said, "I guess I'm dull. There was a Scotch professor
at college and the fellows used to say his bump of humor was a dent.
Maybe mine isn't much better. Are you joking?"

Keziah stacked the cups and saucers.

"I ain't jokin'," she declared. "I've been a poor relation in this
village for a good while and my brother was a shoemaker and on the upper
fringe of the town-folk class. My humor bump would have to stick up like
Cannon Hill afore I could see any joke in that."

"But you're not seriously advising me to treat a rich man differently
from a poor one?"

"Not openly different--no. But if you want to steer a perfectly SAFE
course, one that'll keep deep water under your keel the whole voyage,
why, there's your chart."

Mr. Ellery promptly tore the "chart" into small pieces.

"I'm going out," he said. "I shall be back by supper time."

Mrs. Coffin eyed him grimly.

"Goin' to run it blindfold, are you?" she asked.

"Yes, I am."

Her grimness disappeared and she smiled.

"I'll have your supper ready for you," she said. "Bring back a good
appetite."

The young man hesitated on the threshold.

"Mrs. Coffin," he demanded, "would YOU have called only on the
aristocrats at first?"

She shook her head, smiling still.

"No," she replied, "not me. I've always taken risks. But I didn't
know but you might be a safe sailor. It saves a lot of trouble in this
world."

"How about the next?"

"Oh, well, perhaps even the scum may count for somethin' over there."
She turned to face him and her smile vanished. "Go on, Mr. Ellery," she
said. "Go and call where you please. Far be it from me that I should
tell you to do anything else. I suppose likely you hope some day to be
a great preacher. I hope you will. But I'd enough sight rather you was a
good man than the very greatest. No reason why you can't be both. There
was a preacher over in Galilee once, so you told us yesterday, who was
just good. 'Twa'n't till years afterwards that the crowd came to realize
that he was great, too. And, if I recollect right, he chummed in with
publicans and sinners. I'm glad you tore up that fool paper of mine. I
hoped you might when I gave it to you. Now you run along, and I'll wash
dishes. If cleanliness is next to godliness, then a parson ought to eat
out of clean plates."

As a matter of fact, the minister's calls were in the nature of a
compromise, although an unintentional one. He dropped in on Zebedee
Mayo, owner of the big house on the slope of the hill. Captain Zeb took
him up into what he called his "cupoler," the observatory on the top of
the house, and showed him Trumet spread out like a map. The main road
was north and south, winding and twisting its rutted, sandy way. Along
it were clustered the principal houses and shops, shaded by silver-leaf
poplars, a few elms, and some willows and spruces. Each tree bent
slightly away from the northeast, the direction from which blew the
heavy winter gales. Beyond the main road were green slopes and pastures,
with swamps in the hollows, swamps which were to be cranberry bogs in
the days to come. Then the lower road, with more houses, and, farther
on, the beach, the flats--partially uncovered because it was high
tide--and the bay.

Behind the Mayo house was the crest of Cannon Hill, more hills, pastures
and swamps, scattered houses and pine groves. Then began the tumbled,
humped waste of sand dunes, and, over their ragged fringes of beach plum
and bayberry bushes, the deep blue of the wide Atlantic. The lighthouse
was a white dot and the fish shanties a blotch of brown. Along the inner
edge of the blue were scars of dancing white, the flashing teeth of
hungry shoals which had torn to pieces and swallowed many a good ship.
And, far out, dotted and sprinkled along the horizon, were sails.

"See?" said Captain Zeb, puffing still from the exertion of climbing
the ladder to the "cupoler," for he was distinctly "fleshy." "See? The
beacon's up. Packet come in this mornin'. There she is. See her down
there by the breakwater?"

Sure enough, the empty barrel, painted red, was hoisted to the top of
its pole on the crest of Cannon Hill. And, looking down at the bay and
following the direction of the stubby pointing finger, Ellery saw a
little schooner, with her sails lowered, lying, slightly on her side,
in a shallow pool near a long ridge of piled stones--the breakwater. A
small wharf made out from the shore and black figures moved briskly upon
it. Carts were alongside the schooner and there more dots were busy.

"Eben's pennant's flyin'," said Captain Zeb. "He always sets colors
when the packet's in. Keeps packet tavern, Eben does. That's it, that
old-fashioned, gambrel-roofed house on the rise by the wharf. Call it
'Saints' Rest,' they do now, 'cause Eben's so mighty religious."

The minister saw the long, rambling house, with one lonely, twisted tree
in its yard, a flag flying from a pole beside it. So that was where
the Hammonds lived. And where the girl lived who was certain he was a
"conceited snippet." Whatever he might be in reality he hoped it was not
that. "Snippet" was not in his dictionary, but he didn't like the sound
of it.

"Who owns the packet?" he asked, to make conversation.

"Zach Foster. Married Freewill Doane's daughter over to Harniss. She's
dead now."

"A good sailor, is he?"

Captain Zeb spat in supreme disgust.

"Good farmer!" he snorted. "Zach took over the packet for a debt when
the chap that used to run her died. His dad, old man Foster, raised
garden truck at the same time mine went to sea. Both of us took after
our fathers, I guess. Anyhow, my wife says that when I die 'twill be of
salt water on the brain, and I'm sure Zach's head is part cabbage. Been
better for him if he'd stuck to his garden. However, I s'pose he does
his best."

"They say angels can do no more."

"Um-m. Well, Zach'll be an angel pretty soon if he keeps on cruisin'
with that old hooker as she is. 'Bijah Perry, he's mate and the only
good seaman aboard, tells me that most of the riggin's rotten and the
main topmast ain't sound, by a good deal. The old man's put off havin'
her overhauled for two reasons, one that repairs cost money, and t'other
that puttin' off is the main sheet of his gospel. When there's no rain
the roof don't leak and long's it don't blow too hard 'most any kind of
gear'll hold. That's philosophy--cabbage philosophy."

Ellery decided that he should like Captain Zeb, although it was evident
that the old whaler had decided opinions of his own which he did not
hesitate to express. He judged that the Mayos were of the so-called
aristocracy, but undoubtedly unique specimens. He visited four more
households that afternoon. The last call was at Mrs. Thankful Payne's,
and while there, listening to the wonderful "poem," he saw Miss Van
Horne pass the window, as has already been told. He came home to a Cape
Cod supper of scalloped clams, hot biscuits, and baked Indian pudding,
and Keziah greeted him with a cheery smile which made him feel that it
WAS home. His summary disposal of the "chart" had evidently raised him
in his housekeeper's estimation. She did not ask a single question as to
where he had been.

Next day he had a taste of Trumet's real aristocracy, the genuine
article. Captain Elkanah Daniels and his daughter made their first
formal call. The captain was majestic in high hat, fur-collared cape,
tailed coat, and carrying a gold-headed cane. Miss Annabel wore her
newest gown and bonnet and rustled as she walked. They entered the
sitting room and the lady glanced superciliously about the apartment.

"Hum--ha!" barked Captain Elkanah. "Ahem! Mr. Ellery, I trust you're
being made comfortable. The parish committee are--hum--ah--anxious that
you should be. Yes?"

The minister said that he was very comfortable indeed.

"It isn't what you've been used to, we know," observed Miss Annabel.
"Mr. Langley, our former pastor, was a sweet old gentleman, but he was
old-fashioned and his tastes were queer, especially in art. Have you
noticed that 'fruit piece' in the dining room? Isn't it too ridiculous?"

Ellery admitted that the fruit piece was rather funny; but no doubt it
had been a gift and so

--"Yes, indeed. I guess it was a present, fast enough. Nobody would buy
such a thing. It seems strange to pa and me that, although so many of
our people have been abroad, they have such strange ideas of art. Do you
remember the beautiful marbles in the palaces at Florence, Mr. Ellery?
Of course you've seen them?"

The minister was obliged to admit that he had never been abroad.

"Oh, is that so? I've been so many times with pa that it seems almost
as if everybody was as familiar with Yurrup as I am. You remember what I
said about the marbles, pa?"

Her parent nodded.

"Hum--ha! Oh, yes, yes," he said. "That was when I was in the
fruit-carrying trade and made a voyage to Valenchy."

"Valencia, pa," corrected Annabel. "And Valencia is in Spain."

"I know it. But we went to Leghorn afterwards. I sailed to Cronstadt for
some years regular. Cronstadt is in Rooshy, Mr. Ellery."

"Russia, pa," snapped his daughter. Then she changed the subject to
church and parish affairs. They spoke of the sewing circle and the
reading society and the Friday-evening meetings.

"The Come-Outers are so vexed with us," tittered Miss Annabel, "that
they won't even hold prayer meeting on the same night as ours. They have
theirs on Thursday nights and it's as good as a play to hear them shout
and sing and carry on. You'll enjoy the Come-Outers, Mr. Ellery. They're
a perfect delight."

And as they rose to go Captain Elkanah asked:

"Is there anything you'd like done about the parsonage, Mr. Ellery?
If so, it shall be done immejitly. How are you satisfied with your
housekeeper?"

"Very well, indeed, Captain Daniels," was the prompt reply.

"She's a character, isn't she?" giggled Annabel. "She was born here
in Trumet, but went away to New Bedford when she was young and grew up
there. Her maiden name was Hall, but while she was away she married a
man named Ansel Coffin. They didn't live together very long and weren't
happy, I guess. I don't know whose fault it was, nobody knows much
of anything about it, for that's the one thing she won't talk about.
Anyhow, the Coffin man was lost to sea, and after a while she came back
to keep house for her brother Solomon. She's an awful odd stick, but
she's a good cook, I believe; though I'm afraid you won't get the meals
people such as ourselves, who've been so much in the city, are used to."

Ellery thought of the meals at his city boarding house and shuddered. He
was an orphan and had boarded for years. Incidentally, he had worked his
way through college. Captain Elkanah cleared his throat.

"Keziah," he commanded. "Hum--ha! Keziah, come in here a minute."

Keziah came in response to the call, her sewing in her hand. The
renovation of the parsonage had so far progressed that she could now
find time for a little sewing, after the dinner dishes were done.

"Keziah," said the captain pompously, "we expect you to look out for Mr.
Ellery in every respect. The parish committee expects that--yes."

"I'll try," said Mrs. Coffin shortly.

"Yes. Well, that's all. You can go. We must be going, too, Mr.
Ellery. Please consider our house at your disposal any time. Be
neighborly--hum--ha!--be neighborly."

"Yes," purred Annabel. "DO come and see us often. Congenial society is
very scarce in Trumet, for me especially. We can read together. Are you
fond of Moore, Mr. Ellery? I just dote on him."

The last "hum--ha" was partially drowned by the click of the gate.
Keziah closed the dining-room door.

"Mrs. Coffin," said the minister, "I shan't trouble the parish
committee. Be sure of that. I'm perfectly satisfied."

Keziah sat down in the rocker and her needle moved very briskly for a
moment. Then she said, without looking up:

"That's good. I own up I like to hear you say it. And I am glad there
are some things I do like about this new place of mine. Because--well,
because there's likely to be others that I shan't like at all."

On Friday evening the minister conducted his first prayer meeting.
Before it, and afterwards, he heard a good deal concerning the
Come-Outers. He learned that Captain Eben Hammond had preached against
him in the chapel on Sunday. Most of his own parishioners seemed to
think it a good joke.

"Stir 'em up, Mr. Ellery," counseled Lavinia Pepper. "Stir 'em up! Don't
be afraid to answer em from the pulpit and set 'em where they belong.
Ignorant, bigoted things!"

Others gave similar counsel. The result was that the young man became
still more interested in these people who seemed to hate him and all he
stood for so profoundly. He wished he might hear their side of the case
and judge it for himself. It may as well be acknowledged now that John
Ellery had a habit of wishing to judge for himself. This is not always a
politic habit in a country minister.

The sun of the following Thursday morning rose behind a curtain of fog
as dense as that of the day upon which Ellery arrived. A flat calm in
the forenoon, the wind changed about three o'clock and, beginning with
a sharp and sudden squall from the northwest, blew hard and steady. Yet
the fog still cloaked everything and refused to be blown away.

"There's rain astern," observed Captain Zeb, with the air of authority
which belongs to seafaring men when speaking of the weather. "We'll get
a hard, driving rain afore mornin', you see. Then, if she still holds
from the northwest'ard, it'll fair off fine."

"Goin' out in this, Mr. Ellery!" exclaimed Keziah, in amazement, as the
minister put on his hat and coat about seven that evening. "Sakes alive!
you won't be able to see the way to the gate. It's as dark as a nigger's
pocket and thicker than young ones in a poor man's family, as my father
used to say. You'll be wet through. Where in the world are you bound for
THIS night?"

The minister equivocated. He said he had been in the house all day and
felt like a walk.

"Well, take an umbrella, then," was the housekeeper's advice. "You'll
need it before you get back, I cal'late."

It was dark enough and thick enough, in all conscience. The main road
was a black, wet void, through which gleams from lighted windows were
but vague, yellow blotches. The umbrella was useful in the same way
that a blind man's cane is useful, in feeling the way. The two or
three stragglers who met the minister carried lanterns. One of these
stragglers was Mr. Pepper. Kyan was astonished.

"Well, I snum!" cried Kyan, raising the lantern. "If 'tain't Mr. Ellery.
Where you bound this kind of night?"

Before the minister could answer, a stately figure appeared and joined
the pair. Lavinia, of course.

"Well, Mr. Ellery," she said. "Ain't you lost, out in this fog? Anybody
sick?"

No, no one was sick.

"That's a mercy. Goin' callin', be you?"

"No."

"Hum! Queer weather for a walk, I call it. Won't be many out to-night,
except Come-Outers goin' to holler their lungs loose at prayer meetin'.
He, he! You ain't turned Come-Outer, have you, Mr. Ellery? You've headed
right for the chapel."

Ellery's reply was hurried and a bit confused. He said good night and
went on.

"Laviny," whispered the shocked Kyan, "do you think that was
a--er--polite thing to say to a parson? That about his turnin'
Come-Outer? He didn't make much answer, seemed to me. You don't think he
was mad, do ye?"

"I don't care if he was," snorted Miss Pepper. "He could tell a body
where he was goin' then. Nobody can snub me, minister or not. I think
he's kind of stuck-up, if you want to know, and if he is, he'll get took
down in a hurry. Come along, don't stand there with your mouth open like
a flytrap. I'd like to know what he was up to. I've a precious good mind
to follow him; would if 'twa'n't so much trouble."

She didn't. Yet, if she had, she would have deemed the trouble worth
while. For John Ellery stumbled on through the mist till he reached the
"Corners" where the store was located and the roads forked. There, he
turned to the right, into the way called locally "Hammond's Turn-off."
A short distance down the "Turn-off" stood a small, brown-shingled
building, its windows alight. Opposite its door, on the other side of
the road, grew a spreading hornbeam tree surrounded by a cluster of
swamp blackberry bushes. In the black shadow of the hornbeam Mr. Ellery
stood still. He was debating in his mind a question: should he or should
he not enter that building?

As he stood there, groups of people emerged from the fog and darkness
and passed in at the door. Some of them he had seen during his fortnight
in Trumet. Others were strangers to him. A lantern danced and wabbled up
the "Turn-off" from the direction of the bay shore and the packet wharf.
It drew near, and he saw that it was carried by an old man with long
white hair and chin beard, who walked with a slight limp. Beside him was
a thin woman wearing a black poke bonnet and a shawl. In the rear of
the pair came another woman, a young woman, judging by the way she was
dressed and her lithe, vigorous step. The trio halted on the platform of
the building. The old man blew out the lantern. Then he threw the door
open and a stream of yellow light poured over the group.

The young woman was Grace Van Horne. The minister recognized her at
once. Undoubtedly, the old man with the limp was her guardian, Captain
Eben Hammond, who, by common report, had spoken of him, Ellery, as a
"hired priest."

The door closed. A few moments thereafter the sound of a squeaky
melodeon came from within the building. It wailed and quavered and
groaned. Then, with a suddenness that was startling, came the first
verse of a hymn, sung with tremendous enthusiasm:

          "Oh, who shall answer when the Lord shall call
             His ransomed sinners home?"

The hallelujah chorus was still ringing when the watcher across the
street stepped out from the shadow of the hornbeam. Without a pause he
strode over to the platform. Another moment and the door had shut behind
him.

The minister of the Trumet Regular church had entered the Come-Outer
chapel to attend a Come-Outer prayer meeting!


CHAPTER V

IN WHICH THE PARSON CRUISES IN STRANGE WATERS


The Come-Outer chapel was as bare inside, almost, as it was without.
Bare wooden walls, a beamed ceiling, a raised platform at one end with
a table and chairs and the melodeon upon it, rows of wooden settees for
the congregation--that was all. As the minister entered, the worshipers
were standing up to sing. Three or four sputtering oil lamps but dimly
illumined the place and made recognition uncertain.

The second verse of the hymn was just beginning as Ellery came in. Most
of the forty or more grown people in the chapel were too busy wrestling
with the tune to turn and look at him. A child here and there in the
back row twisted a curious neck but twisted back again as parental
fingers tugged at its ear. The minister tiptoed to a dark corner and
took his stand in front of a vacant settee.

The man whom Ellery had decided must be Captain Eben Hammond was
standing on the low platform beside the table. A quaint figure,
patriarchal with its flowing white hair and beard, puritanical with its
set, smooth-shaven lips and tufted brows. Captain Eben held an open hymn
book back in one hand and beat time with the other. He wore brass-bowed
spectacles well down toward the tip of his nose. Swinging a heavy,
stubby finger and singing in a high, quavering voice of no particular
register, he led off the third verse:

          "Oh, who shall weep when the roll is called
             And who shall shout for joy?"

The melodeon and the hymn book were in accord as to the tune, but
Captain Eben and the various members of the congregation seemed to have
a desire to improvise. They sang with spirit, however, and the rhythmic
pat of feet grew louder and louder. Here and there men and women were
swaying and rocking their bodies in time to the music. The chorus for
each verse was louder than the one preceding it.

Another hymn was given out and sung. And another and still another. The
windows rattled. The patting grew to a steady "thump! thump!" Momentary
pauses between lines were punctuated by hallelujahs and amens. Standing
directly in front of the minister was a six-foot, raw-boned individual
whose clothes smelled strongly of fish, and whose hands, each swung
at the end of an exposed five inches of hairy red wrist, looked like
flippers. At the end of the third hymn this personage sprang straight up
into the air, cracked the heels of a pair of red cowhide boots together,
and whooped: "Glory be! Send the PAOWER!" in a voice like the screech
of a northeast gale. Mr. Ellery, whom this gymnastic feat had taken by
surprise, jumped in sympathy, although not as high.

The singing over, the worshipers sat down. Captain Eben took a
figured handkerchief from his pocket and wiped his forehead. The thin,
nearsighted young woman who had been humped over the keyboard of the
melodeon, straightened up. The worshipers relaxed a little and began to
look about.

Then the captain adjusted his spectacles and opened a Bible, which he
took from the table beside him. Clearing his throat, he announced that
he would read from the Word, tenth chapter of Jeremiah:

"'Thus saith the Lord. Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not
dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them.

"'For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of
the forest, the work of the hands of the workmen, with the ax.'"

He read in a measured singsong, stopping occasionally to hold the book
in a better light and peering at the fine print through his spectacles.
And as he read, there was a sudden rustle on one of the back benches. A
child had turned, stared, and pulled at its mother's sleeve. The rustle
grew and spread.

Captain Eben drawled on to the twentieth verse:

"'My tabernacle is spoiled and all my cords are broken: my children are
gone forth from me, and they are not: there is none to stretch forth my
tent any more, and to set up my curtains!

"'For the pastors are become brutish and have not sought the Lord:
therefore they shall not prosper, and--'"

"A-MEN!"

The shout came from the second bench from the front, where Ezekiel
Bassett, clam digger and fervent religionist, was always to be found on
meeting nights. Ezekiel was the father of Susannah B. Bassett, "Sukey
B." for short, who played the melodeon. He had been, by successive
seizures, a Seventh Day Baptist, a Second Adventist, a Millerite, a
Regular, and was now the most energetic of Come-Outers. Later he was to
become a Spiritualist and preside at table-tipping seances.

Ezekiel's amen was so sudden and emphatic that it startled the reader
into looking up. Instead of the faces of his congregation, he found
himself treated to a view of their back hair. Nearly every head
was turned toward the rear corner of the room, there was a buzz of
whispering and, in front, many men and women were standing up to look.
Captain Eben was scandalized.

"Well!" he exclaimed. "Is this a prayer meetin' or--or--what? Brethren
and sisters, I must say--"

Ezekiel Bassett stepped forward and whispered in his ear. The
captain's expression of righteous indignation changed to one of blank
astonishment. He, too, gazed at the dark corner. Then his lips tightened
and he rapped smartly on the table.

"Brethren and sisters," he thundered, in the voice which, of old, had
enforced obedience aboard his coasting schooner, "remember this is the
house of the Lord. Be reverent!"

He waited until every eye had swung about to meet his. Then he regarded
his abashed but excited hearers with a steady and prolonged stare.

"My friends," he said, "let us bow in prayer."

John Ellery could have repeated that prayer, almost word for word, years
after that night. The captain prayed for the few here gathered together:
Let them be steadfast. Let them be constant in the way. The path they
were treading might be narrow and beset with thorns, but it was the path
leading to glory.

"Scoffers may sneer," he declared, his voice rising; "they may make a
mock of us, they may even come into Thy presence to laugh at us, but
theirs is the laugh that turns to groanin'. O Lord, strengthen us
to-night to speak what's in our hearts, without fear." ("A-men!") "To
prophesy in Thy name! To bid the mockers and them that dare--dare to
profane this sanctuary be careful. Hired singers and trumpets and vain
shows we have not" ("Thank the Lord! Amen!"), "but the true faith and
the joy of it we do have." ("Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Glory!")

And so on, his remarks becoming more personal and ever pointing like
a compass needle to the occupant of that seat in the corner. The
minister's determination to attend a Come-Outer meeting, though it had
reached the sticking point only a half hour before, was the result of
considerable deliberation. He had argued with himself and had made up
his mind to find out for himself just what these people did. He was
finding out, certainly. His motives were good and he had come with no
desire to scoff, but, for the life of him, he could not help feeling
like a criminal. Incidentally, it provoked him to feel that way.

"O Lord," prayed Captain Hammond, the perspiration in beads on his
forehead, "Thou hast said that the pastors become brutish and have not
sought Thee and that they shan't prosper. Help us tonight to labor with
this one that he may see his error and repent in sackcloth and ashes."

They sang once more, a hymn that prophesied woe to the unbeliever.
Then Ezekiel Bassett rose to "testify." The testimony was mainly to the
effect that he was happy because he had fled to the ark of safety while
there was yet time.

"I found out," he shouted, "that fancy music and--ah--and--ah--sot
sermons and fine duds and suchlike wa'n't goin' to do ME no good.
I needed somethin' else. I needed good times in my religion"
("Hallelujah!") "and I've found 'em right here. Yes, sir! right here.
And I say this out loud," turning to glare at the intruder, "and I don't
care who comes to poke fun at me for sayin' it." ("Amen!")

A sharp-nosed female followed Mr. Bassett. She spoke with evident
feeling and in a voice that trembled and shook when her emotion carried
it aloft. SHE'D had enough of high-toned religion. Yes, and of them that
upheld it. When her brother Simeon was took bad with phthisic, "wheezin'
like a busted bellerses" and 'twas "up and down, trot, trot, trot," to
fetch and carry for him day in and night out, did the folks from the
Reg'lar church help her? She guessed NOT. The only one that came nigh
her was Laviny Pepper, and she came only to gas and gabble and find out
things that wa'n't none of her business. What help she got was from
a Come-Outer, from Eben Hammond, bless his good soul! ("Amen!") That
phthisic settled her for Reg'larism. Yes, and for them that preached it,
too. So there!

Captain Eben called for more testimony. But the testifiers were, to use
the old minstrel joke, backward in coming forward that evening. At an
ordinary meeting, by this time, the shouts and enthusiasm would have
been at their height and half a dozen Come-Outers on their feet at once,
relating their experiences and proclaiming their happiness. But tonight
there was a damper; the presence of the leader of the opposition cast a
shadow over the gathering. Only the bravest attempted speech. The others
sat silent, showing their resentment and contempt by frowning glances
over their shoulders and portentous nods one to the other.

"Come, brethren," commanded the captain sharply; "we are waitin' to hear
you. Are you afraid? If your faith is real, nothin' nor nobody should
keep you from cryin' it out loud. Now, if ever, is the accepted time.
Speak up for the spirit that's in you."

An elderly man, grave and quiet, arose and said a few words, dignified
and solemn words of prayer and thankfulness for the comfort this little
society of true believers had been to him. Ellery realized that here
was another sort of Come-Outer, one of the Hammond type. Evidently, they
were not all like Ezekiel and the shrill-voiced woman.

Then, from the settee in front of him, rose the lengthy and fishy person
with the cowhide boots and enormous hands. His name was Josiah Badger
and he was, according to Trumet's estimate, "a little mite lackin' in
his top riggin'." He stuttered, and this infirmity became more and more
apparent as he grew eloquent.

"I--I ain't afraid," he proclaimed. "They can call me a C-C-Come-Outer
all they want to. I--I don't care if they do. Let 'em, I say; l-let 'em!
They can p-p-poke their fun and p-p-p-pup-pup-poke it, but I tell 'em
to h-heave ahead and p-pup-pup-POKE. When I used to g-go to their old
Reg'lar meetin' house, all I done was to go to sleep. But I don't go
to sleep here, glory hallelujah! No, sir! There's too much b-b-blessed
noise and we have too g-good times to g-go to sleep here. That old
K-Kyan Pepper called me t-town f-fool t'other day. T-tut-town fool's
what he called me. Says I to him, says I: 'You-you-y-you ain't got spunk
enough to be a fool,' I says, 'unless Laviny says you c-can be. You old
Reg'lar p-p-pepper shaker, you!"

By this time tee-hees from the children and chuckles from some of the
older members interfered with Mr. Badger's fervent but jerky discourse.
Captain Eben struck the table smartly.

"Silence!" he thundered. "Silence! Brother Badger, I beg your pardon for
'em. Go on!"

But Josiah's train of thought had evidently been derailed by the
interruption.

"I--I--I cal'late that's about all," he stammered and sat down.

The captain looked over the meeting.

"I'm ashamed," he said, "ashamed of the behavior of some of us in the
Lord's house. This has been a failure, this service of ours. We have
kept still when we should have justified our faith, and allowed the
presence of a stranger to interfere with our duty to the Almighty. And
I will say," he added, his voice rising and trembling with indignation,
"to him who came here uninvited and broke up this meetin', that it would
be well for him to remember the words of Scriptur', 'Woe unto ye, false
prophets and workers of iniquity.' Let him remember what the Divine
wisdom put into my head to read to-night: 'The pastors have become
brutish and have not sought the Lord; therefore they shall not
prosper.'"

"Amen!" "Amen!" "Amen!" "So be it!" The cries came from all parts of the
little room. They ceased abruptly, for John Ellery was on his feet.

"Captain Hammond," he said, "I realize that I have no right to speak in
this building, but I must say one word. My coming here to-night may have
been a mistake; I'm inclined to think it was. But I came not, as you
seem to infer, to sneer or to scoff; certainly I had no wish to disturb
your service. I came because I had heard repeatedly, since my arrival
in this town, of this society and its meetings. I had heard, too, that
there seemed to be a feeling of antagonism, almost hatred, against me
among you here. I couldn't see why. Most of you have, I believe, been at
one time members of the church where I preach. I wished to find out for
myself how much of truth there was in the stories I had heard and to
see if a better feeling between the two societies might not be brought
about. Those were my reasons for coming here to-night. As for my being
a false prophet and a worker of iniquity"--he smiled--"well, there is
another verse of Scripture I would call to your attention: 'Judge not,
that ye be not judged.'"

He sat down. There was silence for a moment and then a buzz of
whispering. Captain Eben, who had heard him with a face of iron
hardness, rapped the table.

"We will sing in closin'," he said, "the forty-second hymn. After which
the benediction will be pronounced."

The Regular minister left the Come-Outers' meeting with the unpleasant
conviction that he had blundered badly. His visit, instead of tending
toward better understanding and more cordial relationship, had
been regarded as an intrusion. He had been provoked into a public
justification, and now he was quite sure that he would have been more
politic to remain silent. He realized that the evening's performance
would cause a sensation and be talked about all over town. The
Come-Outers would glory in their leader's denunciation of him, and his
own people would perhaps feel that it served him right. If he had only
told Mrs. Coffin of what he intended to do. Yet he had not told her
because he meant to do it anyhow. Altogether it was a rather humiliating
business.

So that old bigot was the Van Horne girl's "uncle." It hardly seemed
possible that she, who appeared so refined and ladylike when he met her
at the parsonage, should be a member of that curious company. When
he rose to speak he had seen her in the front row, beside the thin,
middle-aged female who had entered the chapel with Captain Hammond and
with her. She was looking at him intently. The lamp over the speaker's
table had shone full on her face and the picture remained in his memory.
He saw her eyes and the wavy shadows of her hair on her forehead.

He stepped off the platform, across the road, out of the way of
homeward-bound Come-Outers, and stood there, thinking. The fog was
as heavy and wet as ever; in fact, it was almost a rain. The wind
was blowing hard from the northwest. The congregation dispersed in
chattering groups, their lanterns dipping and swinging like fireflies.
The chatter dealt entirely with one subject--himself. He heard his name
mentioned at least twenty times. Out of the gusty, dripping blackness
came Mr. Badger's voice.

"By time!" crowed Josiah, "he was took down a few p-p-pup-pegs, wa'n't
he! My! how Eben did g-gi-gi-give it to him. He looked toler'ble white
under the gills when he riz up to heave out his s-s-sus-sassy talk. And
foolish, too. I cal'late I won't be the only town fuf-fuf-fool from now
on. He! he!"

The noises died away in the distance. Within the chapel the tramp
of heavy boots sounded as the lights were blown out, one by one. The
minister frowned, sighed, and turned homeward. It is not pleasant to be
called a fool, even by a recognized member of the fraternity.

He had taken but a few steps when there was a rustle in the wet grass
behind him.

"Mr. Ellery," whispered a voice, "Mr. Ellery, may I speak to you just a
moment?"

He wheeled in surprise.

"Why! why, Miss Van Horne!" he exclaimed. "Is it you?"

"Mr. Ellery," she began, speaking hurriedly and in a low voice, "I--I
felt that I must say a word to you before--"

She paused and glanced back at the chapel. Ezekiel Bassett, the janitor,
having extinguished the last lamp, had emerged from the door and was
locking up. In another moment he clumped past them in the middle of the
road, the circle of light from his lantern just missing them as they
stood in the grass at the side under the hornbeam and blackberry bushes.
He was alone; Sukey B. had gone on before, other and younger masculine
escort having been providentially provided.

Mr. Bassett was out of hearing before Grace finished her sentence. The
minister was silent, waiting and wondering.

"I felt," she said, "that I must see you and--explain. I am SO sorry you
came here to-night. Oh, I wish you hadn't. What made you do it?"

"I came," began Ellery, somewhat stiffly, "because I--well, because I
thought it might be a good thing to do. As I said--"

"Yes, I know. But it wasn't. It was so--so--"

"So foolish. Thank you, I'm aware of it. I've heard myself called a
fool already since I left your church. Not that I needed to hear it. I
realize the fact."

There was a bitterness in his tone, unmistakable. And a little laugh
from his companion did not tend to soothe his feelings.

"Thank you," he said. "Perhaps it is funny. I did not find it so. Good
evening."

This was priggish, but it must be borne in mind that John Ellery was
very, very fresh from the theological school, where young divines are
taught to take themselves seriously. He was ashamed of himself as soon
as he said it, which proved that his case was not beyond hope.

The girl detained him as he was turning away.

"I wasn't laughing at that," she said. "I know who called you that--that
name. It was Josiah Badger, and he really is one, you know. I was
thinking of his testimony in meeting and how he called Ky--Abishai--a
pepper shaker. That was ridiculous enough, but it reminded me of
something else about Mr. Pepper, and I HAD to laugh. It wasn't at you,
truly."

So the minister begged her pardon; also he remained where he was, and
heard the drops from the tree patter hollow on his hat.

"I came after you," went on Grace rapidly and with nervous haste,
"because I felt that you ought not to misjudge my uncle for what he said
to-night. He wouldn't have hurt your feelings for the world. He is a
good man and does good to everybody. If you only knew the good he does
do, you wouldn't--you wouldn't DARE think hardly of him."

She stamped her foot in the wet grass as she said it. She was evidently
in earnest. But Ellery was not in the mood to be greatly impressed
by Eben Hammond's charity or innate goodness. The old tavern keeper's
references to himself were too fresh in his mind. "False prophet" and
"worker of iniquity!"

"I'm not judging your uncle," he declared. "It seemed to me that the
boot was on the other leg."

"I know, but you do judge him, and you mustn't. You see, he thought
you had come to make fun of him--and us. Some of the Regular people do,
people who aren't fit to tie his shoes. And so he spoke against you.
He'll be sorry when he thinks it over. That's what I came to tell you. I
ask your pardon for--for him."

"Why--why, that's all right. I think I understood--"

"I'm not asking it because he's a Come-Outer and you're a Regular
minister. He isn't ashamed of his religion. Neither am I. I'm a
Come-Outer, too."

"Yes. I--I supposed you were."

"Yes, I am. There, good night, Mr. Ellery. All I ask is that you don't
think too hardly of uncle. He didn't mean it."

She turned away now, and it was the minister who detained her.

"I've been thinking," he said slowly, for in his present state of mind
it was a hard thing to say, "that perhaps I ought to apologize, too.
I'm afraid I did disturb your service and I'm sorry. I meant well,
but--What's that? Rain?"

There was no doubt about it; it was rain and plenty of it. It came in
a swooping downpour that beat upon the trees and bushes and roared upon
the roof of the chapel. The minister hurriedly raised his umbrella.

"Here!" he cried, "let me--Miss Van Horne! Where are you?"

The answer came from a short distance down the "Turn-off."

"Good night," called the girl. "I must run."

Evidently, she WAS running. Therefore the young man ran after her. He
caught up with her in a moment, in spite of some stumbles over the rough
road.

"Here!" he commanded, "you must take the umbrella. Really, you must. You
haven't one and you'll be wet through."

She pushed the umbrella aside.

"No, no," she answered. "I don't need it; I'm used to wet weather; truly
I am. And I don't care for this hat; it's an old one. You have a long
way to go and I haven't. Please, Mr. Ellery, I can't take it."

"Very well," was the sternly self-sacrificing reply, "then I shall
certainly go with you."

"But I don't wish you to."

"I can't help that. I'm not going to let you go unprotected through
this flood. Especially as you might have been at home before this if you
hadn't stopped to speak with me."

"But you mustn't."

"I shall."

Here was the irresistible force and the immovable object. They stood
stock still in the middle of the road, while the rain drops jumped as
they struck the umbrella top. The immovable object, being feminine,
voiced the unexpected.

"All right," she said; "then I suppose I shall have to take it."

"What?"

"The umbrella. I'm sorry, and you'll get dreadfully wet, but it's your
own fault."

He could feel her hand near his own on the handle. He did not relinquish
his grasp.

"No," he said. "I think, on the whole, that that is unreasonable. I
SHOULD get wet and, though I don't mind it when it is necessary, I--"

"Well?" rather sharply, "what are you going to do?"

"Go with you as far as your gate. I'm sorry, if my company is
distasteful, but--"

He did not finish the sentence, thinking, it may be, that she might
finish it for him. But she was silent, merely removing her hand from the
handle. She took a step forward; he followed, holding the umbrella above
her head. They plashed on, without speaking, through the rapidly forming
puddles.

Presently she stumbled and he caught her arm to prevent her falling. To
his surprise he felt that arm shake in his grasp.

"Why, Miss Van Horne!" he exclaimed in great concern, "are you crying?
I beg your pardon. Of course I wouldn't think of going another step with
you. I didn't mean to trouble you. I only--If you will please take this
umbrella--"

Again he tried to transfer the umbrella and again she pushed it away.

"I--I'm not crying," she gasped; "but--oh, dear! this is SO funny!"

Mr. Ellery gazed blankly at her through the rain-streaked dark. This was
the most astonishing young person he had met in his twenty-three years
of worldly experience.

"Funny!" he repeated. "Well, perhaps it is. Our ideas of fun seem to
differ. I--"

"Oh, but it IS so funny. You don't understand. What do you think your
congregation would say if they knew you had been to a Come-Outers'
meeting and then insisted on seeing a Come-Outer girl home?"

John Ellery swallowed hard. A vision of Captain Elkanah Daniels and the
stately Miss Annabel rose before his mind's eye. He hadn't thought of
his congregation in connection with this impromptu rescue of a damsel in
distress.

"Ha, ha!" he laughed mournfully. "I guess it is rather funny, after
all."

"It certainly is. Now will you leave me and go back to your parsonage?"

"Not unless you take the umbrella."

"Very well. It is a beautiful evening for a walk, don't you think so?
Mr. Ellery, I'm afraid we shan't have you with us in Trumet very long."

"Why not?"

"Oh, because you're so very, very original. Are your sermons that way,
too? Captain Elkanah doesn't like his ministers to be too original."

The minister set his teeth. At that moment he felt an intense desire
to bid the Daniels family mind their own business. Then another thought
struck him.

"Possibly your Uncle Eben might be somewhat--er--surprised if he
knew you were with me. Perhaps he might have something to say on the
subject."

"I guess he would. We shall know very soon. I ran away and left him with
Mrs. Poundberry, our housekeeper. He doesn't know where I am. I wonder
he hasn't turned back to look for me before this. We shall probably meet
him at any moment."

She seemed to enjoy the prospect of the meeting. Ellery wondered what on
earth he should say to Captain Hammond--that is, provided he was allowed
to say anything.

Suddenly a heavier gust of rain and wind beat upon them. The minister
struggled with the umbrella. The gust passed and with it the fog. An
instant before it had been all about them, shutting them within inky
walls. Now it was not. Through the rain he could see the shadowy
silhouettes of bushes at the road side. Fifty yards away the lighted
windows of the Hammond tavern gleamed yellow. Farther on, over a ragged,
moving fringe of grass and weeds, was a black flat expanse--the bay. And
a little way out upon that expanse twinkled the lights of a vessel. A
chain rattled. Voices shouting exultingly came to their ears.

"Why!" exclaimed Grace in excited wonder, "it's the packet! She was due
this morning, but we didn't expect her in till to-morrow. How did she
find her way in the fog? I must tell uncle."

She started to run toward the house. The minister would have followed
with the umbrella, but she stopped him.

"No, Mr. Ellery," she urged earnestly. "No, please don't. I'm all right
now. Thank you. Good night."

A few steps farther on she turned.

"I hope Cap'n Elkanah won't know," she whispered, the laugh returning to
her voice. "Good night."

Ellery stood still in the rain and watched her. He saw her pass the
lighted windows and open a door. Into the yellow radiance she flashed
and disappeared. A minute more and the bulky form of Eben Hammond,
lantern in hand, a sou'wester on his head and his shoulders working
themselves into an oilskin coat, burst out of the door and hurriedly
limped down toward the shore. On the threshold, framed in light, stood
his ward, gazing after him. And the minister gazed at her.

From the bay came the sound of oars in row-locks. A boat was approaching
the wharf. And suddenly from the boat came a hail.

"Halloo! Ahoy, dad! Is that you?"

There was an answering shout from the wharf; a shout of joy. Then
a rattle of oars and a clamor of talk. And Grace still stood in the
doorway, waiting.

The lantern bobbed up the slope. As it reached the tavern gateway, the
minister saw that it was now carried by a tall, active man, who walked
with a seaman's stride and roll. Captain Eben was close beside him,
talking excitedly.

They entered the yard.

"Grace! Grace!" screamed Captain Eben. "Gracie, girl, look who's come!
Look!"

The tall man ran forward.

"Hi, Grace!" he cried in a deep, hearty voice. "Is that you? Ain't you
got a word for your old messmate?"

The girl stepped out into the rain.

"Why! why, NAT!" she cried.

The big man picked her up bodily in his arms and carried her into the
house. Captain Eben followed and the door closed.

John Ellery picked his way homeward through the puddles and the pouring
rain.

He found Keziah in the sitting room, seated by the table, evidently
writing a letter. She looked tired and grave--for her.

"Well!" she exclaimed as he entered. "I guess you're soppin' now, sartin
sure. There's a light in your room. Take off your wet things and throw
'em down to me, and I'll dry 'em in the kitchen. Better leave your boots
here now and stand that umbrella in the sink. The kettle's on the stove;
you'd better have somethin' hot--ginger tea or somethin'. I told you not
to go out such a night as this. Where in the world have you been?"

The minister said he would tell her all about it in the morning. Just
now he thought he had better go up and take off his wet clothes. He
declined the ginger tea, and, after removing his boots, went upstairs to
his room.

Keziah dipped her pen in the ink and went on with her letter.

"I inclose ten dollars," she wrote. "It is all I can send you now. More
than I ought to afford. Goodness knows why I send anything. You don't
deserve it. But while I live and you do I can't--"

The minister called from the landing.

"Here is my coat," he said. "The cuffs and lower part of the sleeves are
pretty wet. By the way, the packet came in to-night. They didn't expect
her so soon on account of the fog. There was a passenger aboard whom I
think must be that Nathaniel Hammond you told me of."

Keziah's pen stopped. The wet coat struck the hall floor with a soft
thump. The tick of the clock sounded loud in the room. A sheet of
wind-driven rain lashed the windows.

"Did you hear?" called the minister. "I said that Nathaniel Hammond,
Captain Eben's son, came on the packet. I didn't meet him, but I'm sure
it was he. Er--Mrs. Coffin, are you there? Do you hear me?"

The housekeeper laid the pen down beside the unfinished letter.

"Yes," she said, "I hear you. Good night."

For minutes she sat there, leaning back in her chair and staring at the
wall. Then she rose, went into the hall, picked up the coat, and took it
out into the kitchen, where she hung it on the clotheshorse by the cook
stove. After a while she returned to the table and took up the pen. Her
face in the lamplight looked more tired and grave than ever.

It was a long time before John Ellery fell asleep. He had much to think
of--of the morrow, of the talk his rash visit to the chapel would cause,
of the explanation he must make to Captain Elkanah and the rest. But the
picture that was before his closed eyes as he lay there was neither of
Captain Elkanah nor the parish committee; it was that of a girl, with
dark hair and a slim, graceful figure, standing in a lighted doorway and
peering out into the rain.


CHAPTER VI

IN WHICH OLD FRIENDS MEET


When Ellery came down to breakfast the rain was over, the wind had
gone down, and the morning sunshine was pouring in at the dining-room
windows. Outside the lilacs were in bud, the bluebirds were singing, and
there was a sniff of real spring in the air. The storm was at an end and
yet the young minister was conscious of a troublesome feeling that, for
him, it was just beginning.

However, he had determined while dressing to make a clean breast of it
to his housekeeper--a nominally clean breast, that is. There were some
things he would not tell her, some that he would not speak of to anyone,
the picture in the doorway for instance. True, it was only a picture
and of no moment, but it was pleasant to remember. One of the very few
pleasant things connected with the previous evening.

So, as they sat opposite each other at the table, he began his
confession. The muffins scorched in the oven and the coffeepot boiled
over as he told his story, for Keziah was too much interested to think
of trifles. Interested and astounded, for, since Come-Outers had been
Come-Outers and the split in the society took place, no Regular minister
had crossed the threshold of a seceder's dwelling, much less attended
their services and walked home with a member of their congregation. She
knew what this amazing procedure was likely to mean, if her parson did
not.

"Well!" she exclaimed when the recital was finished. "Well!"

"I--I'm afraid I was too hasty," observed Mr. Ellery thoughtfully.
"Perhaps it would have been wiser not to have done it."

"Perhaps 'twould. Yes, I wouldn't wonder a mite."

"It will be talked about some, I suppose. Don't you think so?"

"Some, yes."

"I'm afraid some of my own people may think it queer."

"Queer! Say, Mr. Ellery, you remind me of a half-breed Portugee
feller--half Portugee and a half Indian--that went to sea with my
father, back in the old days. He hardly ever spoke a word, mainly
grunted and made signs. One day he and another fo'mast hand went aloft
in a calm to do somethin' to the tops'l. The half-breed--they called him
Billy Peter and he always called himself that--was out on the end of
the yard, with his foot on the rope underneath, I forget the name of it,
when the tarred twine he had for a shoe string caught. Tryin' to get
it loose it broke sudden, his shoe pulled off, he lost his balance and
fell. He grabbed at the yard, saved himself for a second, fell again,
grabbed the next yard, then a rope and so on down, grabbin' and pullin'
all the way. First his shoe hit the deck, then his sheath knife, then
a piece of rope, and finally himself, landin' right on top of the Irish
cook who was goin' aft from the galley with father's dinner.

"There was the greatest racket you ever heard, pans fallin', dishes
smashin', men yellin', and the cook swearin'. Father run on deck,
thinkin' the ship was dismasted. He found the cook and Billy Peter
sittin' in the middle of the mess, lookin' at each other. Neither was
hurt a mite. The mates and the crew, part of 'em, was standin' starin'
at the pair.

"'For Heaven sakes!' says father; 'what happened?'

"The half-breed looked up and rubbed his head. 'Ugh!' says he, 'Billy
Peter bust his shoe string.'

"The cook, his name was O'Neill, looked at him disgusted. 'Well,
begorra!' says he, 'Billy Peter, you don't exaggerate none, do ye! It's
a good thing BOTH of 'em didn't bust or we'd have foundered.'

"You remind me of Billy Peter, Mr. Ellery, you don't exaggerate. Queer?
Some folks think your goin' to that meetin' last night QUEER? At this
moment one half of Trumet is talkin' about it and runnin' out to tell
the other half. I guess I'd better hurry up with this breakfast. We're
goin' to have callers."

Strange to say, however, this prophecy of early morning visitors did
not prove true. Nine o'clock, then ten, and no visitor came to the
parsonage. Mrs. Coffin affirmed that she did not understand it. Where
was Didama? Where Lavinia Pepper? Had the "Trumet Daily Advertiser"
suspended publication?

At half past ten the gate slammed. Keziah peered from the window.

"Humph!" she ejaculated. "Here comes Elkanah and he's got storm signals
set, by the looks. He's comin' after you, Mr. Ellery."

"Very well," was the calm reply; "let him come."

"What are you goin' to say to him?"

"Nothing, except that I did what I considered right at the time. Show
him into the study, Mrs. Coffin, please."

Captain Daniels marched to the dining-room door, his gold-headed cane
marking time like a drumbeat. He nodded curtly to Keziah, who answered
the knock, and stepped across the threshold.

"Hum--ha!" he barked. "Is the minister--hum--ha! is Mr. Ellery in?"

"Yes, he's in."

"Tell him I want to see him."

The housekeeper announced the visitor.

"He's as sour as a skimmin' of last week's milk," she whispered. "Don't
be afraid of him, though."

"Oh, I'm not. Show him in."

"All right. Say, Mr. Ellery, it's none of my business, but I wouldn't
say anything about your seein' Grace home. That's none of HIS business,
either, or anybody else's."

The head of the parish committee stalked into the study and the
door closed behind him. A rumble of voices in animated conversation
succeeded.

Mrs. Coffin went out into the kitchen and resumed her business of making
a dried-apple pie. There was a hot fire in the stove and she opened the
back door to let in the fresh air. She worked briskly, rolling out the
dough, filling the deep dish, and pinking the edges of the upper crust
with a fork. She was thinking as she worked, but not of the minister or
his visitor.

She put the pie in the oven and set the damper. And, as she knelt by the
stove, something struck her lightly on the back of the neck. She looked
up and about her, but there was no one in sight. Then she picked up the
object which had struck her. It was a cranberry, withered and softened
by the winter frosts.

She looked at the cranberry, then at the open door, and her eyes
twinkled. Running quickly to the threshold she peered out. The back yard
was, apparently, empty, save for a few hens belonging to near neighbors,
and these had stopped scratching for a living and were huddled near the
fence.

"Hum!" she mused. "You rascal! Eddie Snow, if it's you, I'll be after
you in a minute. Just because you're big enough to quit school and drive
store wagon is no reason why I can't--Hey? Oh!"

She was looking down below the door, which opened outward and was swung
partly back on its hinges. From under the door projected a boot, a man's
boot and one of ample size.

Keziah's cheeks, already red from the heat of the stove, reddened still
more. Her lips twitched and her eyes sparkled.

"Hum!" she said again. "They say you can tell the Old Scratch by his
footprints, even if you can't smell the sulphur. Anyhow, you can tell
a Hammond by the size of his boots. Come out from behind that door this
minute. Ain't you ashamed of yourself?"

The owner of the boot stepped forth from behind the door and seized her
by both hands.

"Halloo, Keziah!" he cried joyfully. "My, but it's good to see you."

"Halloo, Nat!" said Keziah heartily. "It's kind of good to see you,
too."

The rest of him was in keeping with his boots. He was big and
broad-shouldered and bearded. His face, above the beard, was tanned to a
deep reddish brown, and the corners of his eyes were marked with dozens
of tiny wrinkles. He was dressed in blue cloth and wore a wide-brimmed,
soft felt hat. He entered the kitchen and tossed the hat into a corner.

"Well!" he exclaimed. "Why don't you act surprised to see a feller? Here
I've been cruisin' from the Horn to Barnegat and back again, and you
act as if I'd just dropped in to fetch the cup of molasses I borrowed
yesterday. What do you mean by it?"

"Oh, I heard you'd made port."

"Did, hey? That's Trumet, sure pop. You ain't the only one. I sneaked
off acrost lots so's to dodge the gang of neighbors that I knew would
be sailin' into our yard, the whole fleet loaded to the gunwale with
questions. Wanted to see you first, Keziah."

"Yes. So, instead of callin' like a Christian, you crept up the back way
and threw cranberries at me. Ain't you ashamed of yourself?"

"Not a mite." He took a handful of the frostbitten berries from his
coat pocket and inspected them lovingly. "Ain't they fine?" he asked,
crunching two or three between his teeth. "I picked 'em up as I came
along. I tell you, that's the home taste, all right."

"Don't eat those frozen things. They'll give you your never-get-over."

"What? Cape Cod cranberries! Never in the world. I'd rather eat sand
down here than the finest mug my steward can cook. Tell you what I'll
do, though; I'll swear off on the cranberries if you'll give me a
four-inch slice of that pie I saw you put in the oven. Dried-apple, I'll
bet my sou'wester. Think you might ask a feller to sit down. Ain't you
glad to see me?"

Mrs. Coffin pulled forward one of the kitchen chairs. He seated himself
on it and it groaned under his weight.

"Whew!" he whistled. "Never made to stand rough weather, was it? Well,
AIN'T you glad?"

Keziah looked at him gravely.

"You know I'm glad, Nat," she said.

"So? I hoped you would be, but I did want to hear you say it. Now you
come to anchor yourself and let's have a talk. I've been countin' on it
ever since we set tops'ls off Surinam."

The housekeeper took the other chair.

"How are you--" she began. He stopped her.

"S-shh!" he interrupted. "Don't say anything for a minute. Let me look
at you. Just as clean and wholesome and good-lookin' as ever. They don't
make girls like that anywhere else but down on this old sand bar. Not a
day older, by the jumpin'--"

She held up her hand.

"Hush, Nat," she protested; "don't talk foolish. Girl? Not a day older?
Why, if feelin's count for anything, I'm as old as Methusaleh. Haven't I
had enough to make me old?"

He was grave immediately.

"I beg your pardon, Keziah," he said. "I'm a dough head, that's a fact.
I hadn't forgot about Sol, but I was so glad to be home again and to see
dad and Grace and the old town and you that everything else flew out of
my mind. Poor Sol! I liked him."

"He liked you, too. No wonder, considerin' what you did to--"

"Belay! Never mind that. Poor chap! Well, he's rid of his sufferin's at
last. Tell me about it, if you can without bringin' all the trouble back
too plain."

So she told him of her brother's sickness and death, of having to give
up the old home, and, finally, of her acceptance of the housekeeper's
position. He listened, at first with sympathy and then with suppressed
indignation.

"By the jumpin' Moses!" he exclaimed. "And Elkanah was goin' to turn you
out of house and home. The mean, pompous old--"

"Hush! hush! he's in there with Mr. Ellery."

"Who? Elkanah?"

"Yes; they're in the study."

"By the jumpin'--Let me talk to him for a few minutes. I'LL tell him
what's good for his health. You just listen."

He rose from the chair, but she made him sit down again.

"No, no," she protested. "He wasn't to blame. He had to have his rent
and I didn't feel that I could afford to keep up a whole house, just for
myself. And, besides, I ought to be thankful to him, I suppose. He got
me this place."

"He did?"

"Yes, he did. I rather guess Zeb Mayo or somebody may have suggested it
to him first, but--"

"Humph! I rather guess so, too."

"Well, you can't always tell. Sometimes when you really get inside of a
person you find a generous streak that--"

"Not in a Daniels. Anybody that got inside of Elkanah would find nothin'
but Elkanah there, and 'twould be crowded at that. So he's talkin' to
the new parson, hey? Bossin' him, too, I'll bet."

"I ain't so sure. Mr. Ellery's young, but he's got a mind of his own."

Captain Hammond chuckled and slapped his knee.

"Ho, ho!" he laughed. "I've been hearin' somethin' about that mind. Went
to the chapel last night, I understand, and he and dad had a set-to. Oh,
I heard about it! Wish I might have been there."

"How does your father act about it?"

"'Bout the way a red-hot stove acts when you spill water on it; every
time he thinks of the minister he sizzles. Ho, ho! I do wish I could
have been there."

"What does Grace say?"

"Oh, she doesn't say much. I wouldn't wonder if she felt the way I do,
though we both keep quiet. I'll tell you, between ourselves and the
ship's pump, that I sort of glory in the young chap's spunk."

"Good! So do I. I like him."

"See here, Keziah! I'm gettin' frightened. You ain't settin' your cap to
be a parson's wife, are you? Because--"

"Don't be silly. I might adopt him, but that's all, I guess."

Her friend leaned forward.

"Keziah," he said earnestly, "there's no sense in your slavin' yourself
to death here. I can think of a good deal pleasanter berth than that.
Pleasanter for me, anyhow, and I'd do my best to make it pleasant for
you. You've only got to say the word and--No? Well, then all I can do is
hope through another voyage."

"Please don't, Nat. You know."

"No, I don't know."

"Well, perhaps you don't. But I know. I like you, Nat. I count on you as
the straightest, truest friend I've got; and I want to keep on countin'
on you just that way. Mayn't I?"

"'Course you can, Keziah. But--"

"Then don't say another word, please."

He sighed and looked out at the open door. The kitchen clock ticked loud
in the silence.

"All right," he said at last. "All right, but I'm goin' to keep on
hopin'."

"You mustn't, Nat."

"Keziah, when you set your foot down you're pretty stubborn; but I've
got somethin' of a foot myself. You remember you said so a few minutes
ago. Hi, hum! Well, speakin' of dad reminds me that I'm kind of worried
about him."

"You are? Why? Isn't he well?"

"Pretty well, but he ain't strong, and he gets too excited over things
like last night's foolishness. Grace tells me that the doctor says he
must be careful or he'll drop off sudden some of these days. He had a
shock five or six years ago, a little one, and I've been anxious about
him ever since. I've got to go to New York off and on for the next
month; after that I hope to be home for a spell and I can keep an eye on
him. Keziah, if you'll listen I'll whisper somethin' to you--religion's
a good thing and so's a mustard plaster, but both of 'em can be put on
too strong. Dad is just a little mite crazy on Come-Outers, I'm afraid."

"Oh, no, I guess not! You mustn't worry. How did Grace look to you?"

"Like the harbor light on a stormy night. She's a brick, that girl, and
gets prettier every minute. Wonder to me some of the young chaps down
here don't carry her off by main strength. She'll make somebody a good
wife."

"Um-hm. Have--have you ever thought of her that way yourself?"

"Keziah!"

"Well, don't get mad. I think a lot of Grace, and I don't know anyone
I'd rather see you marry."

"I do. Keziah, that's enough of that. Are you and dad in partnership to
get me spliced and out of the way? He was at me this mornin' along the
same line. Don't say anything like that again, even in fun. YOU know
why."

"All right, all right. Now tell me about yourself. Have you had a good
voyage? How do you like your owners? How did Zach Foster ever get the
packet in through yesterday's fog?"

"Voyage was all right. Some rugged weather on the trip out, but homeward
bound we slid along like a slush bucket on a greased plank. Owners
are all right. Good people as ever I sailed for. As for Zach and the
packet--Ho, ho!"

He laughed, rocking back and forth on the chair, which creaked in
sympathy.

"What's the joke?" demanded the housekeeper. "Don't do that! That chair
wasn't made for elephants to use."

"Hey? 'Tis pretty weak in the knees, ain't it? Dad would say 'twas a
piece with the creed of those that owned it. I--What's that? Somebody's
comin'. I'm goin' to clear out. I don't want to be put through my
catechism yet a while."

"No, you mustn't go. I want you to meet Mr. Ellery. You sit out on
the wash bench by the back door till I get rid of whoever 'tis that's
comin'. Scoot!"

Nat "scooted," stopping to snatch up his hat as he ran. Keziah went into
the dining room and admitted Captain Zebedee Mayo, who was panting from
the exertion of his walk.

"Whew!" puffed Captain Zeb, mopping his forehead. "How be you, Keziah?
What? You ain't all alone! Thought you'd have a cabin full of gab
machines by this time. Have they been and gone?"

"No, they haven't been. I--My land, my pie!"

She rushed into the kitchen and snatched the pastry from the oven. Her
new caller followed her.

"So they ain't been, hey?" he said. "That's queer."

"Elkanah's here. He's in there with the minister now."

"He is? Givin' the young feller Hail Columby, I cal'late. Well, now,
he shan't. He, he! When they told me how the minister passed old
hop-and-go-fetch-it what was due him at the chapel last night I riz up
and hoorayed till my wife shut the windows. She said the neighbors all
thought I was loony, anyhow, and I needn't prove it to 'em. He, he! But
Elkanah ain't got any funny bone. He's as solemn as a stuffed owl, and
he'll--Well, I'm goin' to put MY oar in. I'm parish committee, too, I
cal'late, and I've got somethin' to say, even if I wa'n't christened
Daniels. Here goes!"

He headed for the study, but before he crossed the threshold of the
kitchen Ellery and his visitor came out into the dining room. Captain
Elkanah's face was flushed, and he fidgeted. The minister looked
determined but calm.

"Ahoy there, Elkanah!" hailed Zebedee cheerfully. "'Mornin', Mr. Ellery.
Been havin' officers' counsel, have you?"

"Good morning, Captain Mayo," said the minister.

"'Mornin', Zebedee," grunted Elkanah. "I have--hum--ha!--been
discussing the regrettable affair of last night with Mr. Ellery. I have
tried--hum--ha! to show him that respectable people of our society don't
associate with Come-Outers, and that for a Regular minister to go to
their meetings is something neither the congregation nor the parish
committee approves of. No--er--hum--ha! no!"

"And I explained to Captain Daniels," observed the minister, "that I
went there for what seemed to me good reasons, and, as they did seem to
me good at the time, I'm not ashamed of having gone. It was an honest
mistake on my part and I may make more."

"But the society--" began Elkanah. Captain Zeb interrupted him.

"Don't worry about the society, Mr. Ellery," he said with emphasis. "Nor
about the parish committee, either. Great fishhooks! the most of us are
tickled to death over what you said to Eben Hammond. We think it's a
mighty good joke. YOU didn't know, of course, and what you did was done
innocent. He! he! he! Did you lay him out, hey?"

"Zebedee," began Captain Daniels, "I must say I can't see anything to
laugh at."

"You never could, Elkanah. I remember that time when you and me and some
of the fellers home from sea went out sailin' and the boom knocked you
overboard with your Sunday clothes on. Lordy, how the rest of us did
holler! but you never cracked a smile. If you'd seen yourself when we
hauled you in! whiskers runnin' salt water; beaver hat lookin' like a
drownded kitten--"

"There! There! Never mind that. I think you'll find a good many of the
society feel as I do, shocked and--hum--ha!--sorry. I'm surprised they
haven't been here to say so."

"I expected them," remarked the minister.

"So did I," chimed in Captain Zeb. "But I cal'late to know why they
ain't been. They're all too busy crowin' over the way Nat Hammond
fetched the packet home last night. WHAT? You ain't heard? Great
fishhooks! it's the best thing ever--"

"I've heard about it," snapped Elkanah impatiently. "Mr. Ellery, I'm
glad you realize that your action was a mistake and I will take pains to
have that immejitly made plain to--"

"YOU ain't heard, Keziah, have you?" broke in Zebedee. "Nor you, Mr.
Ellery? Well, I must tell you. Here's where I gain a lap on Didama
Rogers. Seems the Deborah S.--that's the packet's name, Mr. Ellery--she
hauled out of Boston night afore last on the ebb, with a fair wind and
sky clear as a bell. But they hadn't much more'n got outside of Minot's
'fore the fog shut down, thicker'n gruel for a sick rich man. The wind
held till 'long toward mornin'; then she flattened to a dead calm. 'Bije
Perry, the mate, he spun the yarn to me, and he said 'twas thick and
flat as ever he see and kept gettin' no better fast.

"They drifted along till noon time and then they was somewheres out in
the bay, but that's about all you could say. Zach, he was stewin' and
sputterin' like a pair of fried eels, and Lafayette Gage and Emulous
Peters--they're Denboro folks, Mr. Ellery, and about sixteen p'ints
t'other side of no account--they was the only passengers aboard except
Nat Hammond, and they put in their time playin' high low jack in the
cabin. The lookout was for'ard tootin' a tin horn and his bellerin'
was the most excitin' thing goin' on. After dinner--corned beef and
cabbage--trust Zach for that, though it's next door to cannibalism to
put cabbage in HIS mouth--after dinner all hands was on deck when Nat
says: 'Hush!' he says. 'Don't I hear somethin'?'

"They listened, and then they all heard it--all 'cept Zach, who's deef
in his larboard ear.

"'Stand by!' roars Nat. 'It's a squall, dead astern and comin' abilin'!
I'll take her, 'Bije. You look out for them tops'ls.'

"So Nat grabs the wheel and 'Bije tears for'ard and sends the two
fo'mast hands aloft on the jump. Zach was skipper, but all he done was
race around and holler and trip over his own feet. Oh, he's a prize
sailor, he is! Don't talk to me about them Fosters! I--"

"Nobody is talkin' about 'em but you, Zeb," observed Keziah drily. "Go
on. How about the squall?"

"It hit 'em 'fore they got even one tops'l clewed down. That one, the
foretops'l 'twas, split to rags. The main tops'l was set, and when the
squall struck, the rotten old topmast went by the board 'Kerrash-o!'
'Course splinters flew like all possessed, and one of 'em, about a foot
long, sailed past Nat's head, where he stood heavin' his whole weight on
the wheel, and lit right on the binnacle, smashin' it to matches.

"They say Nat never paid the least attention, no more'n if the chunk of
wood had been a June bug buzzin' past. He just held that wheel hard down
and that saved the packet. She come around and put her nose dead in
the wind just in time. As 'twas, 'Bije says there was a second when the
water by her lee rail looked right underneath him as he hung onto the
deck with finger nails and teeth.

"Well, there they was, afloat, but with their upper riggin' gone and
the compass smashed flat. A howlin' no'thwester blowin' and fog thick as
ever. Zach was a whimperin', fidgetin' old woman, Lafayette and Emulous
was prayin' in the scuppers--and that ain't an exercise they're used to,
neither--and even 'Bije was mighty shook up and worried--he says he was
himself. But Nat Hammond was as cool and refreshin' as the bottom of my
well up home.

"'Better clear away that mess aloft, hadn't you?' he says to the
skipper.

"Zach said he guessed so; he wa'n't sure of nothin'. However, they
cleared it away, and incidentally 'Bije yanked the prayer meetin' out
of the scuppers and set 'em to work. Then Nat suggests gettin' the spare
compass and, lo and behold you! there wa'n't any. Compasses cost money
and money's made to keep, so Zach thinks.

"So there they was. Wind was fair, or ought to be, but 'twas blowin'
hard and so thick you couldn't hardly see the jib boom. Zach he wanted
to anchor, then he didn't, then he did, and so on. Nobody paid much
attention to him.

"'What'll we do, Nat?' says 'Bije. He knew who was the real seaman
aboard.

"'Keep her as she is, dead afore it, if you ask me, says Nat. 'Guess
we'll hit the broadside of the cape somewheres if this gale holds.'

"So they kept her as she was. And it got to be night and they knew
they'd ought to be 'most onto the edge of the flats off here, if their
reck'nin' was nigh right. They hove the lead and got five fathom. No
flats about that.

"Zach was for anchorin' again. 'What do you think, Nat?' asks 'Bije.

"'Anchor, of course, if you want to,' Nat says. 'You're runnin' this
craft. I'm only passenger.'

"'But what do you THINK?' whines Zach. 'Can't you tell us what you do
think?'

"'Well, if 'twas me, I wouldn't anchor till I had to. Prob'ly 'twill
fair off to-morrow, but if it shouldn't, we might have to lay out here
all day. Anyhow, we'd have to wait for a full tide.'

"'I'm afraid we're off the course,' says 'Bije, else we'd been acrost
the bar by this time.'

"'Well,' Nat tells him, 'if we are off the course and too far inshore,
we would have made the bar--the Bayport bar--if not the Trumet one. And
if we're off the course and too far out, we'd ought to have deeper water
than five fathom, hadn't we? 'Course I'm not sure, but--What's that,
lands-man?'

"'Three and a half, sir,' says the feller with the lead. That showed
they was edgin' in somewheres. Nat he sniffed, for all the world like a
dog catchin' a scent, so 'Bije declares.

"'I can smell home,' he says.

"Three fathom the lead give 'em, then two and a half, then a scant two.
They was drawin' six feet. Zach couldn't stand it.

"'I'm goin' to anchor,' he squeals, frantic. 'I believe we're plumb over
to Wellmouth and drivin' right onto Horsefoot Shoal.'

"'It's either that or the bar,' chimes in 'Bije. 'And whichever 'tis, we
can't anchor in the middle of it.'

"'But what'll we do?' shouts Zach. 'Can't nobody say somethin' to DO?'

"'Tell you I smell home,' says Nat, calm and chipper, 'and I'd know that
smell if I met it in Jericho. Ha! there she deepens again. That was the
bar and we're over it.'

"The wind had gone down to a stiff sailin' breeze, and the old Debby S.
slapped along afore it. Sometimes there was twelve foot under her keel
and sometimes eight or nine. Once 'twas only seven and a half. Zach and
'Bije both looked at each other, but Nat only smiled.

"'Oh, you can laugh!' hollers Zach. ''Tain't your vessel you're runnin'
into danger. YOU aint paid out your good money--'

"Nat never answered; but he stopped smilin'.

"And all to once the water deepened. Hammond swung her up into the wind.

"'NOW you can anchor,' says he.

"'And 'bout time, too, I guess,' says 'Bije. 'I cal'late the skipper's
right. This IS Horsefoot and we're right between the shoals. Yes, sir,
and I hear breakers. Lively there!'

"They hove over the mudhook and dropped the sails. Nat shook his head.

"'Breakers or not,' says he, 'I tell you I've smelt home for the last
half hour. Now, by the jumpin' Moses, I can TASTE it!'

"And inside of a couple of shakes come the rain. It poured for a while
and then the fog cleared. Right acrost their bows was Trumet, with the
town clock strikin' ten. Over the flat place between the hills they
could see the light on the ocean side. And they was anchored right
in the deep hole inside the breakwater, as sure as I'm knee high to a
marlin spike!

"'Bije just stared at Hammond with his mouth open.

"'Nat,' says he, 'you're a seaman, if I do say it. I thought I was a
pretty good bay pilot, but I can't steer a vessel without a compass
through a night as black as Pharaoh's Egypt, and in a thick fog besides,
and land her square on top of her moorin's. If my hat wa'n't sloshin'
around thirty mile astern, I snum if I wouldn't take it off to you this
minute!'

"'Nat,' stammers Zach, 'I must say I--'

"Nat snapped him shut like a tobacco box. 'You needn't,' says he. 'But
I'll say this to you, Zach Foster. When I undertake to handle a vessel
I handle her best I know how, and the fact that I don't own her makes no
difference to me. You just put that down somewheres so you won't forget
it.'

"And this mornin'," crowed Captain Zebedee, concluding his long yarn,
"after that, mind you, that lubber Zach Foster is around town tellin'
folks that his schooner had been over the course so often she COULDN'T
get lost. She found her way home herself. WHAT do you think of that?"

The two members of the parish committee left the parsonage soon after
Captain Mayo had finished his story. Elkanah had listened with growing
irritation and impatience. Zebedee lingered a moment behind his
companions.

"Don't you fret yourself about what happened last night, Mr. Ellery,"
he whispered. "It'll be all right. 'Course nobody'd want you to keep up
chummin' in with Come-Outers, but what you said to old Eben'll square
you this time. So long."

The minister shut the door behind his departing guests. Then he went out
into the kitchen, whither the housekeeper had preceded him. He found her
standing on the back step, looking across the fields. The wash bench was
untenanted.

"Hum!" mused Ellery thoughtfully, "that was a good story of Captain
Mayo's. This man Hammond must be a fine chap. I should like to meet
him."

Keziah still looked away over the fields. She did not wish her employer
to see her face--just then.

"I thought you would meet him," she said. "He was here a little while
ago and I asked him to wait. I guess Zeb's yarn was too much for him; he
doesn't like to be praised."

"So? Was he here? At the Regular parsonage? I'm surprised."

"He and I have known each other for a long while."

"Well, I'm sorry he's gone. I think I should like him."

Keziah turned from the door.

"I know you would," she said.


CHAPTER VII

IN WHICH CAPTAIN NAT PICKS UP A DERELICT


It is probable that John Ellery never fully realized the debt of
gratitude he owed to the fog and the squall and to Captain Nat Hammond.
Trumet, always hungry for a sensation, would have thoroughly enjoyed
arguing and quarreling over the minister's visit to Come-Outer meeting,
and, during the fracas, Keziah's parson might have been more or less
battered. But Captain Nat's brilliant piloting of the old packet was
a bit of seamanship which every man and woman on that foam-bordered
stretch of sand could understand and appreciate, and the minister's
indiscretion was all but forgotten in consequence. The "Daily
Advertisers" gloated over it, of course, and Captain Elkanah brought it
up at the meeting of the parish committee, but there Captain Zeb Mayo
championed the young man's course and proclaimed that, fur's he was
concerned, he was for Mr. Ellery more'n ever. "A young greenhorn
with the spunk to cruise single-handed right into the middle of the
Come-Outer school and give an old bull whale like Eben the gaff is the
man for my money," declared Zebedee. Most of his fellow-committee agreed
with him. "Not guilty, but don't do it again," was the general verdict.

As for the Come-Outers, they professed to believe that their leader had
much the best of the encounter, so they were satisfied. There was a
note of triumph and exultation in the "testimony" given on the following
Thursday night, and Captain Eben divided his own discourse between
thankfulness for his son's safe return and glorification at the
discomfiture of the false prophets. Practically, then, the result of
Ellery's peace overture was an increased bitterness in the feeling
between the two societies and a polishing of weapons on both sides.

Keziah watched anxiously for a hint concerning her parson's walk in the
rain with Grace, but she heard nothing, so congratulated herself that
the secret had been kept. Ellery did not again mention it to her, nor
she to him. A fortnight later he preached his great sermon on "The
Voyage of Life," and its reference to gales and calms and lee shores and
breakers made a hit. His popularity took a big jump.

He met Nat Hammond during that fortnight. The first meeting was
accompanied by unusual circumstances, which might have been serious, but
were actually only funny.

The tide at Trumet, on the bay side, goes out for a long way, leaving
uncovered a mile and a half of flats, bare and sandy, or carpeted with
seaweed. Between these flats are the channels, varying at low water from
two to four feet in depth, but deepening rapidly as the tide flows.

The flats fascinated the young minister, as they have many another
visitor to the Cape, before or since. On cloudy days they lowered with
a dull, leaden luster and the weed-grown portions were like the dark
squares on a checkerboard, while the deep water beyond the outer bar was
steely gray and angry. When the sun shone and the wind blew clear from
the northwest the whole expanse flashed into fire and color, sapphire
blue, emerald green, topaz yellow, dotted with white shells and ablaze
with diamond sparkles where the reflected light leaped from the flint
crystals of the wet, coarse sand.

The best time to visit the flats--tide serving, of course--is the early
morning at sunrise. Then there is an inspiration in the wide expanse, a
snap and tang and joy in the air. Ellery had made up his mind to take a
before-breakfast tramp to the outer bar and so arose at five, tucked a
borrowed pair of fisherman's boots beneath his arm, and, without saying
anything to his housekeeper, walked down the lawn behind the parsonage,
climbed the rail fence, and "cut across lots" to the pine grove on the
bluff. There he removed his shoes, put on the boots, wallowed through
the mealy yellow sand forming the slope of the bluff, and came out on
the white beach and the inner edge of the flats. Then he plashed on,
bound out to where the fish weirs stood, like webby fences, in the
distance.

It was a wonderful walk on a wonderful day. The minister enjoyed every
minute of it. Out here he could forget the petty trials of life, the
Didamas and Elkanahs. The wind blew his hat off and dropped it in a
shallow channel, but he splashed to the rescue and laughed aloud as he
fished it out. It was not much wetter than it had been that night of
the rain, when he tried to lend his umbrella and didn't succeed. This
reflection caused him to halt in his walk and look backward toward the
shore. The brown roof of the old tavern was blushing red in the first
rays of the sun.

A cart, drawn by a plodding horse and with a single individual on its
high seat, was moving out from behind the breakwater. Some fisherman
driving out his weir, probably.

The sand of the outer bar was dimpled and mottled like watered silk by
the action of the waves. It sloped gradually down to meet the miniature
breakers that rolled over and slid in ripples along its edge. Ellery
wandered up and down, picking up shells and sea clams, and peering
through the nets of the nearest weir at the "horsefoot crabs" and squid
and flounders imprisoned in the pound. There were a few bluefish there,
also, and a small school of mackerel.

The minister had been on the bar a considerable time before he began to
think of returning to the shore. He was hungry, but was enjoying himself
too well to mind. The flats were all his that morning. Only the cart and
its driver were in sight and they were half a mile off. He looked at
his watch, sighed, and reluctantly started to walk toward the town; he
mustn't keep Mrs. Coffin's breakfast waiting TOO long.

The first channel he came to was considerably deeper than when he forded
it on the way out. He noticed this, but only vaguely. The next, however,
was so deep that the water splashed in at the top of one of his boots.
He did notice that, because though he was not wearing his best clothes,
he was not anxious to wet his "other ones." The extent of his wardrobe
was in keeping with the size of his salary.

And the third channel was so wide and deep that he saw at once it could
not be forded, unless he was willing to plunge above his waist. This
was provoking. Now he realized that he had waited too long. The tide had
been flowing for almost an hour; it had flowed fast and, as he should
have remembered, having been told, the principal channels were eight
feet deep before the highest flats were covered.

He hurried along the edge, looking for a shallower place, but found
none. At last he reached the point of the flat he was on and saw, to
his dismay, that here was the deepest spot yet, a hole, scoured out by a
current like a mill race. Turning, he saw, creeping rapidly and steadily
together over the flat behind him, two lines of foam, one from each
channel. His retreat was cut off.

He was in for a wetting, that was sure. However, there was no help for
it, so he waded in. The water filled his boots there, it gurgled about
his hips, and beyond, as he could see, it seemed to grow deeper and
deeper. The current was surprisingly strong; he found it difficult to
keep his footing in the soft sand. It looked as though he must swim for
it, and to swim in that tide would be no joke.

Then, from behind him, came a hail. He turned and saw moving toward him
through the shallow water now covering the flat beyond the next channel,
the cart he had seen leave the shore by the packet wharf, and, later, on
the outer bar. The horse was jogging along, miniature geysers spouting
beneath its hoofs. The driver waved to him.

"Hold on, mate," he called. "Belay there. Stay where you are. I'll be
alongside in a shake. Git dap, January!"

Ellery waded back to meet this welcome arrival. The horse plunged into
the next channel, surged through it, and emerged dripping. The driver
pulled the animal into a walk.

"Say," he cried, "I'm cruisin' your way; better get aboard, hadn't you?
There's kind of a heavy dew this mornin'. Whoa, Bill!"

"Bill" or "January" stopped with apparent willingness. The driver leaned
down and extended a hand. The minister took it and was pulled up to the
seat.

"Whew!" he panted. "I'm much obliged to you. I guess you saved me from a
ducking, if nothing worse."

"Yes," was the answer, "I wouldn't wonder if I did. This ain't Saturday
night and 'twould be against Trumet principles to take a bath any other
time. All taut, are you? Good enough! then we'll get under way." He
flapped the reins and added, "G'long, Julius Caesar!"

The horse, a sturdy, sedate beast to whom all names seemed to be alike,
picked up his feet and pounded them down again. Showers of spray flew
about the heads of the pair on the seat.

"I ain't so sure about that duckin'," commented the rescuer. "Hum! I
guess likely we'll be out of soundin's if we tackle that sink hole you
was undertakin' to navigate. Let's try it a little further down."

Ellery looked his companion over.

"Well," he observed with a smile, "from what I've heard of you, Captain
Hammond, I rather guess you could navigate almost any water in this
locality and in all sorts of weather."

The driver turned in surprise.

"So?" he exclaimed. "You know me, do you? That's funny. I was tryin' to
locate you, but I ain't been able to. You ain't a Trumetite I'll bet on
that."

"Yes, I am."

"Tut! tut! tut! you don't tell me. Say, shipmate, you hurt my pride. I
did think there wa'n't a soul that ever trod sand in this village that I
couldn't name on sight, and give the port they hailed from and the names
of their owners. But you've got me on my beam ends. And yet you knew
ME."

"Of course I did. Everybody knows the man that brought the packet home."

Nat Hammond sniffed impatiently.

"Um--hm!" he grunted. "I cal'late everybody does, and knows a lot more
about that foolishness than I do myself. If ever a craft was steered
by guess and by godfrey, 'twas that old hooker of Zach's t'other night.
Well--Humph! here's another piece of pilotin' that bids fair to be a
mighty sight harder. Heave ahead, Hannibal! hope you've got your web
feet with you."

They had moved along the edge of the flat a short distance and now
turned into the channel. The horse was wading above its knees; soon the
water reached its belly and began to flow into the body of the cart.

"Pick up your feet, shipmate," commanded Nat. "You may get rheumatiz if
you don't. This'll be a treat for those sea clams back in that bucket
amidships. They'll think I've repented and have decided to turn 'em
loose again. They don't know how long I've been countin' on a sea-clam
pie. I'll fetch those clams ashore if I have to lug 'em with my teeth.
Steady, all hands! we're off the ways."

The cart was afloat. The horse, finding wading more difficult than
swimming, began to swim.

"Now I'm skipper again, sure enough," remarked Hammond. "Ain't gettin'
seasick, are you?"

The minister laughed.

"No," he said.

"Good! she keeps on a fairly even keel, considerin' her build. THERE
she strikes! That'll do, January; you needn't try for a record voyage.
Walkin's more in your line than playin' steamboat. We're over the worst
of it now. Say! you and I didn't head for port any too soon, did we?"

"No, I should say not. I ought to have known better than to wait out
there so long. I've been warned about this tide. I--"

"S-sh-sh! YOU ought to have known better! What do you think of me? Born
and brought up within sight and smell of this salt puddle and let myself
in for a scrape like this! But it was so mighty fine off there on the
bar I couldn't bear to leave it. I always said that goin' to sea on
land would be the ideal way, and now I've tried it. But you took bigger
chances than I did. Are you a good swimmer?"

"Not too good. I hardly know what might have happened if you hadn't--"

"S-sh-sh! that's all right. Always glad to pick up a derelict, may be a
chance for salvage, you know. Here's the last channel and it's an easy
one. There! now it's plain sailin' for dry ground."

The old horse, breathing heavily from his exertions, trotted over the
stretch of yet uncovered flats and soon mounted the slope of the beach.
The minister prepared to alight.

"Captain Hammond," he said, "you haven't asked me my name."

"No, I seldom do more'n once. There have been times when I'D just as
soon cruise without too big letters alongside my figurehead."

"Well, my name is Ellery."

"Hey? WHAT? Oh, ho! ho! ho!"

He rocked back and forth on the seat. The minister's feelings were a bit
hurt, though he tried not to show it.

"You mustn't mind my laughin'," explained Nat, still chuckling. "It
ain't at you. It's just because I was wonderin' what you'd look like if
I should meet you and now--Ho! ho! You see, Mr. Ellery, I've heard of
you, same as you said you'd heard of me."

Ellery smiled, but not too broadly.

"Yes," he admitted, "I imagined you had."

"Yes, seems to me dad mentioned your name once or twice. As much as
that, anyhow. Wonder what he'd say if he knew his son had been takin'
you for a mornin' ride?"

"Probably that it would have been much better to have left me where you
found me."

The captain's jolly face grew serious.

"No, no!" he protested. "Not so bad as that. Dad wouldn't drown anybody,
not even a Regular minister. He's a pretty square-built old craft, even
though his spiritual chart may be laid out different from yours--and
mine."

"From yours? Why, I supposed--"

"Yes, I know. Well, WHEN I go to meetin', I generally go to the chapel
to please father. But when it comes right down to a confession of faith,
I'm pretty broad in the beam. Maybe I'd be too broad even for you, Mr.
Ellery."

The minister, who had jumped to the ground, looked up.

"Captain Hammond," he said, "I'm very glad indeed that I met you. Not
alone because you helped me out of a bad scrape; I realize how bad it
might have been and that--"

"Shsh! shh! Nothin' at all. Don't be foolish."

"But I'm glad, too, because I've heard so many good things about you
that I was sure you must be worth knowing. I hope you won't believe I
went to your father's meeting with any--"

"No, no! Jumpin' Moses, man! I don't find fault with you for that. I
understand, I guess."

"Well, if you don't mind the fact that I am what I am, I'd like to shake
hands with you."

Nat reached down a big brown hand.

"Same here," he said. "Always glad to shake with a chap as well
recommended as you are. Yes, indeed, I mean it. You see, you've got a
friend that's a friend of mine, and when she guarantees a man to be A.
B., I'll ship him without any more questions."

"Well, then, good-by. I hope we shall meet again and often. And I
certainly thank you for--"

"That's all right. Maybe you'll fish ME out of the drink some day; you
never can tell. So long! Git dap, Gen'ral Scott!"

He drove off up the beach, but before he turned the corner of the
nearest dune he called back over his shoulder:

"Say, Mr. Ellery, if you think of it you might give my regards
to--to--er--the lady that's keepin' house for you."

Breakfast had waited nearly an hour when the minister reached home.
Keziah, also, was waiting and evidently much relieved at his safe
arrival.

"Sakes alive!" she exclaimed, as she met him at the back door. "Where in
the world have you been, Mr. Ellery? Soakin' wet again, too!"

Ellery replied that he had been for a walk out to the bar. He sat down
on the step to remove the borrowed boots. A small rivulet of salt water
poured from each as he pulled them off.

"For a walk! A swim, you mean. How could you get in up to your waist if
you just walked? Did you fall down?"

"No, not exactly. But I waited too long and the tide headed me off."

"Mercy on us! you mustn't take chances on that tide. If you'd told me
you was goin', I'd have warned you to hurry back."

"Oh, I've been warned often enough. It was my own fault, as usual. I'm
not sure that I don't need a guardian."

"Humph! well, I ain't sure either. Was the channels very deep?"

"Deep enough. The fact is, that I might have got into serious trouble if
I hadn't been picked up."

He told briefly the story of his morning's adventure. The housekeeper
listened with growing excitement.

"Heavens to Betsy!" she interrupted. "Was the channel you planned to
swim the one at the end of the flat by the longest weir leader?"

"Yes."

"My soul! there's been two men drowned in that very place at half tide.
And they were good swimmers. After this I shan't dare let you out of my
sight."

"So? Was it as risky as that? Why, Captain Hammond didn't tell me so. I
must owe him more even than I thought."

"Yes, I guess you do. He wouldn't tell you, though; that ain't his way.
Deary me! for what we've received let us be thankful. And that reminds
me that biscuits ought to be et when they're first made, not after
they've been dried up on the back of the stove forever and ever amen.
Go on and change those wet things of yours and then we'll eat. Tryin' to
swim the main channel on the flood! My soul and body!"

"Captain Nat sent his regards to you, Mrs. Coffin," said the minister,
moving toward the stairs.

"Did, hey?" was the housekeeper's reply. "Want to know!"


CHAPTER VIII

IN WHICH THE PARSON AND MR. PEPPER DECLARE THEIR INDEPENDENCE


That afternoon, when dinner was over, the Reverend John decided to make
a few duty calls. The first of these he determined should be on the
Peppers. Lavinia and her brother had called at the Parsonage several
times, but as yet he had not paid them a visit. It was not a ceremony
to which he looked forward with delight, but it must be performed.
Miss Pepper had hinted several times, at sewing circle and after prayer
meeting, of "partiality" and "only stoppin' in where they had fancy
curtains up to the windows." So, as it could not be put off longer,
without causing trouble, he determined to go through with it.

The Pepper house was situated just off the main road on the lane leading
over the dunes to the ocean and the light. It was a small building, its
white paint dingy and storm beaten, and its little fenced-in front
yard dotted thickly with clumps of silver-leaf saplings. A sign, nailed
crookedly on a post, informed those seeking such information that within
was to be found "Abishai G. W. Pepper, Tax Collector, Assessor, Boots
and Shoes Repaired." And beneath this was fastened a shingle with the
chalked notice, "Salt Hay for sale."

The boot and shoe portion of the first sign was a relic of other days.
Kyan had been a cobbler once, but it is discouraging to wait three
or four weeks while the pair of boots one has left to be resoled are
forgotten in a corner. Captain Zeb Mayo's pointed comment, "I want my
shoe leather to wear while I'm alive, not to be laid out in after I die
of old age," expressed the general feeling of the village and explained
why custom had left Mr. Pepper and flown to the more enterprising
shoemaker at "The Corners." The tax collectorship might have followed
it, but here Lavinia kept her brother up to the mark. She went with
him on his rounds and it gave her opportunity to visit, and afterwards
comment upon, every family in town.

The minister walked up the dusty lane, lifted the Pepper gate and swung
it back on its one hinge, shooed away the three or four languid and
discouraged-looking fowls that were taking a sun bath on the clam-shell
walk, and knocked at the front door. No one coming in answer to the
knock, he tried again. Then he discovered a rusty bell pull and gave it
a sharp tug. The knob came off in his hand and he hurriedly thrust it
back again into its place. Evidently, that bell was solely for ornament.

He came to the conclusion that no one was at home and felt a guilty
sense of relief in consequence. But his conscience would not let him
depart without another try, so he clenched his fist and gave the cracked
door panel a series of tremendous thumps. A thin black cat, which had
evidently been asleep beneath the step, burst from its concealment and
fled in frantic terror. Then from somewhere in the rear of the house
came the sound of a human voice.

"Hi!" it called faintly. "Whoever you be, don't bust that door down.
Come round here."

Ellery walked around the corner of the building. The voice came again.

"Say!" it wailed, "why don't you answer? Be you comin'? If you're a
peddler, you needn't."

"I'm not a peddler," was the minister's amused reply.

"Oh, ain't ye? All right. Come along, then."

Ellery "came along" as far as the angle where the ell joined the main
body of the house. So far as he could see every door and window was
closed and there were no signs of life. However, he stepped to the door,
a green-painted affair of boards, and ventured another knock.

"Don't start that poundin' again!" protested the voice. "Come round to
t'other side where I be."

So around went the Reverend John, smiling broadly. But even on "t'other
side" there was no one to be seen. And no door, for that matter.

"Why!" exclaimed the voice, "if 'tain't Mr. Ellery! How d'ye do? Glad to
see you, Mr. Ellery. Fine day, ain't it? Here I be at this window."

Sure enough; one of the windows on this side of the house was raised
about six inches at the bottom, the shade was up, and peering beneath
the sash the minister discerned the expressive features of Abishai
Pepper--or as much of those features as the size of the opening
permitted to be seen.

"Oh!" exclaimed the visitor, "is that you, Mr. Pepper? Well, I'm glad to
see you, at last. You are rather hard to see, even now."

Kyan was plainly embarrassed. He stammered as he answered.

"Yes," he agreed, "I--I shouldn't wonder if I be. How be you? Pretty
smart?"

"Yes, thank you. I'm well."

"Er--er--come to call, did you?"

"Why, yes, that was my intention."

"Hum! Er--er--Laviny, she's gone over to Thankful Payne's. She heard
that Thankful's cousin up to Middleboro had died--passed away, I
mean--and she thought she'd run over and find out if Thankful was willed
anything. She said she'd be back pretty soon."

"Very well. Then, as she won't be gone long, perhaps I'll come in and
wait."

He was moving away toward the corner when a shout from beneath the
window sash brought him to a halt.

"Hi!" called Abishai. "Hi, Mr. Ellery! don't go to that door. 'Tain't no
use; it's locked."

"Locked? Well, you can unlock it, can't you?"

"No, not very well. That is, I--Mr. Ellery, come back here, won't ye? I
don't want anybody to hear."

The house of the nearest neighbor being several hundred yards away,
the likelihood of being overheard was improbable; but the minister came
back, nevertheless.

"You see, Mr. Ellery," stammered Kyan, "I--I'd like to have you come in
fust rate, but--er--Laviny she's got the key."

Ellery was surprised.

"She has!" he exclaimed.

"Um--hm, she's got it. She took it with her."

"But there are other doors. She didn't take them all, did she?"

"No--o, but--Well, the fact is, Mr. Ellery, I--I--I'm locked in."

"Locked in?"

"Yes, locked in this room. She--she--Oh, consarn it all, Mr. Ellery,
she's locked me in this room a-purpose, so's I won't get out and go
somewheres without her knowin' it."

"What?"

"Um--h'm; that's what she's done. Did you ever hear of anything like
that in your born days?"

This surprising disclosure was funny enough, but the tone of grieved
indignation in which Mr. Pepper told of his imprisonment was funnier
still. The minister coughed violently and looked the other way.

"She done it a-purpose," continued Kyan, in a burst of confidence. "She
had me put one of them new-fangled spring locks on the door of this room
t'other day, 'cause she said she was afraid of tramps and wanted some
place to shut herself up in if one of em come. And--and after dinner
to-day she sent me in here for somethin' and then slammed the door on
me. Said she cal'lated I'd stay put till she got back from Thankful's.
She knew mighty well I couldn't get out of the window, 'cause it won't
open no further'n 'tis now. I wa'n't never so provoked in my life.
'Tain't no way to treat your own brother, lockin' him up like a young
one; now, is it?"

Ellery's reply was not made immediately. He had heard numerous stories
concerning this odd household, some of which seemed too absurd for
belief. But this performance was more ridiculous than anything he had
heard.

"'Tain't right, is it, Mr. Ellery?" demanded Kyan.

"Why," answered the caller chokingly, "I--I--it is rather unusual,
that's a fact. May I ask what you've done to--"

"Done? I ain't done nothin'. She's so darned scared some other woman'll
get my money that--you see, a month or so ago I--I--well, she thought
I done somethin', or was plannin' to do somethin' that--Keziah Coffin
never told you anything about me, did she?"

"No, indeed. What could Mrs. Coffin tell me about you?"

"All right. Nothin', nothin'. Only if she did, tain't so. But I ain't
goin' to stand it no more, Mr. Ellery. Bein' shut up in a darned
old--excuse my swearin', I didn't mean to, though I got reason enough,
land knows--bein' shut up in a room full of trunks and odds and ends is
goin' too fur. I never want to smell old clothes ag'in long's I live.
Would you stand it if you was me, Mr. Ellery?"

"Why, of course I mustn't interfere in your family matters, Mr. Pepper.
Perhaps I'd better call some other time. Good afternoon."

"Hold on! hold on! you ain't answered me yet. You're a minister and I
go to your meetin' house. Tell me what you'd do if you was me. Would you
stand it?"

Ellery laughed aloud.

"No," he said, "I suppose I shouldn't."

"I bet you wouldn't! What would you do?"

"I don't know. You're of age, Mr. Pepper, and you must decide for
yourself. I think I should declare my independence. Really, I must go.
I--"

"Don't be in such a hurry. I want advice. I need it. And, so fur's
DECLARIN' goes, that don't do me no good. She can declare more things in
a minute than I can think of in a week. Tongue! I never heard--No, no!
Never mind the declarin'. What would you DO? S'posin' you wanted to go
outdoor without havin' her tagged to your coat tails, how'd you stop the
taggin'?"

The absurdity of the affair was too much for the visitor. He roared a
"Ha, ha!" that caused Abishai to wave a warning hand beneath the sash.

"Ss-h-h! sshh!" he hissed. "Folks'll hear ye, and I'd be so ashamed if
they did that I wouldn't dast to show my head. Can't show much of it,
anyhow, just now. By gum! I'll do somethin' desperate. I--I dunno as I
won't pizen her. I--"

"Hush! hush! you mustn't talk that way. I'm afraid you must be very
fascinating, Mr. Pepper. If your sister is so very fearful of your
meeting other women, it must be because she has good reason to fear."

"Stop your foolishness! Oh!--I--I ask your pardon, Mr. Ellery. That
ain't no way to talk to a minister. But I'm goin' to go out when I want
to if I bust a hole through the clapboards. I AIN'T fascinatin'. You ask
any woman--except her--if I be, and see what they say. What'll I DO?"

"Ha, ha! I don't know, I'm sure. You might lock HER up, I suppose, just
for a change."

"Hey!" There was a sound from behind the pane as if the imprisoned one
had slapped his knee. "By gum! I never thought of that. Would you now,
Mr. Ellery? Would you? Sshh! sshh! somebody's comin'. Maybe it's her.
Run around to the door, Mr. Ellery, quick. And don't tell her I've seen
you, for mercy sakes! Don't now, will ye? Please! Run!"

The minister did not run, but he walked briskly around the corner.
Sure enough, Lavinia was there, just unlocking the door. She expressed
herself as very glad to see the caller, ushered him into the sitting
room and disappeared, returning in another moment with her brother, whom
she unblushingly said had been taking a nap. Abishai did not contradict
her; instead, he merely looked apprehensively at the minister.

The call was a short one. Lavinia did seven eighths of the talking and
Ellery the rest. Kyan was silent. When the visit was over, Miss Pepper
escorted her guest to the door and bade him a voluble good-by. Over
her shoulder the minister saw Kyan making frantic signs to him;
he interpreted the signals as a request for secrecy concerning the
interview by the window.

Several times during the remainder of that week he surprised his
housekeeper by suddenly laughing aloud when there was, apparently,
nothing to laugh at. He explained these outbursts by saying that he
had thought of something funny. Keziah suggested that it must be mighty
funny to make him laugh in the middle of sermon writing.

"I've heard sermons that were funny," she said, "though they wasn't
intended to be; but what I've heard of yours ain't that kind. I wish
you'd let me in on the joke. I haven't been feelin' like laughin' for
the last fortni't."

She had been rather grave and preoccupied, for her, of late. Bustling
and busy she always was, never sitting down to "rest," as she called it,
without a lap full of sewing. The minister's clothes were mended and his
socks darned as they had not been since his mother's day. And with
him, at meal times, or after supper in the sitting room, she was always
cheerful and good-humored. But he had heard her sigh at her work, and
once, when she thought herself unobserved, he saw her wipe her eyes with
her apron.

"No, no," she protested, when he asked if anything had gone wrong. "I'm
all right. Got a little cold or somethin', I guess, that's all."

She would not give any other explanation and absolutely refused to see
the doctor. Ellery did not press the matter. He believed the "cold" to
be but an excuse and wondered what the real trouble might be. It seemed
to him to date from the evening of his chapel experience.

He told no one, not even her, of Kyan's confidential disclosure, and,
after some speculation as to whether or not there might be a sequel, put
the whole ludicrous affair out of his mind. He worked hard in his study
and at his pastoral duties, and was conscious of a pleasant feeling that
he was gaining his people's confidence and esteem.

A week from the following Sunday he dined in state at the Daniels's
table. Captain Elkanah was gracious and condescending. Annabel was more
than that. She was dressed in her newest gown and was so very gushing
and affable that the minister felt rather embarrassed. When, after the
meal was over, Captain Elkanah excused himself and went upstairs for
his Sabbath nap, the embarrassment redoubled. Miss Annabel spoke very
confidentially of her loneliness, without "congenial society," of
how VERY much she did enjoy Mr. Ellery's intellectual sermons, and
especially what a treat it had been to have him as a guest.

"You must dine here every Sunday," she said. "It will be no trouble at
all, and if you say no, I shall feel that it is because you don't want
to see me--FATHER and me, of course, I mean."

The minister didn't accept this pressing invitation; on the other
hand, he could not refuse it absolutely. He did not like Miss Daniels
overmuch, but she was the daughter of his leading parishioner and she
and her parent did seem to like him. So he dodged the issue and said she
was very kind.

He left the big house as soon as he could without giving offense, and
started back toward the parsonage. But the afternoon was so fine and the
early summer air so delightful that he changed his mind and, jumping the
fence at the foot of Cannon Hill, set off across the fields toward the
bluffs and the bay shore.

The sun was low in the west as he entered the grove of pines on the
bluff. The red light between the boughs made brilliant carpet patterns
on the thick pine needles and the smell was balsamy and sweet. Between
the tree trunks he caught glimpses of the flats, now partially covered,
and they reminded him of his narrow escape and of Nat Hammond, his
rescuer. He had met the captain twice since then, once at the store and
again on the main road, and had chatted with him. He liked him immensely
and wished he might count him as an intimate friend. But intimacy
between a Regular clergyman and the son of the leader of the Come-Outers
was out of the question. Partisans on both sides would shriek at the
idea.

Thinking of the Hammond family reminded him of another member of it. Not
that he needed to be reminded; he had thought of her often enough since
she ran away from him in the rain that night. And the picture in the
doorway was not one that he could forget--or wanted to. If she were
not a Come-Outer, he could meet her occasionally and they might become
friends. She was a disconcerting young person, who lacked proper respect
for one of his profession and laughed when she shouldn't--but she was
interesting, he admitted that.

And then he saw her. She was standing just at the outer edge of the
grove, leaning against a tree and looking toward the sunset. She wore a
simple white dress and her hat hung upon her shoulders by its ribbons.
The rosy light edged the white gown with pink and the fringes of her
dark hair were crinkly lines of fire. Her face was grave, almost sad.

John Ellery stood still, with one foot uplifted for a step. The girl
looked out over the water and he looked at her. Then a crow, one of
several whirling above the pines, spied the intruder and screamed a
warning. The minister was startled and stepped back. A dead limb beneath
his foot cracked sharply. Grace turned and saw him.

"Oh!" she cried. "Who is it?"

Ellery emerged from the shadow.

"Don't be frightened, Miss Van Horne," he said. "It is--er--I."

This statement was neither brilliant nor original; even as an
identification it lacked considerable.

"I?" repeated the girl. "Who? Oh! Why--"

The minister came forward.

"Good afternoon, Miss Van Horne," he stammered. "I'm afraid I frightened
you."

She was looking at him with a queer expression, almost as if she
scarcely believed him real.

"I hope--" he began again. She interrupted him.

"No," she said confusedly, "you didn't frighten me. I was a little
startled when I saw you there behind me. It seemed so odd, because I was
just thinking--No, I wasn't frightened. What is there to be frightened
of--in Trumet?"

He had extended his hand, but partially withdrew it, not sure how even
such a perfunctory act of friendliness might be received. She saved him
embarrassment by frankly offering her own.

"Not much, that's a fact," he said, in answer to her question. He
would have liked to ask what she had been thinking that made his sudden
appearance seem so odd.

"You came to see the sunset, I suppose?" she said hurriedly, as if to
head off a question. "So did I. It is a beautiful evening for a walk,
isn't it?"

She had said precisely the same thing on that other evening, when they
stood in the middle of "Hammond's Turn-off" in the driving rain. He
remembered it, and so, evidently, did she, for she colored slightly and
smiled.

"I mean it this time," she said. "I'm glad you didn't get cold from your
wetting the other day."

"Oh! I wasn't very wet. You wouldn't let me lend you the umbrella, so I
had that to protect me on the way home."

"Not then; I meant the other morning when Nat--Cap'n Hammond--met you
out on the flats. He said you were wading the main channel and it was
over your boots."

"Over my boots! Is that all he said? Over my head would be the plain
truth. To cross it I should have had to swim and, if what I've heard
since is true, I doubt if I could swim that channel. Captain Hammond
helped me out of a bad scrape."

"Oh, no! I guess not. He said you were cruising without a pilot and he
towed you into port; that's the way he expressed it."

"It was worse than that, a good deal worse. It might have been my last
cruise. I'm pretty certain that I owe the captain my life."

She looked at him uncomprehendingly.

"Your life?" she repeated.

"I believe it. That part of the channel I proposed swimming was exactly
where two men have been drowned, so people say. I'm not a very strong
swimmer, and they were. So, you see."

Grace cried out in astonishment.

"Oh!" she exclaimed. Then pointing toward the bay, she asked: "Out
there, by the end of that leader, was it?"

"Yes, that was it."

She drew a long breath. Then, after a moment:

"And Nat spoke as if it was all a joke," she said.

"No doubt he did. From what I hear of your brother, he generally refers
to his own plucky, capable actions as jokes. Other people call them
something else."

She did not answer, but continued to gaze at the half-submerged
"leader," with the pine bough tied at its landward end to mark the edge
of deep water, and the tide foaming through its lath gratings.

"Your brother--" went on the minister.

"He isn't my brother," she interrupted absently. "I wish he was."

She sighed as she uttered the last sentence.

"No, of course he isn't your real brother; I forgot. But he must seem
like one."

"Yes," rather doubtfully.

"You must be proud of him."

"I am." There was nothing doubtful this time.

"Well, he saved me from drowning. I'm almost certain of that."

"I'm so glad."

She seemed to mean it. He looked at her.

"Thank you," he said drily. "I'm rather glad myself."

"Oh! I didn't mean it exactly that way. Of course I'm glad you weren't
drowned, but I'm especially glad that--that one of our family saved you.
Now you won't believe that Come-Outers are all bad."

"I never believed it."

She shook her head.

"Oh, yes, you did," she affirmed stubbornly. "You've heard nothing good
of us since you came here. Don't tell fibs, Mr. Ellery."

"But I assure you--"

"Nonsense! Does--well, does Cap'n Daniels, or his daughter, say anything
good of us? Be honest, do they?"

"I hardly think--that is, I shouldn't call their opinions unprejudiced.
And, Miss Van Horne, perhaps the prejudice isn't all on one side. What
did your uncle say about Cap'n Nat's meeting me the other day?"

"Uncle Eben doesn't know. Nat didn't tell anyone but me. He doesn't
boast. And uncle would be glad he helped you. As I told you before, Mr.
Ellery, I'm not ashamed of my uncle. He has been so good to me that I
never can repay him, never! When my own father was drowned he took me
in, a little orphan that would probably have been sent to a home, and
no father could be kinder or more indulgent than he has been. Anything
I asked for I got, and at last I learned not to ask for too much. No
self-denial on his part was too great, if he could please me. When he
needed money most he said nothing to me, but insisted that I should be
educated. I didn't know until afterwards of the self-sacrifice my four
years at the Middleboro Academy meant to him."

The minister had listened eagerly to this defense of the man whom he had
been led to consider his arch enemy. It was given with spirit and the
girl's head was uplifted and her eyes flashed as she spoke. Ellery's
next remark was uttered without premeditation. Really, he was thinking
aloud.

"So you went away to school?" he mused. "That is why--"

"That is why I don't say 'never done nothin'' and 'be you' and
'hain't neither.' Yes, thank you, that's why. I don't wonder you were
surprised."

The young man blushed.

"You misunderstand me," he protested. "I didn't mean--"

"Oh! yes, you did. Not precisely that, perhaps, but pretty near it. I
suppose you expected me to speak like Josiah Badger or Kyan Pepper. I
try not to. And I try not to say 'immejitly,' too," she added, with a
mischievous twinkle.

Ellery recognized the "immejitly" quotation and laughed.

"I never heard but one person say that," he observed. "And he isn't a
Come-Outer."

"No, he isn't. Well, this lesson in English can't be very interesting
to you, Mr. Ellery, and I must go. But I'm very glad Nat helped you the
other day and that you realize the sort of man he is. And I'm glad I
have had the opportunity to tell you more about Uncle Eben. I owe him
so much that I ought to be glad--yes, glad and proud and happy, too, to
gratify his least wish. I must! I know I must, no matter how I--What
am I talking about? Yes, Mr. Ellery, I'm glad if I have helped you to
understand my uncle better and why I love and respect him. If you knew
him as I do, you would respect him, too. Good-by."

She was going, but the minister had something to say. He stepped forward
and walked beside her.

"Just a minute, please," he urged. "Miss Van Horne, I do understand. I
do respect your uncle. We have a mutual friend, you and I, and through
her I have come to understand many things."

Grace turned and looked at him.

"A mutual friend?" she repeated. "Oh! I know. Mrs. Coffin?"

"Yes; Mrs. Coffin. She's a good woman and a wise one."

"She's a dear! Do you like her, too?"

"Indeed, I do."

"Has she told you about me--about uncle, I mean?"

"Yes. Why, she told me--"

He began to enumerate some of the things Keziah had told concerning the
Hammond family. They were all good things, and he couldn't help seeing
that the recital pleased her. So he went on to tell how his housekeeper
had helped him, of her advice, of her many acts of kindness, of what
he owed to her. The girl listened eagerly, asking questions, nodding
confirmation, and, in her delight at hearing Keziah praised, quite
forgetting her previous eagerness to end the interview. And, as he
talked, he looked at her, at the red light on her hair, the shine of
her eyes, like phosphorus in the curl of a wave at night, at her long
lashes, and--

--"Yes," said Miss Van Horne, "you were saying--"

The minister awoke with a guilty start. He realized that his sentence
had broken off in the middle.

"Why! why--er--yes," he stammered. "I was saying that--that I don't know
what I should have done without Mrs. Coffin. She's a treasure. Frankly,
she is the only real friend I have found in Trumet."

"I know. I feel the same way about her. She means so much to me. I love
her more than anyone else in the world, except uncle, of course--and
Nat. I miss her very much since--since--"

"Since I came, you mean. I'm sorry. I wish--I hate to think I am the
cause which separates you two. It isn't my fault, as you know."

"Oh! I know that."

"Yes, and I object to having others choose my friends for me, people
who, because of a fanatical prejudice, stand in the way of--If it wasn't
for that, you might call and see Mrs. Coffin, just as you used to do."

Grace shook her head. They had moved on to the bend of the bluff, beyond
the fringe of pines, and were now standing at the very edge of the high
bank.

"If it wasn't for that, you would come," asserted the minister.

"Yes, I suppose so. I should like to come. I miss my talks with Aunt
Keziah more than you can imagine--now especially. But, somehow, what we
want to do most seems to be what we mustn't, and what we don't like is
our duty."

She said this without looking at him, and the expression on her face was
the same sad, grave one he had noticed when he first saw her standing
alone by the pine.

"Why don't you come?" he persisted.

"I can't, of course. You know I can't."

"Why not? If my company is objectionable I can go away when you come. If
you dislike me I--"

"You know I don't dislike you personally."

"I'm awfully glad of that."

"But it's impossible. Uncle respects and is fond of Aunt Keziah, but he
wouldn't hear of my visiting the parsonage."

"But don't you think your uncle might be persuaded? I'm sure he
misunderstands me, just as I should him if it weren't for Mrs.
Coffin--and what you've said. Don't you think if I called on him and he
knew me better it might help matters? I'll do it gladly. I will!"

"No, no. He wouldn't listen. And think of your own congregation."

"Confound my congregation!"

"Why, Mr. Ellery!"

She looked at him in amazement; then her lips began to curl.

"Why, Mr. Ellery!" she repeated.

The minister turned very red and drew his hand across his forehead.

"I--I don't mean that exactly," he stammered. "But I'm not a child. I
have the right to exercise a man's discretion. My parish committee must
understand that. They shall! If I choose to see you--Look out!"

She was close to the overhanging edge of the bluff and the sod upon
which she stood was bending beneath her feet. He sprang forward, caught
her about the waist, and pulled her back. The sod broke and rattled down
the sandy slope. She would have had a slight tumble, nothing worse, had
she gone with it. There was no danger; and yet the minister was very
white as he released her.

She, too, was pale for a moment, and then crimson.

"Thank you," she gasped. "I--I must go. It is late. I didn't realize how
late it was. I--I must go."

He did not answer, though he tried to.

"I must go," she said hurriedly, speaking at random. "Good afternoon.
Good-by. I hope you will enjoy your walk."

"I have enjoyed it." His answer was unstudied but emphatic. She
recognized the emphasis.

"Will you come to see Mrs. Coffin?" he asked.

"No, no. You know I can't. Good-by. The sunset is beautiful, isn't it?"

"Beautiful, indeed."

"Yes. I--I think the sunsets from this point are the finest I have ever
seen. I come here every Sunday afternoon to see them."

This remark was given merely to cover embarrassment, but it had an
unexpected effect.

"You DO?" cried the minister. The next moment he was alone. Grace Van
Horne had vanished in the gloom of the pine thickets.

It was a strange John Ellery who walked slowly back along the path, one
that Keziah herself would not have recognized, to say nothing of
Captain Elkanah and the parish committee. The dignified parson, with
the dignified walk and calm, untroubled brow, was gone, and here was
an absent-minded young fellow who stumbled blindly along, tripping over
roots and dead limbs, and caring nothing, apparently, for the damage to
his Sunday boots and trousers which might result from the stumbles. He
saw nothing real, and heard nothing, not even the excited person who,
hidden behind the bayberry bush, hailed him as he passed. It was not
until this person rushed forth and seized him by the arm that he came
back to the unimportant affairs of this material earth.

"Why! Why, Mr. Pepper!" he gasped. "Are you here? What do you want?"

"Am I here?" panted Kyan. "Ain't I been here for the last twenty minutes
waitin' to get a chance at you? Ain't I been chasin' you from Dan
to Beersheby all this dummed--excuse me--afternoon? Oh, my godfreys
mighty!"

"Why, what's the matter?"

"Matter? Matter enough! It's all your fault. You got me into the mess,
now you git me out of it."

Usually, when Abishai addressed his clergyman, it was in a tone of
humble respect far different from his present frantic assault. The
Reverend John was astounded.

"What IS the trouble, Mr. Pepper?" he demanded. "Behave yourself, man.
What IS it?"

"You--you made me do it," gurgled Kyan. "Yes, sir, 'twas you put me up
to it. When you was at our house t'other day, after Laviny locked me up,
you told me the way to get square was to lock her up, too. And I done
it! Yes, sir, I done it when she got back from meetin' this noon. I
run off and left her locked in. And--and"--he wailed, wringing his
hands--"I--I ain't dast to go home sence. WHAT'll I do?"


CHAPTER IX

IN WHICH MISS DANIELS DETERMINES TO FIND OUT


The hysterical Mr. Pepper doubtless expected his clergyman to be almost
as much upset as he was by the news of his action. But John Ellery was
provokingly calm. As a matter of fact he scarcely grasped the purport of
the little man's disjointed story. He had been wandering in dreamland,
his head among the clouds, and the explosion of Keziah's bomb disturbed,
but did not clear the air.

"What will you do?" he repeated. "Why--er--I don't know, I'm sure."

Kyan was staggered.

"You don't know?" he shouted. "YOU don't? Then who does, for the land
sakes? Didn't you tell me to lock her up? Didn't I do it 'CAUSE you told
me? Didn't--didn't--"

He seemed to be on the verge of apoplexy. Also he had raised his
voice to a yell. The minister seized him by the arm and shook him into
silence.

"Hush! hush!" he commanded. "Wait a minute. Let me understand this
thing. Some one is locked up, you say. Who is it? Where--"

"WHO is it? Ain't I tellin' you. It's Laviny. She went into that spare
room where I was t'other day and I slammed the spring lock to on her.
Then I grabbed the key and run. That was afore three this afternoon; now
it's 'most night and I ain't dast to go home. What'll she say when I
let her out? I got to let her out, ain't I? She can't starve to death in
there, can she? And YOU told me to do it! YOU did! Oh--"

The apoplectic attack was once more imminent.

"Stop it, Mr. Pepper," ordered Ellery. "I don't remember telling you
to lock your sister up, though--Why, yes, I may have said something or
other, as a joke, but I didn't expect you would seriously consider doing
such a thing. Ha, ha! This is the most idiotic piece of business that I
ever--"

"Be you laughin'?" demanded the shocked Abishai. "LAUGHIN'? Why, my
godfreys mighty! Idiotic? Well, who's the idiot? 'Tain't me! I'D never
have thought of such a fool trick. But you said--"

"Hush! Let me think. Have you told anybody?"

"TOLD anybody! I guess NOT. And nobody'll never know if they wait for me
to tell 'em."

"Well, then, I don't see why you can't go home and--hum--I don't like
to advise your telling a lie, but you might let her infer that it was an
accident. OR, if you really mean to be your own master, you can tell her
you did it purposely and will do it again if she ever tries the trick on
you."

"I tell her that! I tell her! O Mr. Ellery, DON'T talk so. You don't
know Laviny; she ain't like most women. If I should tell her that
she'd--I don't know's she wouldn't take and horsewhip me. Or commit
suicide. She's said she would afore now if--if--"

"Nonsense! She won't do that, you needn't worry." He burst into another
laugh, but checked himself, as he saw the look of absolute distress on
poor Kyan's face.

"Never mind, Mr. Pepper," he said. "We'll think of some plan to smooth
matters over. I'll go home with you now and we'll let her out together."

"Will you, Mr. Ellery? Will you, honest? Say, by godfreys mighty, I'd
get down on my knees and thank you this minute if--if I wa'n't in such a
hurry. Come right on; come quick!"

It was a silent procession of two that wended its way out of the pines
and across the fields, by the brook and the pond, where the evening
mists were rising and the frogs chanting their good-night song,
through the gathering twilight shades, across the main road and up the
lighthouse lane. Kyan, his mind filled with fearful forebodings, was
busily trying to think of a reasonable excuse for the "accidental"
imprisonment of his sister. John Ellery was thinking, also, but his
thoughts were not of the Peppers.

The little house was dark and still as they approached it. No welcoming
light in the dining-room windows, no open door, no shrill voice
demanding to know where the wandering brother had been "all this
everlastin' time." Even the hens had gone to roost. Abishai groaned.

"Oh, dear!" he wailed. "I'm scart to death. Where is she? You don't
cal'late she's done it, do ye?"

"Done it? Done what?"

"Done the suicidin'. She said she would if--O Laviny!"

"Hush! Be quiet. She's all right. She's in the room where you left her,
of course. She couldn't get out, could she? You've got the key. Come
in."

They entered the house. The dining room was dark and quiet. So was the
sitting room. The clock ticked, solemn and slow. Kyan clutched at his
companion's arm.

"I don't hear her," he whispered. "You don't s'pose she HAS done it?
Godfreys mighty!"

The gloom and mystery were having their effect, even on Mr. Ellery's
nerves. His answer also was given in a tense whisper, but with some
irritation.

"Hush!" he murmured. "Let go of my wrist. You've pinched it black and
blue. Which room did you leave her in? Show me at once."

Kyan's trembling knees managed to carry him to the little hall leading
from the sitting room toward the ell at the side of the house. This hall
was almost pitch black. The minister felt his guide's chin whisker brush
his ear as the following sentence was literally breathed into it:

"Here--here 'tis," panted Kyan. "Here's the door. I don't hear nothin',
do you? Listen!"

They listened. Not a sound, save the dismal tick of the clock in the
room they had left. Ellery knocked on the door.

"Miss Pepper," he said; "Miss Pepper, are you there?"

Kyan caught his breath. No answer.

"Miss Pepper," repeated the minister. "Miss Pepper!"

Silence, absolute. Abishai could stand it no longer. He groaned and
collapsed on his knees.

"She has!" he moaned. "She's done it and there ain't nothin' in there
but her remains. Oh, my soul!"

Ellery, now rather frightened himself, shook him violently.

"Be quiet, you idiot!" he commanded. "We must go in. Give me the key."

After repeated orders and accompanying shakings, Kyan produced a key.
The minister snatched it from his trembling fingers, felt for the
keyhole and threw the door open. The little room was almost as dark as
the hall and quite as still. There was a distinct smell of old clothes
and camphor.

"A match," demanded Ellery. "Quick!"

"I ain't got none," quavered Mr. Pepper. "They're all in the box in the
settin' room. Oh, my godfreys mighty! What'll I do? What undertaker'll I
have? Solon Tripp's the reg'lar one, but Laviny and he had a row and
she said she'd come back and ha'nt me if I ever let him touch her
rema--Where you goin'? DON'T LEAVE ME HERE!"

The minister was going after a match, and said so. In a moment he
returned with several. One of these he lit. The brimstone sputtered,
burned blue and fragrant, then burst into a yellow flame.

The little room was empty.

John Ellery drew a breath of relief. Then he laughed.

"Humph!" he exclaimed. "She's gone."

"GONE? Why, she ain't nuther! Where could she go?"

"I don't know, but she has gone--somewhere. At any rate, she's not
here."

Kyan rose to his feet. His alarm had changed to paralyzed astonishment.

"How could she go?" he repeated. "That window won't open more'n six
inches. Laviny ain't what you'd call fleshy, but she never could squeeze
through that in this world. And I locked the door, 'cause I heard the
click. I--I--I--do you b'lieve in spirits, Mr. Ellery?"

"Nonsense! Come into the sitting room, light a lamp, and let's talk it
over."

The lamp was found and lighted at last. Its radiance brightened the
dingy sitting room.

"Do you b'lieve in spirits?" repeated Kyan. "I've heard yarns about
folks bein' spirited away, but I never took much stock in 'em. And,"
he added with conviction, "'twould take a pretty husky spirit to handle
Laviny if she had her mad up. She--Hush! hear that!"

The sound of wheels was heard in the lane by the front gate. A vehicle
stopped. Then some one called a hurried good night. Mr. Pepper's fear
returned.

"It's her!" he cried. "She's been ahuntin' for me. NOW I'll get it!
You stand by me, Mr. Ellery. You got to. You said you would. But how on
earth did she get--"

The minister motioned him to silence.

"I'll stand by you," he whispered. "Don't speak. Leave it to me."

A step sounded on the back step. The dining-room door was hurriedly
thrown open.

"'Bishy," called Miss Pepper eagerly. "'Bish, where are you?"

"Here--here I be, Laviny," faltered Kyan.

His sister appeared on the threshold. She was dressed in her Sunday
best, flowered poke bonnet, mitts, imitation India shawl, rustling black
bombazine gown. She looked at Mr. Pepper then at the minister.

"O Mr. Ellery!" she exclaimed, "be you here?"

The Reverend John admitted his presence. Miss Pepper's demeanor
surprised him. She did not seem angry; indeed, she acted embarrassed and
confused, as if she, and not her brother, were the guilty party.

"I'm afraid I'm awful late, 'Bishy," she said. "Have you had your
supper?"

Kyan was too perturbed to venture a reply. The sword above his head was
quivering on its single hair and he was preparing to dodge the fall. But
it did not fall.

"You haven't had any supper, have you?" purred Miss Pepper pityingly.
"It's too bad. You poor thing! you must be awful hungry."

She moved across the room and kissed him. Abishai, who had prepared
himself for a different sort of greeting, clutched his chair with both
hands. He looked as if he might faint. The minister gazed open-mouthed.

"I'm awful sorry, Mr. Ellery," gushed Lavinia, removing the bonnet. "You
see, I was invited out to ride this afternoon and--and--I went."

She glanced at her brother, reddened--yes, almost blushed--and
continued.

"You know, 'Bishy," she said "Thankful Payne's cousin's home avisitin'
her. He come about that cousin's will--the other cousin that's just
died. He's a reel nice man--her live cousin is--keeps a shoe store up
to Sandwich, and I used to know him years ago. When I was over to
Thankful's t'other day, him and me had quite a talk. We got speakin' of
what nice drives there was around Trumet and--and--er--well, he asked me
if I wouldn't like to go to ride next Sunday afternoon--that's to-day.
And a ride bein' a good deal of a treat to me, I said I would. Thankful
was goin', too, but--er--er--she couldn't very well. So Caleb--that's
his name, you remember, 'Bishy--he come round with his horse and team
about ha'f past three and we started. But I'd no IDEE 'twas so late.
I--I--meant to tell you I was goin', 'Bish, but I forgot."

Kyan had listened to this recital, or explanation, or apology, with a
curious succession of expressions passing over his face. He swallowed
two or three times, but did not interrupt.

"I'm so sorry I kept you waitin' supper," gushed Lavinia. "I'll get you
a good one now. Oh, well, deary me! I must be gettin' absent-minded. I
ain't asked you where you've been all the afternoon."

Abishai's eyes turned beseechingly toward his promised backer. Ellery
could not resist that mute appeal.

"Your brother has been with me for some time, Miss Pepper," he
volunteered.

"Oh, has he? Ain't that nice! He couldn't have been in better comp'ny,
I'm sure. But oh, say, 'Bishy! I ain't told you how nigh I come to not
gettin' out at all. Just afore Mr. Payne come, I was in that spare room
and--you remember I put a spring lock on that door?"

It was here at last. The long-dreaded explosion was imminent. Kyan's
chin shook. He braced himself for the blow. The minister prepared to
come to the rescue.

"Yes," went on Lavinia. "I--I put a lock on that door so's I--I could
shut the room up when I wanted to. Well, when I was in there this
afternoon the wind blew the door shut and--Hey?"

"I--I never said nothin'," panted Kyan.

"Yes, it blew to, the lock clicked, and there I was. If I hadn't had the
other key in my pocket I don't know's I wouldn't have been in there yet.
That would have been a pretty mess, wouldn't it! He! he! he!"

She laughed shrilly. The minister looked at her, then at her brother,
and he, too, burst into a shout of laughter. Kyan did not laugh; yet his
grip upon the chair relaxed, and over his countenance was spreading a
look of relief, of hope and peace, like a clear sunrise after a stormy
night.

"Well, I must go and get supper," declared Lavinia. "You'll forgive me
for leavin' you so, won't you, 'Bishy?"

Mr. Pepper sighed.

"Yes," he said slowly. "I'll forgive you, Laviny."

"I knew you would. I hope you ain't been too lonesome. Did you miss me?
Was you worried?"

"Hey? Yes, I--I missed you consider'ble. I WAS gettin' sort of worried.
I didn't s'pose you'd go off to ride with--with a feller and leave me
all alone. But I forgive you." He stopped, drew his hand across his
forehead, and then added, "I s'pose I hadn't ought to complain. Maybe
I'd better get used to it; I guess likely this is only the beginnin'."

Lavinia blushed furiously.

"Why, 'Bish!" she exclaimed. "How you do talk! Ain't he awful, Mr.
Ellery?"

The Reverend John did not answer. He could not trust himself to speak
just then. When he did it was to announce that he must be getting toward
home. No, he couldn't stay for supper.

Miss Pepper went into the kitchen, and Abishai saw the visitor to the
door. Ellery extended his hand and Kyan shook it with enthusiasm.

"Wa'n't it fine?" he whispered. "Talk about your miracles! Godfreys
mighty! Say, Mr. Ellery, don't you ever tell a soul how it really was,
will you?"

"No, of course not."

"No, I know you won't. You won't tell on me and I won't tell on you.
That's a trade, hey?"

The minister stopped in the middle of his step.

"What?" he said, turning.

Mr. Pepper merely smiled, winked, and shut the door. John Ellery
reflected much during his homeward walk.


The summer in Trumet drowsed on, as Trumet summers did in those days,
when there were no boarders from the city, no automobiles or telephones
or "antique" collectors. In June the Sunday school had its annual
picnic. On the morning of the Fourth of July some desperate spirits
among the younger set climbed in at the church window and rang the bell,
in spite of the warning threats of the selectmen, who had gone on record
as prepared to prosecute all disturbers of the peace to the "full extent
of the law." One of the leading citizens, his name was Daniels, awoke to
find the sleigh, which had been stored in his carriage house, hoisted to
the roof of his barn, and a section of his front fence tastefully draped
about it like a garland. The widow Rogers noticed groups of people
looking up at her house and laughing. Coming out to see what they were
laughing at, she was provoked beyond measure to find a sign over the
front door, announcing "Man Wanted Imediate. Inquire Within." The door
of the Come-Outer chapel was nailed fast and Captain Zeb Mayo's old
white horse wandered loose along the main road ringed with painted black
stripes like a zebra. Captain Zeb was an angry man, for he venerated
that horse.

The storm caused by these outbreaks subsided and Trumet settled into
its jog trot. The stages rattled through daily, the packet came and went
every little while, occasionally a captain returned home from a long
voyage, and another left for one equally long. Old Mrs. Prince, up at
the west end of the town, was very anxious concerning her son, whose
ship was overdue at Calcutta and had not been heard from. The minister
went often to see her and tried to console, but what consolation is
there when one's only child and sole support is nobody knows where,
drowned and dead perhaps, perhaps a castaway on a desert island, or
adrift with a desperate crew in an open boat? And Mrs. Prince would say,
over and over again:

"Yes, yes, Mr. Ellery. Thank you. I'm sure you mean to encourage me, but
oh, you don't know the things that happen to seafarin' men. I do. I went
to sea with my husband for fourteen year. He died on a voyage and they
buried him over the vessel's side. I can't even go to his grave. The sea
got him, and now if it's taken my Eddie--"

The young clergyman came away from these calls feeling very young,
indeed, and woefully inadequate. What DID he know of the great sorrows
of life?

The Sunday dinners with the Daniels family were almost regular weekly
functions now. He dodged them when he could, but he could not do so
often without telling an absolute lie, and this he would not do. And,
regularly, when the solemn meal was eaten, Captain Elkanah went upstairs
for his nap and the Reverend John was left alone with Annabel. Miss
Daniels did her best to be entertaining, was, in fact, embarrassingly
confidential and cordial. It was hard work to get away, and yet, somehow
or other, at the stroke of four, the minister always said good-by and
took his departure.

"What is your hurry, Mr. Ellery?" begged Annabel on one occasion when
the reading of Moore's poems had been interrupted in the middle by the
guest's sudden rising and reaching for his hat. "I don't see why you
always go so early. It's so every time you're here. Do you call at any
other house on Sunday afternoons?"

"No," was the prompt reply. "Oh, no."

"Then why can't you stay? You know I--that is, pa and I--would LOVE to
have you."

"Thank you. Thank you. You're very kind. But I really must go. Good
afternoon, Miss Daniels."

"Mrs. Rogers said she saw you going across the fields after you left
here last Sunday. Did you go for a walk?"

"Er--er--yes, I did."

"I wish you had mentioned it. I love to walk, and there are SO few
people that I find congenial company. Are you going for a walk now?"

"Why, no--er--not exactly."

"I'm sorry. GOOD-by. Will you come again next Sunday? Of COURSE you
will. You know how dreadfully disappointed I--we--shall be if you
don't."

"Thank you, Miss Daniels. I enjoyed the dinner very much. Good
afternoon."

He hurried down the path. Annabel watched him go. Then she did an odd
thing. She passed through the sitting room, entered the front hall, went
up the stairs, tiptoed by the door of her father's room, and then up
another flight to the attic. From here a steep set of steps led to the
cupola on the roof. In that cupola was a spyglass.

Annabel opened a window a few inches, took the spyglass from its rack,
adjusted it, laid it on the sill of the open window and knelt, the glass
at her eye. The floor of the cupola was very dusty and she was wearing
her newest and best gown, but she did not seem to mind.

Through the glass she saw the long slope of Cannon Hill, with the beacon
at the top and Captain Mayo's house near it. The main road was deserted
save for one figure, that of her late caller. He was mounting the hill
in long strides.

She watched him gain the crest and pass over it out of sight. Then she
shifted the glass so that it pointed toward the spot beyond the curve
of the hill, where the top of a thick group of silver-leafs hid the
parsonage. Above the tree tops glistened the white steeple of the
Regular church. If the minister went straight home she could not see
him. But under those silver-leafs was the beginning of the short cut
across the fields where Didama had seen Mr. Ellery walking on the
previous Sunday.

So Annabel watched and waited. Five minutes, then ten. He must have
reached the clump of trees before this, yet she could not see him.
Evidently, he had gone straight home. She drew a breath of relief.

Then, being in a happier frame of mind, and the afternoon clear and
beautiful, she moved the glass along the horizon, watching the distant
white specks across the bay on the Wellmouth bluffs--houses and
buildings they were--the water, the shore, the fish weirs, the pine
groves. She became interested in a sloop, beating into Wellmouth harbor,
and watched that. After a time she heard, in the house below, her father
shouting her name.

She gave the glass one more comprehensive sweep preparatory to closing
it and going downstairs. As she did this a moving speck came into view
and vanished.

Slowly she moved the big end of the spyglass back along the arc it had
traveled. She found the speck and watched it. It was a man, striding
across the meadow land, a half mile beyond the parsonage, and hurrying
in the direction of the beach. She saw him climb a high dune, jump a
fence, cross another field and finally vanish in the grove of pines on
the edge of the bluff by the shore.

The man was John Ellery, the minister. Evidently, he had not gone home,
nor had he taken the short cut. Instead he had walked downtown a long
way and THEN turned in to cross the fields and work his way back.

Annabel put down the glass and, heedless of her father's calls, sat
thinking. The minister had deliberately deceived her. More than that, he
had gone to considerable trouble to avoid observation. Why had he done
it? Had he done the same thing on other Sunday afternoons? Was there
any real reason why he insisted on leaving the house regularly at four
o'clock?

Annabel did not know. Her eyes snapped and her sharp features looked
sharper yet as she descended the steps to the attic. She did not know;
but she intended to find out.


CHAPTER X

IN WHICH KEZIAH'S TROUBLES MULTIPLY


Keziah was getting worried about her parson. Not concerning his
popularity with his congregation. She had long since ceased to worry
about that. The young minister's place in his people's regard was now
assured, the attendance was increasing, and the Regular church was
now on a firmer footing, financially and socially, than it had been
in years. Even Mrs. Rogers and Lavinia Pepper had ceased to criticise,
except as pertained to unimportant incidentals, and were now among the
loudest of the praise chanters. And as Captain Zeb Mayo said: "When
Didama and Laviny stops fault-findin', the millennium's so nigh port a
feller ought to be overhaulin' his saint uniform."

But what worried Mrs. Coffin was John Ellery's personal appearance and
behavior. He had grown perceptibly thinner during the past month, his
manner was distrait, and, worst of all in the housekeeper's eyes, his
appetite had fallen off. She tried all sorts of tempting dishes, but the
result was discouraging.

"What!" she exclaimed. "Don't want but one piece of huckleberry pie?
Why, a week ago you ate three and looked kind of disappointed 'cause the
dish was empty. What is the matter? Are you sick?"

"No, Mrs. Coffin," replied the Reverend John. "No, I'm not sick. I just
don't feel hungry, that's all."

"Hum! Well, I've usually noticed that when a healthy man don't feel
hungry at dinner time, 'specially in the huckleberry season, his
healthiness is pretty shaky. What does ail you, Mr. Ellery? Got
somethin' on your mind? If you have, I'd heave it overboard. Or you
might unload it onto me and let me prescribe. I've had consider'ble
experience in that kind of doctorin'."

But the answer was unsatisfactory. Mr. Ellery laughed, changed the
subject, and wandered out into the garden, where Keziah saw him, shortly
afterwards, intently regarding nothing in particular with a rapt stare.
She watched him for a few moments and then, with a puzzled shake of
the head, returned to her work. She believed that he was troubled about
something and was herself troubled in consequence.

His absent-mindedness was most acute on Sunday evenings, before prayer
meeting, and after he had returned from the afternoon at Captain
Elkanah's.

"Say, Mr. Ellery," she said, on one of these Sunday evenings, "do you
know, it seems to me that Elkanah's meals must go to your head. Don't
have any of his granddad's New England rum, do you? They tell me he's
got some of that down cellar that he doles out occasional to his
very particular friends. That's the common yarn around town, though I
couldn't swear 'twas gospel."

The minister smiled and denied acquaintanceship with the New England
beverage.

"Humph! Then it must be the other thing. You ain't in love, are you?"

The young man started, colored, and was plainly embarrassed.

"In love?" he repeated. "In love, Mrs. Coffin?"

"Yes, in love. Annabel hasn't landed a male at last, has she? She's a
line over the side for a long time."

The hearty laugh with which this was received settled the question of
Annabel's success. Keziah was relieved.

"Well, I'm glad of that," she said. "I ain't got any grudge against
Annabel, but neither have I got one against you. Another man in that
family would have an easy time in one way, he wouldn't have to do any
thinkin' for himself--Elkanah and his daughter would do all that was
necessary. So you're not in love. Then I don't know what does ail you.
I'll say this, though, for a body that ain't in love you certainly stay
with the Danielses a long time. You went there right after meetin' this
noon and now it's seven o'clock and you've just got home. And 'twas the
same last Sunday and the one before. Been there all the time, have you?"

She knew he had not, because she had seen him pass the parsonage, on
the opposite side of the road, two hours before. But she was curious to
learn what his reply would be. It was noncommittal.

"No," he said slowly. "Not all the time. I--er--went for a short walk."

Before she could inquire concerning that walk he had entered the study
and closed the door after him.

During the week which followed this particular conversation he was more
absent-minded than ever. There were evenings when he spoke scarcely a
word, but sat silent in his chair, while Keziah, looking up from her
mending, watched him and guessed and wondered. After he had gone to his
room for the night, she would hear him pacing the floor, back and forth,
back and forth. She asked no more questions, however; minding her own
business was a specialty of Keziah's, and it was a rare quality in
Trumet.

Sunday was a cloudy, warm day, "muggy," so Captain Zeb described it.
After the morning service Mr. Ellery, as usual, went home with Captain
Daniels and Annabel. Keziah returned to the parsonage, ate a lonely
dinner, washed the dishes, and sat down to read a library book. She
read for an hour and then, finding it difficult to keep her mind on the
story, gave it up, closed the book and, rising, walked to the window.
But the misty, hot loneliness of the afternoon, was neither interesting
nor cheerful, so she turned away and went upstairs to her own room. Her
trunk was in one corner of this room and she unlocked it, taking from
a compartment of the tray a rosewood writing case, inlaid with
mother-of-pearl, a present from her father, who had brought it home from
sea when she was a girl.

From the case she took a packet of letters and a daguerreotype. The
latter was the portrait of a young man, in high-collared coat, stock,
and fancy waistcoat. His hair, worn long over the ears, was smooth with
a shine that suggested oil, and in his shirt front was a large pin,
which might possibly have been mistaken by a credulous observer for a
diamond. Mrs. Coffin looked at the daguerreotype, sighed, shuddered, and
laid it aside. Then she opened the packet of letters. Selecting one from
the top of the pile, she read it slowly. And, as she read, she sighed
again.

She did not hear the back door of the parsonage open and close softly.
Nor did she hear the cautious footsteps in the rooms below. What aroused
her from her reading was her own name, spoken at the foot of the stairs.

"Keziah! Keziah, are you there?"

She started, sprang up, and ran out into the hall, the letter still in
her hand.

"Who is it?" she asked sharply. "Mr. Ellery, is that you?"

"No," was the answer. "It's me--Nat. Are you busy, Keziah? I want to see
you for a minute."

The housekeeper hurriedly thrust the letter into her waist.

"I'll be right down, Nat," she answered. "I'm comin'."

He was in the sitting room when she entered. He was wearing his Sunday
suit of blue and his soft felt hat was on the center table. She held out
her hand and he shook it heartily.

"Well!" she observed, smiling, "I declare if I don't believe you've got
the tiptoe habit. This is the second time you've sneaked into the house
and scared me 'most to death. I asked you before if you wa'n't ashamed
of yourself and now I ask it again."

Before he could reply she caught a glimpse of his face.

"What is it?" she asked. "What is the matter? Is anybody sick? Is your
father--"

"No, he's all right. That is, he's as well as he has been lately, though
that isn't sayin' much."

"Is Grace--"

"No, she's all right, too, I guess. Been sort of quiet and sorrowful
for the last few weeks--or I've seemed to notice that she has--but
I cal'late it's nothin' serious. I wouldn't wonder if the same thing
that's troublin' her is what ails me."

"But what is it? Why don't you tell me?"

"I'm goin' to tell you, Keziah. That's what I come here for. I--"

"Sit down, can't you? Don't stand up there like a lighthouse, shuttin'
out the whole broadside of the room. You are the BIGGEST thing!"

Captain Hammond selected the most substantial chair in the apartment and
sat down upon it. He looked at his friend and shook his head.

"No use, Keziah," he said. "If I was as deep down in the blues as the
bottom of the Whale Deep, a look at that face of yours would pull me to
the top again. You're a good woman!"

"Thanks! When I have spare time on my hands I'll practice tryin' to
believe that. But what is the trouble, Nat? Out with it."

"Well, Keziah, it's trouble enough. Dad and I have had a fallin' out."

Mrs. Coffin's mouth and eyes opened.

"What?" she cried, in utter astonishment.

"Yes. It's true. We had what was next door to a real quarrel after
dinner to-day. It would have been a real one if I hadn't walked off and
left him. He's as set as the rock of Gibraltar, and--"

"And your foundations ain't given to slippin' much. Nat Hammond, I'm
surprised at you! What was it all about? Religion?"

"No, not a sliver of religion in it. If 'twas that, I could dodge, or
haul down my colors, if I had to. But it's somethin' worse, enough sight
worse. Somethin' I can't do--even for dad--and won't either. Keziah,
he's dead set on my marryin' Grace. Says if I don't he'll know that
I don't really care a tin nickel for him, or for his wishes, or what
becomes of the girl after he's gone."

"Nat!"

"It's a fact. You see, dad realizes, better'n I thought he did, that his
health is pretty shaky and that he is likely to founder 'most any time.
He says that don't worry him; if he knew Grace and I were provided for
he'd slip his cable with a clean manifest. But the dream of his life, he
says, has been that we should marry. And he wants to see it done."

Keziah was silent for a moment. Then she said slowly:

"And Grace herself? How does she feel about it? Has he spoken to her?"

"I don't know. I guess likely he has. Perhaps that's why she's been so
sort of mournful lately. But never mind whether he has or not; I won't
do it and I told him so. He got red hot in a jiffy. I was ungrateful and
stubborn and all sorts of things. And I, bein' a Hammond, with some of
the Hammond balkiness in me, I set my foot down as hard as his. And we
had it until--until--well, until I saw him stagger and tremble so that I
actually got scared and feared he was goin' to keel over where he stood.

"'Why can't you?' he kept sayin'. 'But WHY can't you? Ain't she a girl
anyone would be proud to have for a wife?' 'Course there was no answer
to that but yes. Then back he comes again with 'Then why can't you?' At
last, bein' frightened, as I said, that he might have another shock or
somethin', I said I'd think it over and come away and left him. And I
come straight to you. Keziah, what shall I do? What can you say to help
me?"

Keziah was silent. She was looking, not at her companion, but at the
carpet center of one of the braided rugs on the floor. Her face was very
grave and the lines about her mouth seemed to deepen. Her hands, clasped
in her lap, tightened one upon the other. But her voice was calm when,
at last, she spoke.

"Nat," she said, "there's only one thing I can say. And that's what your
father said: Why can't you?"

The captain sprang from his chair.

"What?" he cried incredulously. "What are you sayin'?"

"Just what your father said, Nat. Why can't you marry Grace? She's a
dear, good girl and--"

"That be--keelhauled! Keziah Coffin, you sit there and ask me why I
can't marry her! YOU do?"

"Yes, Nat."

"Keziah, you're crazy! Don't talk to me like that. We're not jokin' now.
You know why I can't marry her, nor anyone else in this round world but
you."

"Nat, I can't marry you."

"I know, I know. You're always sayin' that. But you don't mean it. You
can't mean it. Why, you and me have been picked out for each other by
the Almighty, Keziah. I swear I believe just that. We went together when
we were boy and girl, to parties and such. We was promised when I first
went to sea. If it hadn't been for that fool row we had--and 'twas all
my fault and I know it--you never would have let that da--that miserable
Anse Coffin come near you. And when 'twas too late and you'd married
him, the mean, drunken, cruel--"

"Hush, Nat! hush! Stop it!"

"He was, and you know he was. Yes, and worse besides. Runnin' off and
leavin' a wife like you to--Oh, my God! when I think I might have been
your husband to look out for you and take care of you! That you
might have been with me on board my ships. That, when I come down the
companion on stormy nights I might have found you there to comfort me
and--O Keziah! we aren't young any more. What's the use of foolin'? I
want you. I'm goin' to have you. Coffin is dead these ten years. When I
heard he was drowned off there in Singapore, all I could say was: 'Serve
him right!' And I say it now. I come home then more determined to get
you. Say yes, and let's be happy. Do!"

"I can't, Nat."

"Why not? For Heaven sakes! why not? Don't you care for me? You've let
me think--well, at any rate, I have thought you did. You used to. Don't
you?"

"Nat, I--I care for you more than anybody else on earth. But I can't
marry you. Oh, don't keep askin' it! Please don't. I can't marry you,
Nat. No!"

"Well, not now, maybe. Not this month, or even this year, perhaps, but
some day--"

"No, Nat. You must listen. There's no use of this goin' on any longer. I
mean it. I can't marry you."

"You won't, you mean."

"Well, if you wish to think so. Then I won't."

"But by and by--"

"No, not by and by. Never, Nat. Never."

He drew his hand across his forehead.

"Never!" he repeated, more to himself than to her.

"Never. Yes, Nat."

"Then, by the everlastin'! I'll do somethin'--"

"No, no, you won't. Nat Hammond, I know you. You're a great big,
brave-hearted, sensible man. You won't be foolish. You'll do--yes, I
think you'd better do just what your father asks you to do. Marry Grace,
if she wants you and will have you. She'll make you a good wife; you'll
learn to care for her, and I know she'll have the best husband that a
girl could hope for. And you and I will be friends, just as we've always
been, and--"

"Keziah, stop that! Stop it, do you hear! I don't want to listen to such
stuff. I tell you I'm past soft soap, and I didn't think you'd give it
to me."

"Nat!"

"Oh, yes, 'Nat'! A lot you care for 'Nat'! Not a reason on God's
footstool why you won't have me--except one, and that one that you don't
want me."

"Please, Nat! I can hardly believe this is you. This trouble with your
father has upset you. You don't mean what you say. You're not talkin'
like yourself and--"

"Stop it, I tell you. I don't feel like myself. I banked on you, Keziah.
I've lived for you. And now--O Keziah, take it back! Give me a little
hope, just enough to keep my head above water."

"I'd like to, Nat. I only wish I could. But 'twouldn't be any use. I
can't do it."

He snatched his hat from the table and strode to the door. Turning, he
looked at her.

"All right," he said chokingly. "All right. Good-by."

His steps sounded on the oilcloth of the kitchen. Then the back door
slammed. He was gone.

Keziah started, as if the slam of the door had been an electric shock.
During the interview she had been pale and grave but outwardly calm. Now
she sank wearily down in the chair from which she had risen and her
head dropped forward upon her arms on the table. The letter she had been
reading before Captain Nat's arrival fell from her waist to the floor
and lay there, its badly spelled and blotted lines showing black
and fateful against the white paper. And she cried, tears of utter
loneliness and despair.

The clouds thickened as the afternoon passed. The setting sun was
hidden behind them; over the horizon of ocean and bay the fog banks were
rolling in tumbled, crumpled masses. The shadows in the lonely sitting
room deepened. There came a knock at the dining-room door.

Keziah sprang from her chair, smoothed her hair, hastily wiped her eyes,
picked up the dropped letter and went to admit the visitor, whoever he
or she might be. She was glad of the shadows, they prevented her face
from being seen too plainly.

"Good afternoon," she said, opening the door. "Oh! it's you, is it?"

"Yes," admitted Abishai Pepper, standing on the stone step, and shifting
uneasily from one foot to the other. "Yes, Keziah, it's--it's me, thank
you."

"Don't mention it. Well, is Laviny with you?"

"No--o, she ain't. She--she didn't come."

"Hum! Did she know you was comin'?"

"No--o, I don't cal'late she did."

"I see. Well, what do you want?"

Mrs. Coffin's welcome was not too cordial. She had laughed many times
over Abishai's proposal of marriage, but she had never quite forgiven
him for making her ridiculous on that occasion. Incidentally, she did
not feel like laughing.

"What do you want?" she repeated.

Kyan was plainly nervous.

"I only wanted to see Mr. Ellery," he announced. "It's all right,
Keziah. You needn't be afraid."

"Afraid! What on earth should I be afraid of?"

"Why--why, I didn't know but you might be afraid I was goin' to--to talk
about what we talked about when I--I talked to you that day up at--"

"There! that'll do. It ain't me that would have reason to be afraid if
THAT was what you come for. What do you want? Don't stand there dancin'
a jig."

"I only wanted to see Mr. Ellery."

"He's out. Good day."

"But I won't keep him but a minute."

"He's out, I tell you. Do you want to leave a message?"

"No--o. No, I guess not."

"Was it important?"

"Oh! I don't know. Kind of, maybe. I wanted to ask his advice about
somethin'. It's a secret. Only him and me know about it. Good-by."

"Shall I tell him you'll call again? Or ask him to come up to your
house?"

Mr. Pepper, who had started to go, now hurried back to the steps.

"No, no," he protested, in alarm. "Don't you tell him that. I wouldn't
have him come there for no money. Why, Laviny, she--"

"Oh, Laviny isn't in the secret, then?" Keziah smiled in spite of
herself.

"Not exactly. That is, not much. Don't you tell her I come here, will
you? I'll find Mr. Ellery. I know where he is."

"I wouldn't go to the Danielses', if I was you. Elkanah might not like
to have you chasin' after his visitors."

"Oh, the minister ain't at the Danielses', not as late's this, he ain't.
I know where he is."

"You do?" The housekeeper looked at him keenly.

"Yes, sir, I do. I know where he goes Sunday afternoons--and why he
goes, too. Mr. Ellery and me's good friends. We understand each other."

"Look here, Kyan Pepper! What are you talkin' about?"

"Nothin', nothin'. Good day."

"Stop! Stand still! Come in the house here. I want you to."

"No, no, Keziah. Really, I'd love to, but I can't stop."

"Come in, I tell you."

Reluctantly, but lacking the strength of mind to refuse, Mr. Pepper
entered the dining room. Then Mrs. Coffin turned upon him.

"What do you mean," she demanded, "by throwin' out hints that the
minister and you are in some sort of secret? How dare you go round
tellin' people such yarns as that?"

"They ain't yarns. And I never told nobody afore, anyhow. I got to move
along. I'll--"

"Stay where you are. I guess I'll run right up and ask your sister about
this. Perhaps she might--"

"Ss-sh! ss-sh! don't talk that way, Keziah. Don't! Laviny don't know
what I mean. Don't go askin' HER things."

"But you said--"

"I just said I knew where Mr. Ellery goes every Sunday afternoon. He
don't know anybody knows, but I do. That's all there is to it. I shan't
tell. So--"

"Tell? Do you mean there's somethin' Mr. Ellery wouldn't want told?
Don't you dare--I WILL see Laviny!"

"No, no, no, no! 'Tain't nothin' much. I just know where he goes after
he leaves Elkanah's and who he goes to meet. I--Lordy! I hadn't ought to
said that! I--Keziah Coffin, don't you ever tell I told you. I've said
more'n I meant to. If it comes out there'd be the biggest row in the
church that ever was. And I'd be responsible! I would! I'd have to go
on the witness stand and then Laviny'd find out how I--Oh, oh, oh! what
SHALL I do?"

The poor frightened creature's "jig" had, by this time, become a
distracted fandango. But the housekeeper had no mercy on him. She was
beginning to fear for her parson and, for the time, everything else, her
own trouble and the recent interview with Nat, was pushed aside.

"What is it?" she persisted. "WHAT would bring on the row in the church?
WHO does Mr. Ellery meet? Out with it! What do you mean?"

"I mean that the minister meets that Van Horne girl every Sunday
afternoon after he leaves Elkanah's. There, now! It's out, and I don't
give a darn if they hang me for it."

Keziah turned white. She seized Mr. Pepper by the lapel of his Sunday
coat and shook him.

"Grace Van Horne!" she cried. "Mr. Ellery meets Grace Van Horne on
Sunday afternoons? Where?"

"Down in them pines back of Peters's pastur', on the aidge of the
bank over the beach. He's met her there every Sunday for the last six
weeks--longer, for what I know. I've watched 'em."

"You HAVE? YOU have! You've dared to spy on--I think you're lyin' to me.
I don't believe it."

"I ain't lyin'! It's so. I'll bet you anything they're there now,
walkin' up and down and talkin'. What would I want to lie for? You come
with me this minute and I'll show 'em to you."

In the desire to prove his veracity he was on his way to the door. But
Keziah stepped in front of him.

"'Bish Pepper," she said slowly and fiercely, shaking a forefinger in
his face, "you go straight home and stay there. Don't you breathe a word
to a livin' soul of what you say you've seen. Don't you even think it,
or--or dream it. If you do I'll--I'll march straight to Laviny and tell
her that you asked me to marry you. I will, as sure as you're shakin' in
front of me this minute. Now you swear to me to keep still. Swear!"

"How--HOW'll I swear?" begged Kyan. "What do you say when you swear?
I'll say it, Keziah! I'll say anything! I'll--"

"All right. Then mind you remember. Now clear out quick. I want to
think. I MUST think. GO! Get out of my sight!"

Kyan went, glad to escape, but frightened to the soul of him. Keziah
watched him until he turned from the main road into the lighthouse lane.
Then, certain that he really was going straight home, she re-entered
the parsonage and sat down in the nearest chair. For ten minutes she sat
there, striving to grasp the situation. Then she rose and, putting on
her bonnet and shawl, locked the dining-room door, and went out through
the kitchen. On the step she looked cautiously back to see if any of the
neighbors were at their windows. But this was Sunday, the one day when
Trumet people sat in their front parlors. The coast was clear. She
hurried through the back yard, and down the path leading across the
fields. She was going to the pine grove by the shore, going to find out
for herself if Kyan's astonishing story was true.

For if it was true, if the Rev. John Ellery was meeting clandestinely
the adopted daughter of Eben Hammond, it meant--what might it not mean,
in Trumet? If he had fallen in love with a Come-Outer, with Grace Van
Horne of all people, if he should dare think of marrying her, it would
mean the utter wreck of his career as a Regular clergyman. His own
society would turn him out instantly. All sorts of things would be said,
lies and scandal would be invented and believed. His character would be
riddled by the Trumet gossips and the papers would publish the result
broadcast.

And Grace! If she loved a Regular minister, what would happen to her?
Captain Eben would turn her from his door, that was certain. Although
he idolized the girl, Keziah knew that he would never countenance such
a marriage. And if Nat stood by Grace, as he would be almost sure to do,
the breach between father and son would widen beyond healing. If it were
merely a matter of personal selection, Mrs. Coffin would rather have
seen her parson marry Grace than anyone else on earth. As it was, such
a match must not be. It meant ruin for both. She must prevent the affair
going further. She must break off the intimacy. She must save those two
young people from making a mistake which would--She wrung her hands as
she thought of it. Of her own sorrow and trouble she characteristically
thought nothing now. Sacrifice of self was a part of Keziah's nature.

The pines were a deep-green blotch against the cloudy sky and the gloomy
waters of the bay. She skirted the outlying clumps of bayberry and beach
plum bushes and entered the grove. The pine needles made a soft carpet
which deadened her footfalls, and the shadows beneath the boughs were
thick and black. She tiptoed on until she reached the clearing by the
brink of the bluff. No one was in sight. She drew a breath of relief.
Kyan might be mistaken, after all.

Then she heard low voices. As she crouched at the edge of the grove, two
figures passed slowly across the clearing, along the bush-bordered path
and into the shrubbery beyond. John Ellery was walking with Grace
Van Horne. He was holding her hand in his and they were talking very
earnestly.

Keziah did not follow. What would have been the use? This was not the
time to speak. She KNEW now and she knew, also, that the responsibility
was hers. She must go home at once, go home to be alone and to think.
She tiptoed back through the grove and across the fields.

Yet, if she had waited, she might have seen something else which would
have been, at least, interesting. She had scarcely reached the outer
edge of the grove when another figure passed stealthily along that
narrow path by the bluff edge. A female figure treading very carefully,
rising to peer over the bushes at the minister and Grace. The figure of
Miss Annabel Daniels, the "belle" of Trumet. And Annabel's face was not
pleasant to look upon.


CHAPTER XI

IN WHICH CAPTAIN EBEN RECEIVES A CALLER


At the edge of the bluff, just where the pines and the bayberry bushes
were thickest, where the narrow, crooked little footpath dipped over the
rise and down to the pasture land and the salt meadow, John Ellery
and Grace had halted in their walk. It was full tide and the miniature
breakers plashed amid the seaweed on the beach. The mist was drifting in
over the bay and the gulls were calling sleepily from their perch along
the breakwater. A night hawk swooped and circled above the tall "feather
grass" by the margin of the creek. The minister's face was pale, but set
and determined, and he was speaking rapidly.

"I can't help it," he said. "I can't help it. I have made up my mind and
nothing can change it, nothing but you. It rests with you. If you say
yes, then nothing else matters. Will you say it?"

He was holding both her hands now, and though she tried to withdraw
them, he would not let her.

"Will you?" he pleaded.

"I can't," she answered brokenly. "I can't. Think of your church and of
your people. What would they say if--"

"I don't care what they say."

"Oh! yes, you do. Not now, perhaps, but later you will. You don't know
Trumet as I know it. No, it's impossible."

"I tell you there is only one impossible thing. That is that I give you
up. I won't do it. I CAN'T do it! Grace, this is life and death for me.
My church--"

He paused in spite of himself. His church, his first church! He had
accepted the call with pride and a determination to do his best, the
very best that was in him, for the society and for the people whom he
was to lead. Some of those people he had learned to love; many of them,
he felt sure, loved him. His success, his popularity, the growth of the
organization and the praise which had come to him because of it, all
these had meant, and still meant, very much to him. No wonder he paused,
but the pause was momentary.

"My church," he went on, "is my work and I like it. I believe I've done
some good here and I hope to do more. But no church shall say whom I
shall marry. If you care for me, Grace, as I think and hope you do,
we'll face the church and the town together, and they will respect us
for it."

She shook her head.

"Some of them might respect you," she said. "They would say you had been
led into this by me and were not so much to blame. But I--"

"They shall respect my wife," he interrupted, snapping his teeth
together, "or I'll know the reason why."

She smiled mournfully.

"I think they'll tell you the reason," she answered. "No, John, no!
we mustn't think of it. You can see we mustn't. This has all been a
mistake, a dreadful mistake, and I am to blame for it."

"The only mistake has been our meeting in this way. We should have met
openly; I realize it, and have felt it for sometime. It was my fault,
not yours. I was afraid, I guess. But I'll not be a coward any longer.
Come, dear, let's not be afraid another day. Only say you'll marry me
and I'll proclaim it openly, to-night--Yes, from the pulpit, if you say
so."

She hesitated and he took courage from her hesitation.

"Say it," he pleaded. "You WILL say it?"

"I can't! I can't! My uncle--"

"Your uncle shall hear it from me. We'll go to him together. I'll tell
him myself. He worships you."

"Yes, I know. He does worship me. That's why I am sure he had rather see
me dead than married to you, a Regular, and a Regular minister."

"I don't believe it. He can't be so unreasonable. If he is, then you
shouldn't humor such bigotry."

"He has been my father for years, and a dear, kind father."

"I know. That's why I'm so certain we can make him understand. Come,
dear! come! Why should you consider everyone else? Consider your own
happiness. Consider mine."

She looked at him.

"I am considering yours," she said. "That is what I consider most of
all. And, as for uncle, I know--I KNOW he would never consent. His heart
is set on something else. Nat--"

"Nat? Are you considering him, too? Is HE to stand between us? What
right has he to say--"

"Hush! hush! He hasn't said anything. But--but he and uncle have
quarreled, just a little. I didn't tell you, but they have. And I think
I know the reason. Nat is Uncle Eben's idol. If the quarrel should grow
more serious, I believe it would break his heart. I couldn't bear to be
the cause of that; I should never forgive myself."

"You the cause? How could you be the cause of a quarrel between those
two? Grace, think of me."

Here was the selfishness of man and the unselfishness of woman answered.

"John," she said, "it is of you I am thinking. Everything else
could--might be overcome, perhaps. But I must think of your future and
your life. I MUST. That is why--"

He did not wait to hear more. He seized her in his arms and kissed her.

"Then you DO care!" he cried joyfully. "You will marry me?"

For an instant she lay quiet in his embrace, receiving, if not
responding to his caresses. Then she gently but firmly freed herself. He
saw that there were tears in her eyes.

"Grace," he urged, "don't--don't hesitate any longer. You were meant to
be my wife. We were brought together for just that. I know it. Come."

She was crying softly.

"Won't you?" he begged.

"I don't know," she sobbed. "Oh, I don't know! I must think--I MUST!
Wait, please wait, John. Perhaps by to-morrow I can answer. I'll
try--I'll try. Don't ask me again, now. Let me think. Oh, do!"

Doubtless he would have asked her again. He looked as if he meant to.
But just then, drifting through the twilight and the mist, came the
sound of a bell, the bell of the Regular church, ringing for the Sunday
evening meeting. They both heard it.

"Oh!" exclaimed Grace, "that is your bell. You will be late. You must
go, and so must I. Good night."

She started down the path. He hesitated, then ran after her.

"To-morrow?" he questioned eagerly. "Tomorrow, then, you'll say that you
will?"

"Oh, perhaps, perhaps! I mustn't promise. Good night."

It was after seven when Grace reached the old tavern. The housekeeper,
Mrs. Poundberry, was anxiously awaiting her. She wore her bonnet and
Sunday gown and was evidently ready to go out.

"Land sakes alive!" she sputtered. "Where in the name of goodness have
you been to? I was gettin' scairt. Didn't know but you'd run off and got
married, or sunthin' dreadful."

Grace was thankful that the cloudy twilight made it impossible to see
her face distinctly. The housekeeper rattled on without waiting for an
answer.

"Supper's on the table and the kittle's abilin'. You better eat in a
hurry, 'cause it's meetin' time now. Your uncle, he started ten minutes
ago. I'm agoin' right along, too, but I ain't goin' to meetin'; I'm
agoin' up to Betsy E.'s to stay all night. She's got a spine in her
back, as the feller said, and ain't feelin' good, so I told her I'd come
and stay a little spell. S'pose you can get along to-morrow without me?"

"Betsy E." was Mrs. Poundberry's second cousin, an elderly spinster
living alone in a little house near the salt works. Grace assured her
questioner that she could attend to the house and the meals during the
following day, longer if the troublesome "spine" needed company. Mrs.
Poundberry sighed, groaned, and shook her head.

"I shan't stay no longer," she affirmed; "not if Betsy's all over
spines, like one of them Mexican cactus plants. No, marm, my place is
right here and I know it. Your Uncle Eben's mighty feeble and peaked
lately. He ain't long for this world, I'm afraid. You'd ought to be
awful good to him, Gracie."

"I know it," was the hurried reply. "Where's Nat?"

"I don't know. Can't keep track of HIM. Might's well try to put your
finger on a flea. He's here to-day and gone yesterday, as the Scriptur'
says. He ate a little mite of supper, but not much, and then off he
puts. Says he's goin' to walk the fog out'n his head. I told him, s' I,
'You'll walk a plaguey sight more in than you do out, THIS night,'
but he went just the same. He was dreadful kind of dumpy and blue this
evenin'. Seemed to be sort of soggy in his mind. And why he never went
to meetin' with his dad and why his dad never asked him TO go is more'n
I can tell. Land of livin', how I do gabble! My grandmarm used to say
my tongue was loose at both ends and hung in the middle, and I guess she
wa'n't fur off the course. Good-by. Take care of yourself. You can put
what's left of that mock mince pie on the top shelf in the butt'ry and
you'd better heave a dish towel or sunthin' over it to keep the ants
out. There's more ants in this house than there is dollars, a good
sight. Betsy B., she's got a plan for keepin' of 'em out by puttin'
sassers of brimstone round the shelves, but I told her, s' I, 'THEM ants
don't care for no brimstone. They're used to it. Sometimes I b'lieve
they're sent by the everlastin' father of brimstone,' and she--"

She had reached the gate by this time, and Grace shut off the flow of
conversation by closing the door. Then she took a candle from the row
on the dining-room mantel, lighted it, and went up to her own room.
Standing before the old-fashioned bureau with its little oval mirror,
she hastily arranged her hair. She did not wish to go to the prayer
meeting at the chapel, but she felt that she must. The Come-Outer
gatherings, with their noisy singing and shouting, had grown more and
more repugnant to her.

And to-night, of all nights! How could she meet those people who had
known her since she was a child, who boasted of her as one of their
staunchest adherents, who believed in her and trusted her? How could she
meet them and talk with them, knowing what she knew and realizing that
they, too, would know it on the morrow? But her uncle would miss her and
be worried about her if she did not come. She could not bear to trouble
him now; she never loved him so dearly, was never so anxious to humor
his every wish as on this, perhaps the last evening they would spend
together. For, though she would not yet admit it, even to herself, her
decision was made, had really been made the first time John Ellery asked
her weeks before. Only the thought of what might happen to him if she
consented had caused her to hesitate so long.

She blew out the candle and came out into the hall at the head of the
stairs. She was about to descend when she heard voices. The door of the
dining room opened and closed. She felt certain that Nat had returned
and wondered who was with him. Then she heard her uncle's voice,
speaking sharply and with unwonted sternness.

"I don't know what 'tis you want to see me about," said Captain Eben.
"You say it's important; well, it's got to be to keep me from my
meetin'. I ought to be on the Lord's business this minute and nothin'
worldly's goin' to keep me from servin' Him. So speak quick. What is
it?"

The voice that answered was one that Grace recognized, though she
had never before heard in it the note of agitation and undignified
excitement. There were no ponderous pauses and "Hum--ha's" now.

"Don't be a fool, Hammond!" it said. "And don't stand there preaching.
Lock that door! Get a lamp! Are you sure there's nobody but us in the
house?"

Captain Elkanah Daniels! Captain Elkanah visiting a Come-Outer! and
the leader of the Come-Outers!! Grace caught her breath. What in the
world--She started to descend and then a thought flashed to her mind.
She stopped short.

"I ain't the fool, Elkanah," she heard her uncle retort sternly. "The
fools are them who are deef to the call from on high. My foot was on the
threshold of His house when you led me astray. It's never halted there
afore. I warn you--"

"Hush! Shut up! Can't you forget that--that Come-Outer circus of yours
for a minute?"

"Elkanah Daniels, I'll have no blasphemy here. Another word like that
and--"

"WILL you be still and hear me? The Lord's business! I guess you'll
think it's the Lord's business when you understand what I'm going to
tell you! The Lord's business! The devil's business, you better say!
Will you lock that door?"

"My church is waitin' for me and--"

"Let it wait. What's a parcel of yelling Come-Outers compared to the
decency of this town? Stop! Shut up! Eben Hammond, I tell you that your
precious church--yes and mine, the Regular church of Trumet--will go to
rack and ruin if you and me don't pull together this night."

"And I tell you, Elkanah Daniels, I'll have no blasphemy here. That
little sanctuary up the road is founded on a rock and neither you
nor any of your Phariseein' priest-worshipin' crew can shake it. The
Almighty'll protect His own. As for the Reg'lar church, that's no
concern of mine."

"But I tell you 'tis your concern. Or if the church isn't, your own
family is."

"My--my family?"

"Yes, your own family. Huh! that makes you listen, don't it?"

There was an instant of silence. Grace, crouching on the stairs, noticed
the change in her uncle's voice as he answered.

"My own family?" he repeated slowly. "My own--And the Reg'lar
church--What do you mean? Has Nat--"

"No, he ain't. But that cussed girl of yours--"

"Stop!" Eben's shout rang through the house. The listener heard it,
rose, and then sank slowly to her knees.

"Stop!" shouted Captain Hammond. "Elkanah Daniels, for your own sake
now, be careful. If you dast to say a word, another word like that,
I'll--"

"If I dast! The hussy! But there's no use talkin' to you. You're as
crazy as a Bedlamite. Either that, or you're in the game with her. If
you are, I warn you--"

"Stop! What game? What do you mean? Gracie! My Grace! What is it? For
mercy sakes, Elkanah--"

"Humph! I wondered if I couldn't get some sense into you, finally. Lock
that door!"

"I will! I will! But Elkanah--"

"Lock it! Give me the key!"

The click of the lock sounded sharply.

"Where's the lamp?" demanded Daniels. "And the matches? Don't stand
there shaking."

A smell of sulphur floated out into the hall. Then the sickly glow of
the "fluid" lamp shone through the doorway.

"What ails you?" asked Elkanah. "Are you struck dumb? Now go and see if
there's anybody else in the house."

"But--but there ain't. I know there ain't. Hannah's gone and Gracie's at
meetin' by this time."

"She? Humph! Well, maybe she's at meeting and maybe she isn't. Maybe
she's over in Peters's pines, hugging and kissing that man she's met
there every Sunday for I don't know how long--Here! let go, you old
fool! Let go, I tell you!"

A chair fell to the floor with a bang. There was the sound of hard
breathing and rapid footsteps.

"Let go!" panted Daniels. "Are you crazy? Take your hands off me!"

"You liar!" snarled Captain Eben. "You low-lived liar! By the Almighty,
Elkanah Daniels! I'll--You take that back or I'll choke the everlastin'
soul out of you. I will--"

"Let go, you lunatic! You'll kill yourself. Listen! I'm not lying. It's
the truth. She's met a man, I tell you. Been meeting him for months, I
guess. There! now will you listen?"

The footsteps had ceased, but the heavy breathing continued.

"A man!" gasped Eben. "A man! Gracie! It's a--Who is he? What's his
name?"

"His name's John Ellery, and he's minister of the Regular church in this
town; that's who he is! Here! hold up! Good Lord! are you dying? Hold
up!"

The girl on the stairs sprang to her feet. Her head was reeling and she
could scarcely stand, but she blindly began the descent. She must go to
her uncle. She must. But Captain Daniels's voice caused her to halt once
more.

"There! there!" it said in a tone of relief. "That's better. Set still
now. Be quiet, that's it. Shall I get some water?"

"No, no! let me be. Just let me be. I ain't what I used to be and
this--I'm all right, I tell you. Grace! And--and--What was it you just
said? I--I don't b'lieve I heard it right."

"I said that daughter of yours, or niece, or whatever she is, this Grace
Van Horne, has been meeting young Ellery, our minister, in Peters's
grove. Been meeting him and walking with him, and kissing him, and--"

"It's a lie! It ain't so, Elkanah! Prove it or--It--it CAN'T be so, can
it? Please--"

"It is so. She's met him in those pines every Sunday afternoon for a
long time. She was seen there with him this afternoon."

"Who--who saw her?"

"Never mind. The one that did'll never tell--unless it's necessary.
They're fixing to be married, and--"

"MARRIED! She marry a Reg'lar minister! Oh--"

"Hush! Listen! They ain't married yet. We can stop 'em, you and I, if we
get right to work. It isn't too late. Will you help?"

"Will I--I--Go on! tell me more."

"We can stop 'em. I know it would be a good catch for her, the sneaking,
designing--Well, never mind. But it can't be. It shan't be. You've got
to tell her so, Hammond. We folks of the Regular church have pride in
our society; we won't have it disgraced. And we have been proud of our
minister, the young, rattle-headed fool! We'll save him if we can. If
we can't"--the speaker's teeth grated--"then we'll send him to eternal
smash or die trying."

"But I can't believe it's true. It's a mistake; some other girl and not
Gracie. Why, she don't even know him. She wouldn't--But she HAS been out
every Sunday afternoon for weeks. If it SHOULD be!"

"It is. I tell you it is. Don't waste time rolling your eyes and talking
stuff. We've got to work and you've got to work first. I don't know
whether you're only making believe or not. I realize that 'twould be
a good thing for your girl to marry a promising young chap like him,
but--Hush! let me go on. I tell you, Hammond, it can't be. We won't let
her. I won't let her. I'm a man of influence in this town, and outside
of it, too. I'm head of the parish committee and a member of the
National Regular Society. I can't reach your precious ward, maybe, but I
can reach the fellow she's after, and if he marries her, I'll drive 'em
both to the poorhouse.

"Here's where you come in, Hammond. It may be she does really care for
him. Or maybe she's after position and money. Well, you talk to her. You
tell her that if she keeps on going with him, if she doesn't break off
this damnable business now, tomorrow, I'll ruin John Ellery as sure as
I'm a living man. He'll be ruined in Trumet, anyhow. He'll be thrown out
by the parish committee. I'm not sure that his church people won't
tar and feather him. Marrying a low-down Come-Outer hussy! As if there
wa'n't decent girls of good families he might have had! But losing this
church won't be the only thing that'll happen to him. The committee'll
see that he doesn't get another one. I'll use my influence and have him
thrown out of the Regular ministry. Think I can't? What sort of yarns
do you suppose will be told about him and her, meeting the way they did?
Won't the county papers print some fine tales? Won't the Boston ones
enjoy such a scandal? I tell you, Eben Hammond, that young chap's name
will be dragged so deep in the mud it'll never get clean again."

He stopped for breath. His companion was silent. After a moment, he
continued:

"You tell her that, Hammond," he went on. "If she really cares for him,
it'll be enough. She won't let him ruin his life. And I'll keep quiet
till I hear from you. If she's sensible and really decent, then she can
give him his clearance papers without his knowing why she did it and
everything will be a secret and kept so. Nobody else'll ever know. If
she won't do that, then you tell me and I'll have a session with HIM.
If THAT'S no good, then out he goes and she with him; and it's ruination
for both of 'em, reputations and all. Why am I doing this? I'll tell
you. I like him. He isn't orthodox enough to suit me, but I have liked
him mighty well. And Annab--Humph! that's neither here nor there. What
I'm fighting for is the Trumet Regular church. That's MY church and
I'll have no dirty scandal with Come-Outers dragging it down. Now you
understand. Will you tell her what I've said?"

The chair creaked. Evidently, Captain Eben was rising slowly to his
feet.

"Well?" repeated Elkanah.

"Elkanah Daniels," said Eben slowly, his voice shaking from nervous
exhaustion and weakness, but with a fine ring of determination in every
word, "Elkanah Daniels, you listen to me. I've heard you through. If
your yarn is true, then my heart is broke, and I wish I might have died
afore I heard it. But I didn't die and I have heard it. Now listen to
me. I love that girl of mine better'n the whole wide world and yet
I'd ruther see her dead afore me than married to a Reg'lar minister.
Disgrace to HIM! Disgrace to your miser'ble church! What about the
disgrace to MINE? And the disgrace to HER? Ruin to your minister! Ruin
to my girl here and hereafter is what I'm thinkin' of; that and my
people who worship God with me. I'll talk to Grace. I'll talk to
her. But not of what'll happen to him or you--or any of your cantin',
lip-servin' crew. I'll tell her to choose between him and me. And if she
chooses him, I'll send her out of that door. I'll do my duty and read
her out of my congregation. And I'll know she's gone to everlastin'
hell, and that's worse'n the poorhouse. That's all to-night, Elkanah.
Now you better go."

"Humph! Well, I declare! you ARE a bigoted--"

"Stop it! I've kept my hands off you so fur, because I'm the Lord's
servant. But I'm fightin' hard to keep down my old salt-water temper.
You go! There's the door."

"All right, all right! I don't care what you say, so long as it's said
so as to stop her from getting him--and said soon."

"It'll be said to-night. Now go! My people are waitin' at the chapel."

"You're not going to that prayer meeting after THIS?"

"Where else should I go? 'Come unto Me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden.' And--and"--his voice broke--"He knows that I AM heavy laden.
Lord! Lord! do help me, for this is more'n I can bear alone."

The lock turned; the door opened and closed. Grace, clinging to the
balusters, heard Captain Hammond cross the room, slowly and feebly.
She heard him enter the sitting room. Then she heard nothing more,
not another sound, though the minutes dragged on and on, endlessly,
eternally, and each with a message, a sentence repeated over and over
again in her brain. "If she really cares for him, she won't let him ruin
his life."

By and by, pale, but more composed, and with her mind made up, she came
down into the hall. Drawing a long breath, she turned into the sitting
room to face her uncle. By the light shining through the dining-room
door she saw him on his knees by the haircloth sofa. She spoke his name.
He did not answer nor look up. Alarmed, she touched him on the shoulder.
At her touch his arm slid from the couch and he fell gently over upon
his side on the carpet.


CHAPTER XII

IN WHICH CAPTAIN EBEN MAKES PORT


Half past eight. In the vestry of the Regular church John Ellery was
conducting his prayer meeting. The attendance was as large as usual.
Three seats, however, were vacant, and along the settees people were
wondering where Captain Elkanah Daniels and his daughter might be. They
had not missed a service for many a day. And where was Keziah Coffin?

At the Come-Outer chapel the testifying and singing were in full blast.
But Ezekiel Bassett was leading, for Captain Eben Hammond had not
made his appearance. Neither had Grace Van Horne, for that matter, but
Captain Eben's absence was the most astonishing.

"Somethin's the matter," whispered Josiah Badger to his right-hand
neighbor. "Somethin's wrong d-d-d-down to the tavern, sartin' sure.
I'm goin' down there just soon's meetin's over and f-f-f-find out.
Eben wouldn't no more miss leadin' his meetin' from choice than I'd go
without a meal's v-v-vi-vittles. Somethin's happened and I'm goin' to
know what 'tis. You'll go along with me, won't ye, Lot?"

The answer was an affirmative. In fact, almost every worshiper in that
chapel had determined to visit the Hammond tavern as soon as the service
was at an end.


In the Regular parsonage Keziah sat alone by the sitting-room table.
Prayer meeting and supper she had forgotten entirely. The minister
had not come home for his evening meal, and food was furthest from the
housekeeper's thoughts. What should she do? What ought she to do? How
could she avert the disaster so certain to overwhelm those two young
people the moment their secret became known?

It was in vain that she tried to encourage herself with the hope that
Kyan had exaggerated--that the meetings in the grove had not been as
frequent as he said they were, or that they had been merely casual.
She knew better. She had seen the pair together and the look in John
Ellery's eyes. No, the mischief was done, they loved each other; or, at
least, he loved her. There was the great trouble.

Keziah, in spite of her worldly common sense, was an idealist at heart.
Love matches she believed in thoroughly. If the man had not been a
Regular minister, or if he had been a minister in any other town than
narrow, gossiping, squabbling Trumet, where families were divided on
"religious" grounds, neighbors did not speak because their creeds were
different, and even after death were buried in cemeteries three miles
apart; if the girl had been other than the ward of bigoted old Eben
Hammond--then, though they were poor as poverty itself, Keziah would
have joined their hands and rejoiced. Even as it was, she was strongly
tempted to do it. Her sense of right and her every inclination urged her
toward that course. "Face the world together and fight it out," that
was the advice she would like to give them. But no, the battle was too
uneven. The odds were too great. They must not think of marriage, for
the present, and they must cease to meet. Perhaps some day--she tried to
comfort herself with the thought--perhaps some day, years afterwards and
under different circumstances, they might.

--With Ellery she felt certain she could accomplish nothing by argument
or persuasion. She knew him well enough by this time to realize that, if
his mind was made up, all Trumet and all creation could not change it.
He would keep on his course, and, if wrecked, would go down with colors
set and helm lashed. But Grace, perhaps she did not fully realize the
situation. She might be made to see, to listen to reason. And, perhaps,
it was possible--perhaps, on her part, matters were not as serious. The
minister had not acted like a triumphant lover, assured of success;
he had seemed, now that she thought of it, more like a pleader, a
supplicant. Perhaps, if she could see Grace and talk plainly with the
girl, it might not be too late. She determined to try that very night.

She rose and again donned her bonnet and shawl. She was about to blow
out the lamp when she heard rapid footsteps, the sound of some one
running along the sidewalk in front of the house. As she listened, the
footsteps sounded on the path. Whoever the runner was he was coming to
the parsonage. She stepped to the door and opened it.

The runner was a boy, Maria Higgins's boy Isaac, whose widowed mother
lived down by the shore. He did the chores at the Hammond tavern. His
freckled face was dripping with perspiration and he puffed and blew like
a stranded whale.

"What's the matter, Ike?" demanded Keziah. "What is it?"

"Have ye--have ye," panted Ike, "have ye seen the doctor anywheres, Mis
Coffin?"

"Who? Dr. Parker? Have I seen--what in the world are you comin' HERE
after the doctor for?"

"'Cause--'cause I didn't know where else to come. I been to his house
and he ain't to home. Nobody ain't to home. His wife, Mis Parker, she's
gone up to Boston yes'day on the coach, and--and it's all dark and the
house door's open and the shay's gone, so--"

"Who's sick? Who wants him?"

"And--and--all the rest of the houses round here was shut up 'cause
everybody's to meetin'. I peeked in at the meetin' house and he ain't
there, and I see your light and--"

"Who's sick? Tell me that, won't you?"

"Cap'n Eben. He's awful sick. I cal'late he's goin' to die, and Gracie,
she--"

"Cap'n Eben? Eben Hammond! Dyin'? What are you talkin' about?"

"Huh! huh!" puffed the messenger impatiently. "Didn't I tell ye? Cap'n
Eben's adyin'. I seen him. All white and still and--and awful. And
Gracie, she's all alone and--"

"Alone? Where's Nat?"

"She don't know. He ain't to home. But I got to find Dr. Parker."

"Hold on! Stop! I'll tell you where the doctor is most likely. Up to
Mrs. Prince's. She's been poorly and he's prob'ly been called there.
Run! run fast as ever you can and get him and I'll go to Grace this
minute. The poor thing! Have you told anybody else?"

"No, no! ain't seen nobody but you to tell. They was prayin' over to
meetin', and the fellers that waits outside to keep comp'ny with the
girls ain't got there yet. And I never met nobody. And 'twas so blasted
dark I fell down four times and tore my best pants and--"

"S-sh-sh! Listen to me! Don't tell anybody. Not a soul but the doctor.
Half this town'll be runnin' to find out if you do, and that poor girl
must be distracted already. I'll go to her. You get Dr. Parker and tell
him to hurry."

"I'll tell him; don't you fret."

He was gone, running harder than ever. A moment later Keziah followed
him, running also.

It was a misty, black night, and Trumet sidewalks were uneven and hard
to navigate. But she stumbled on, up the main road to the Corners, down
the "Turn-off," past the chapel of the Come-Outers, from the open window
of which sounded the drone of a high, nasal voice. Josiah Badger was
"testifying," and Keziah caught a fragment of the testimony as she
hurried by.

"I says to 'em, says I, I says to 'em, 'I don't care about your smart
mum-mum-minister and what fine sermons he preaches. Let him BE smart,' I
says. Says I, 'Smartness won't g-g-g-git ye into heaven.' ("Amen!") 'No,
sirree! it takes more'n that. I've seen smart folks afore and they got
c-c-cuk-catched up with sooner or later. Pride goes ahead of a tumble,
I've heard tell, and--"

This was all that Keziah heard of Mr. Badger's testimony, for, as she
ran on, a rattle of wheels and the thud of hoofs came from behind her.
Then a rocking chaise, drawn by a galloping horse, shot by. Dr. Parker's
carriage, she was sure. The Higgins boy must have met the doctor and
delivered his message.

The horse and chaise were standing by the front gate of the tavern as
she pantingly drew near it. The side door of the house was ajar and she
opened it softly and entered. The dining room was empty. There was a
light on the sitting-room table and low voices came from the little
bedroom adjoining. Then, from the bedroom, emerged Dr. Parker and Grace
Van Horne. The girl was white and there were dark circles under her
eyes. The doctor was very grave.

Keziah stepped forward and held out both hands. Grace looked, recognized
her, and with a cry ran toward her. Keziah took her in her arms and
soothed her as if she were a child.

"There! there! deary," she said, stroking her hair. "There! there!
deary, don't take it so hard. Poor thing! you're worn out. If I'd only
known sooner."

"O Aunt Keziah!" sobbed the girl. "I'm so glad you've come. It was so
good of you."

"Good! Land of mercy! If I hadn't come, I'd have been worse than the
beasts that perish. Don't cry, don't. How is he now? Some better?"

She looked at the doctor as she asked it. He shook his head
emphatically.

"Well, well, dear," went on Mrs. Coffin hurriedly. "He will be pretty
soon, we'll hope. You mustn't give up the ship, you know. Now you go and
lay down somewheres and I'll get my things off and see what there is to
do. Some good strong tea might be good for all hands, I guess likely.
Where's Hannah Poundberry?"

"She's gone to her cousin's to stay all night. I suppose I ought to send
for her, but I--"

"No, no, you hadn't. Might's well send for a poll parrot, the critter
would be just as much good and talk less. I'll look out for things, me
and the doctor. Where's--where's Nat?"

"He came in just after I sent the boy for the doctor. He's in there
with--with him," indicating the bedroom. "Poor Nat!"

Keziah looked longingly toward the door.

"Yes," she said slowly. "Poor fellow, it's an awful shock to him. He and
his father are--But there! you lay down on that lounge."

"I can't lie down. I can't do anything but think. Oh, what a dreadful
day this has been! And I thought it was going to be such a happy one!"

"Yes, yes, deary, I know."

Grace raised her head.

"You know?" she repeated, looking up into the housekeeper's face.

"I mean I know it's been a dreadful day," explained Keziah quickly.
"Yes, indeed it has," with a sigh. "But there! our moanin' over it don't
cheer it up any. Will you lay down? No? Well, then, SET down, there's a
good girl."

Grace, protesting that she couldn't sit down, she couldn't leave uncle,
and there were so many things to do, was at last persuaded by Keziah and
the doctor to rest for a few moments in the big rocker. Then Mrs. Coffin
went into the kitchen to prepare the tea. As she went, she beckoned to
Dr. Parker, who joined her a moment later.

"Well, doctor?" she asked anxiously.

The stout, gray-haired old physician--he had practiced in Trumet for
nearly thirty years--shook his head.

"Not a single chance," he whispered. "He may possibly live till morning,
but I doubt if he lasts an hour. It's his heart. I've expected it at
any time. Ever since he had that shock, I've been at him to take things
easy; but you might as well talk to a graven image. That Come-Outer
foolishness is what really killed him, though just what brought on this
attack I can't make out. Grace says she found him lying on the floor by
the sofa. He was unconscious then. I'm rather worried about her. She was
very near to fainting when I got here."

"No wonder. All alone in this ark of a house and nobody to help or to
send. Lucky she found that Ike Higgins. Say, I wonder if the young
one's around here now? If he is, he must stand at the gate and scare off
Come-Outers. The whole chapel, mates, crew, and cabin boy, 'll be down
here soon's meetin's over to see what kept Eben. And they mustn't get
in."

"I should say not. I'll hunt up Ike. If a Come-Outer gets into this
house to-night I'll eat him, that's all."

"Some of 'em would give you dyspepsy, I guess. Yes, Grace, I'll be there
in a jiffy."

The doctor left the house to find young Higgins and post him at the
gate. The boy, who had been listening under the window, was proud of his
new responsibility.

"I'll fix 'em, doctor," he declared. "I only hope old Zeke Bassett
comes. He lammed me with a horsewhip t'other day, 'cause I was ridin'
behind his ox cart. If he tried to git by me, I'll bounce a rock off'n
his Sunday hat."

"Doctor," whispered Keziah from the kitchen window. "Doctor, come quick.
Nat wants you."

Captain Nat was standing at the door of the bedroom. His face was drawn
and he had seemingly grown years older since noon.

"He's come to himself, doc," he whispered. "He don't remember how it
happened or anything. And he wants us all. Why! why, Keziah! are you
here?"

"Yes, Nat. I've been here a little while."

He looked at her steadily and his eyes brightened just a trifle.

"Did you come to see me?" he asked. "Was it about what I said this--"

"No, no, Nat; no. I heard the news and that Grace was alone; so I come
right down."

He nodded wearily.

"You can come in, too," he said. "I know dad likes you and I guess--Wait
a minute; I'll ask him." He stepped back into the bedroom. "Yes," he
nodded, returning, "you come, too. He wants you."

The little room, Captain Eben's own, was more like a skipper's cabin
than a chamber on land. A narrow, single bed, a plain washstand, a
battered, painted bureau and a single chair--these made up the list of
furniture. Two pictures, both of schooners under full sail, hung on the
walls. Beside them hung a ship's barometer, a sextant, and a clock that
struck the "bells," instead of the hours as the landsman understands
them. In the corner stood the captain's big boots and his oilskins hung
above them. His Sunday cane was there also. And on the bureau was a
worn, heavy Bible.

Dr. Parker brushed by the others and bent over the bed.

"Well, cap'n," he said cheerily, "how's she headed? How are you feeling
now?"

The old face on the pillow smiled feebly.

"She's headed for home, I guess, doc," said Captain Eben. "Bound for
home, and the harbor light broad abeam, I cal'late."

"Oh, no! you'll make a good many voyages yet."

"Not in this hulk, I won't, doctor. I hope I'll have a new command
pretty soon. I'm trustin' in my owners and I guess they'll do the fair
thing by me. Halloo, Gracie, girl! Well, your old uncle's on his beam
ends, ain't he?"

Grace glanced fearfully at his face. When he spoke her name she shrank
back, as if she feared what he might say. But he only smiled as, with
the tears streaming down her face, she bent over and kissed him.

"There! there!" he protested. "You mustn't cry. What are you cryin'
about me for? We know, you and me, who's been lookin' out for us and
keepin' us on the course all these years. We ain't got anything to cry
for. You just keep on bein' a 'good girl, Gracie, and goin' to the right
church and--I s'pose Ezekiel'll lead in meetin' now," he added. "I do
wish he was a stronger man."

The doctor, whose fingers had been upon the old man's wrist, looked up
at Nat significantly.

"There, dad," said the latter, "don't you worry about Zeke Bassett, nor
anything else. You just lay in dry dock and let Parker here overhaul
your runnin' riggin' and get you fit for sea. That's what you've got to
do."

"I'm fit and ready for the sea I'm goin' to sail," was the answer. His
eyes wandered from his son to Mrs. Coffin. For an instant he seemed
puzzled. Then he said:

"'Evenin', Keziah. I don't know why you're here, but--"

"I heard that Grace was alone and that you was sick, Eben. So I come
right down, to help if I could."

"Thank ye. You're a good-hearted woman, Keziah, even though you
ain't seen the true light yet. And you're housekeeper for that hired
priest--a--a--" He paused, and a troubled look came over his face.

"What is it, dad?" asked Nat.

"I--I--Where's Gracie? She's here, ain't she?"

"Yes, uncle, I'm here. Here I am," said the girl. His fingers groped for
her hand and seized it.

"Yes, yes, you're here," murmured Captain Eben. "I--I--for a minute or
so, I--I had an awful dream about you, Gracie. I dreamed--Never mind.
Doc, answer me this now, true and honest, man to man: Can you keep me
here for just a little spell longer? Can you? Try! Ten minutes, say. Can
you?"

"Of course I can. Cap'n Hammond, what are you--"

"I know. That's all right. But I ain't a young one to be petted and lied
to. I'm a man. I've sailed ships. I've been on blue water. I'm goin' to
make port pretty soon, and I know it, but I want to get my decks clear
fust, if I can. Gracie, stand still. Nat, run alongside where I can see
you plainer. Keziah, you and the doctor stay where you be. I want you to
witness this."

"Cap'n," protested Dr. Parker, "if I were you I wouldn't--"

"Belay! Silence there, for'ard! Nat, you're my boy, ain't you? You set
some store by the old man, hey?"

"I--I guess I do, dad."

"Yes, I guess you do, too. You've been a pretty good boy; stubborn
and pig-headed sometimes, but, take you by and large, pretty good. And
Gracie, you've been a mighty good girl. Never done nothin' I wouldn't
like, nothin' mean nor underhand nor--"

"Hush, uncle! Hush! Please hush!"

"Well, you ain't; so why should I hush? In this--this dream I had, seems
'sif you--seems as if a man come to me and said that you was--It WAS a
dream, wa'n't it?"

He tried to rise. Nat and the doctor started forward. Grace shrank back.

"Of course it was, cap'n," said the doctor briskly. "Now you mustn't
fret yourself in this way. Just lie still and--"

"Belay, I tell you. Yes, I guess 'twas a dream. It had to be, but 'twas
so sort of real that I--How long have I been this way?"

"Oh, a little while! Now just--"

"Hush! Don't pull your hand away, Gracie. Nat, give me yours. That's it.
Now I put them two hands together. See, doctor? See, Keziah?"

"He's wandering. We must stop this," muttered Parker. Mrs. Coffin, who
began to comprehend what was coming, looked fearfully at Nat and the
girl.

"No, I ain't wanderin', neither," declared the old Come-Outer fretfully.
"I'm sane as ever I was and if you try to stop me I'll--Gracie, your
Uncle Eben's v'yage is 'most over. He's almost to his moorin's and
they're waitin' for him on the pier. I--I won't be long now. Just a
little while, Lord! Give me just a little while to get my house in
order. Gracie, I don't want to go till I know you'll be looked out for.
I've spoke to Nat about this, but I ain't said much to you. Seems if I
hadn't, anyhow; I ain't real sartin; my head's all full of bells ringin'
and--and things."

"Don't, uncle, don't!" pleaded Grace. "Don't worry about me. Think of
yourself, please."

"S-sh-sh! Don't put me off. Just listen. I want you to marry my boy,
after I'm gone. I want you to say you will--say it now, so's I can hear
it. Will you, Gracie?"

Grace would have withdrawn her hand, but he would not let her. He clung
to it and to that of his son with all his failing strength.

"Will you, Gracie?" he begged. "It's the last thing I'm goin' to ask of
you. I've tried to be sort of good to you, in my way, and--"

"Don't, don't!" she sobbed. "Let me think a minute, uncle, dear. Oh, do
let me think!"

"I ain't got time, Gracie. You'll have to say it now, or else--All
right, then, think; but think quick."

Grace was thinking. "If she really cares for him, she won't let him ruin
his life." That was what Captain Elkanah had said. And here was a way to
save him from ruin.

"Won't you say it for me, Gracie?" pleaded Captain Eben. She hesitated
no longer.

"Yes, uncle," she answered through tears, "if Nat wants me he can have
me."

Keziah clasped her hands. Captain Eben's face lit up with a great joy.

"Thank the Almighty!" he exclaimed. "Lord, I do thank you. Nat, boy,
you're consider'ble older than she is and you'll have to plan for her.
You be a good husband to her all her days, won't ye? Why, what are you
waitin' for? Why don't you answer me?"

Nat groaned aloud.

"A minute, dad," he stammered. "Just give me a minute, for Heaven sakes!
Keziah--"

"Keziah!" repeated Eben. "Keziah? What are you talkin' to HER for? She
knows there couldn't be no better match in the world. You do know it,
don't ye, Keziah?"

"Yes," said Keziah slowly. "I guess--I guess you're right, Eben."

"Keziah Coffin," cried Nat Hammond, "do you tell me to marry Grace?"

"Yes, Nat, I--I think your father's right."

"Then--then--what difference does--All right, dad. Just as Grace says."

"Thank God!" cried Captain Eben. "Doctor, you and Mrs. Coffin are
witnesses to this. There! now my decks are clear and I'd better get
ready to land. Gracie, girl, the Good Book's over there on the bureau.
Read me a chapter, won't you?"

An hour later Keziah sat alone in the dining room. She had stolen away
when the reading began. Dr. Parker, walking very softly, came to her and
laid his hand on her shoulder.

"He's gone," he said simply.


CHAPTER XIII

IN WHICH KEZIAH BREAKS THE NEWS


It was nearly five o'clock, gray dawn of what was to be a clear,
beautiful summer morning, when Keziah softly lifted the latch and
entered the parsonage. All night she had been busy at the Hammond
tavern. Busy with the doctor and the undertaker, who had been called
from his bed by young Higgins; busy with Grace, soothing her, comforting
her as best she could, and petting her as a mother might pet a
stricken child. The poor girl was on the verge of prostration, and from
hysterical spasms of sobs and weeping passed to stretches of silent,
dry-eyed agony which were harder to witness and much more to be feared.

"It is all my fault," she repeated over and over again. "All my fault! I
killed him! I killed him, Aunt Keziah! What shall I do? Oh, why couldn't
I have died instead? It would have been so much better, better for
everybody."

"Ss-sh! ss-sh! deary," murmured the older woman. "Don't talk so; you
mustn't talk so. Your uncle was ready to go. He's been ready for ever so
long, and those of us who knew how feeble he was expected it any time.
'Twa'n't your fault at all and he'd say so if he was here now."

"No, he wouldn't. He'd say just as I do, that I was to blame. You don't
know, Aunt Keziah. Nobody knows but me."

"Maybe I do, Gracie, dear; maybe I do. Maybe I understand better'n you
think I do. And it's all been for the best. You'll think so, too, one
of these days. It seems hard now; it is awful hard, you poor thing, but
it's all for the best, I'm sure. Best for everyone. It's a mercy he went
sudden and rational, same as he did. The doctor says that, if he hadn't,
he'd have been helpless and bedridden and, maybe, out of his head for
another year. He couldn't have lived longer'n that, at the most."

"But you DON'T know, Aunt Keziah! You don't know what I--I AM to blame.
I'll never forgive myself. And I'll never be happy again."

"Yes, you will. You'll come, some day, to think it was best and right,
for you and--and for others. I know you think you'll never get over it,
but you will. Somehow or other you will, same as the rest of us have
had to do. The Lord tries us mighty hard sometimes, but He gives us the
strength to bear it. There! there! don't, deary, don't."

Dr. Parker was very anxious.

"She must rest," he told Mrs. Coffin. "She must, or her brain will give
way. I'm going to give her something to make her sleep and you must get
her to take it."

So Keziah tried and, at last, Grace did take the drug. In a little while
she was sleeping, uneasily and with moans and sobbings, but sleeping,
nevertheless.

"Now it's your turn, Keziah," said the doctor. "You go home now and
rest, yourself. We don't need you any more just now."

"Where's--where's Cap'n Nat?" asked Keziah.

"He's in there with his father. He bears it well, although he is mighty
cut up. Poor chap, he seems to feel that he is to blame, somehow. Says
Cap'n Eben and he had disagreed about something or other and he fears
that hastened the old man's death. Nonsense, of course. It was bound to
come and I told him so. 'Twas those blasted Come-Outers who really did
it, although I shan't say so to anyone but you. I'm glad Nat and the
girl have agreed to cruise together. It's a mighty good arrangement. She
couldn't have a better man to look out for her and he couldn't have a
better wife. I suppose I'm at liberty to tell people of the engagement,
hey?"

"Yes. Yes, I don't see any reason why not. Yes--I guess likely you'd
better tell 'em."

"All right. Now you go home. You've had a hard night, like the rest of
us."

How hard he had no idea. And Keziah, as she wearily entered the
parsonage, realized that the morning would be perhaps the hardest
of all. For upon her rested the responsibility of seeing that the
minister's secret was kept. And she, and no other, must break the news
to him.

The dining room was dark and gloomy. She lighted the lamp. Then she
heard a door open and Ellery's voice, as he called down the stairs.

"Who is it?" he demanded. "Mrs. Coffin?"

She was startled. "Yes," she said softly, after a moment. "Yes, Mr.
Ellery, it's me. What are you doin' awake at such an hour's this?"

"Yes, I'm awake. I couldn't sleep well to-night, somehow. Too much
to think of, I imagine. But where have you been? Why weren't you at
meeting? And where--Why, it's almost morning!"

She did not answer at once. The temptation was to say nothing now, to
put off the trying scene as long as possible.

"It's morning," repeated the minister. "Are you sick? Has anything
happened?"

"Yes," she answered slowly, "somethin' has happened. Are you dressed?
Could you come down?"

He replied that he would be down in a moment. When he came he found
her standing by the table waiting for him. The look of her face in the
lamplight shocked him.

"Why, Mrs. Coffin!" he exclaimed. "What IS it? You look as if you had
been through some dreadful experience."

"Maybe I have," she replied. "Maybe I have. Experiences like that come
to us all in this life, to old folks and young, and we have to bear 'em
like men and women. That's the test we're put to, Mr. Ellery, and the
way we come through the fire proves the stuff we're made of. Sorrows and
disappointments and heartbreaks and sicknesses and death--"

She paused on the word. He interrupted her.

"Death?" he repeated. "Death? Is some one dead, some one I know? Mrs.
Coffin, what is it you are trying to tell me?"

Her heart went out to him. She held out both her hands.

"You poor boy," she cried, "I'm trying to tell you one of the hardest
things a body can tell. Yes, some one is dead, but that ain't all. Eben
Hammond, poor soul, is out of his troubles and gone."

"Eben Hammond! Captain Eben? Dead! Why, why--"

"Yes, Eben's gone. He was took down sudden and died about ten o'clock
last night. I was there and--"

"Captain Eben dead! Why, he was as well as--as--She said--Oh, I must go!
I must go at once!"

He was on his way to the door, but she held it shut.

"No," she said gravely, "you mustn't go. You mustn't go, Mr. Ellery.
That's the one thing you mustn't do."

"You don't understand. By and by I can tell you why I must be there, but
now--"

"I do understand. I understand it all. Lord help us! if I'd only
understood sooner, how much of this might have been spared. Why DIDN'T
you tell me?"

"Mrs. Coffin--"

"John--you won't mind my callin' you John. I'm old enough, pretty nigh,
to be your mother, and I've come to feel almost as if I was. John,
you've got to stay here with me. You can't go to that house. You can't
go to her."

"Mrs. Coffin, what are you saying? Do you know--Have you--"

"Yes, I know all about it. I know about the meetin's in the pines and
all. Oh, why didn't you trust me and tell me? If you had, all would have
been SO much better!"

He looked at her in utter amazement. The blood rushed to his face.

"You know THAT?" he whispered.

"Yes, I know."

"Did she tell--"

"No, nobody told. That is, only a little. I got a hint and I suspicioned
somethin' afore. The rest I saw with my own eyes."

He was now white, but his jaw shot forward and his teeth closed.

"If you do know," he said, "you must realize that my place is with her.
Now, when she is in trouble--"

"Would you want to make that trouble greater? More than she could bear?"

"I think I might help her to bear it. Mrs. Coffin, you have been my
truest friend, but one, in Trumet. You HAVE been like a mother to me.
But I have thought this out to the end and I shall go through with it.
It is my affair--and hers. If my own mother were alive and spoke as you
do, I should still go through with it. It is right, it is my life. I'm
not ashamed of anything I've done. I'm proud. I'm proud of her. And
humble only when I think how unworthy I am to be her husband. I suppose
you are fearful of what my congregation will say. Well, I've thought of
that, too, and thought it through. Whatever they say and whatever they
do will make no difference. Do you suppose I will let THEM keep me from
her? Please open that door."

He was very tragic and handsome--and young, as he stood there. The tears
overflowed the housekeeper's eyes as she looked at him. If her own love
story had not been broken off at its beginning, if she had not thrown
her life away, she might have had a son like that. She would have given
all that the years had in store for her, given it gladly, to have been
able to open the door and bid him go. But she was firm.

"It ain't the congregation, John," she said. "Nor Trumet, nor your
ministry. That means more'n you think it does, now; but it ain't that.
You mustn't go to her because--well, because she don't want you to."

"Doesn't want me? I know better." He laughed in supreme scorn.

"She doesn't want you, John. She wouldn't see you if you went. She would
send you away again, sure, sartin sure. She would. And if you didn't
go when she sent you, you wouldn't be the man I hope you are. John, you
mustn't see Grace again. She ain't yours. She belongs to some one else."

"Some one else!" He repeated the words in a whisper. "Some one ELSE?
Why, Mrs. Coffin, you must be crazy! If you expect me to--"

"Hush! hush! I ain't crazy, though there's times when I wonder I ain't.
John, you and Grace have known each other for a few months, that's
all. You've been attracted to her because she was pretty and educated
and--and sweet; and she's liked you because you were about the only
young person who could understand her and--and all that. And so you've
been meetin' and have come to believe--you have, anyway--that 'twas
somethin' more than likin'. But you neither of you have stopped to think
that a marriage between you two was as impossible as anything could be.
And, besides, there's another man. A man she's known all her life and
loved and respected--"

"Stop, Mrs. Coffin! stop this wicked nonsense. I won't hear it."

"John, Grace Van Horne is goin' to marry Cap'n Nat Hammond. There!
that's the livin' truth."

In his absolute confidence and faith he had again started for the door.
Now he wheeled and stared at her. She nodded solemnly.

"It's the truth," she repeated. "She and Nat are promised to each other.
Cap'n Eben, on his deathbed, asked Dr. Parker and me to be witnesses to
the engagement. Now you see why you mustn't go nigh her again."

He did not answer. Instead, he stood silently staring. She stepped
forward and laid a hand on his shoulder.

"Set down, John," she said. "Set down and let me tell you about it. Yes,
yes, you must. If I tell you, you'll understand better. There! there!
don't you interrupt me yet and don't you look that way. Do set down."

She led him over to the rocking-chair and gently forced him into it.
He obeyed, although with no apparent realization of what he was doing.
Still with her hand on his shoulder she went on speaking. She told him
of her visit to the Hammond tavern, saying nothing of Mr. Pepper's
call nor of her own experience in the grove. She told of Captain Eben's
seizure, of what the doctor said, and of the old Come-Outer's return to
consciousness. Then she described the scene in the sick room and how Nat
and Grace had plighted troth. He listened, at first stunned and stolid,
then with growing impatience.

"So you see," she said. "It's settled; they're engaged, and Dr. Parker
will tell everybody of the engagement this very mornin'. It wa'n't any
great surprise to me. Those two have been brought up together; 'twas the
natural thing that was almost bound to happen. Eben's heart was set on
it for years. And she'll have a good husband, John, that I know. And
she'll do her best to make him happy. He's a good man and--"

The minister sprang to his feet.

"A good man!" he cried furiously. "A good man! One who will make use of
a dying father to drive a girl into--Stand aside, Mrs. Coffin!"

"John, you mustn't speak that way of Nat Hammond. He ain't the kind to
drive a girl against her will. And Grace is not one to be driven."

"Are you blind? Can't you see? Why, only yesterday, she--Do you think I
shall permit such a wicked crime as that to--"

"Ss-sh! No, it ain't wicked, it's right. Right and best for everybody,
for her especial. Yesterday she might have forgot for a minute. But
think, just think what would have happened if she cared for you."

"But she does! I know she does. Mrs. Coffin, stand away from that door."

"No, John; if you go out of that door now, to go to her, you'll have to
go by main strength. You shan't wreck yourself and that girl if I can
help it. Be a man."

The pair looked at each other. Keziah was determined, but so, evidently,
was he. She realized, with a sinking heart, that her words had made
absolutely no impression. He did not attempt to pass, but he slowly
shook his head.

"Mrs. Coffin," he said, "perhaps you believe you're doing right. I
hope--yes, I'll give you credit for that belief. But I KNOW I am right
and I shall go to her. Such a--a BARGAIN as that you have just told me
of is no more to be regarded than--"

"John, I beg you--"

"NO."

"Then go. Go this minute and break her heart and ruin her life and spoil
her good name in this village where she's lived since she was eight
years old. Go! be selfish. I suppose that's part of a man's make-up. Go!
Never mind her. Go!"

"I do 'mind' her, as you call it. I AM thinking of her."

"No, you're not. It's yourself."

"If it was myself--and God knows it is the only happiness on earth for
me--if it was only myself, and I really thought she wished me to stay
away, I'd stay, I'd stay, though I'd pray to die before this hour was
over."

"I know, I know. I've prayed to die myself afore now, but I'm here yet;
and so will you be. We can't die so easy."

"But I know--"

"Do you suppose SHE would come to YOU if she knew it would be your
ruin?"

He hesitated. The last time they met, ages before--no, only the previous
afternoon--she had told him it was his happiness and his future only
that she thought of. He choked and drew his hand across his eyes.

"Mrs. Coffin," he said, "you tell me it will be her ruin. YOU tell me
so. You SAY she doesn't want me. I tell you that the only thing that
will keep me from her is hearing that from her own lips. When she tells
me to leave her I will, and not before."

"She'll tell you, John; she'll tell you. I know you must despise me,
pretty nigh. I cal'late you think I'm a worldly old woman, carin'
nothin' for your feelin's. Maybe I've talked pretty hard in the last few
minutes, but I haven't meant to be hard. To be honest, I didn't think
you'd listen to me. I expected you'd insist on seein' her yourself.
Well, then, go and see her, if you must, though what will come of it
can only be more trouble, for you run the risk of folks knowin' it and
beginnin' to wonder. And I know Grace. She's made up her mind and won't
change it. But I do ask you this: I ask you not to go now. Wait a little
while, do. I left her asleep, worn out by what she's been through and
under the effects of the doctor's sleepin' medicine. He said she must
rest or he was afraid her brain would give out. For her sake, then,
wait a little. Then, if you don't hear from her, maybe I can arrange a
meetin' place where you can see her without anyone's knowin' it. I'll
try. But do wait a little while, for her sake, won't you?"

At last he was listening and hesitating.

"Won't you?" begged Keziah.

"Yes," he answered slowly. "I'll wait. I'll wait until noon, somehow,
if I can. I'll try. But not a minute later. Not one. You don't know what
you're asking, Mrs. Coffin."

"Yes, I do. I know well. And I thank you for her sake."

But he did not have to wait until noon. At six o'clock, through the
dew-soaked grass of the yard, came the Higgins boy. For the first time
in his short life he had been awake all night and he moved slowly.

The housekeeper opened the door. Ike held up an envelope, clutched in a
grimy hand.

"It's for you, Mrs. Keziah," he said. "Gracie, she sent it. There ain't
no answer."

Keziah took the letter. "How is she? And how's Nat?" she asked.

"They're doin' pretty well, so ma says. Ma's there now and they've sent
for Hannah Poundberry. Gee!" he added, yawning, "I ain't slept a wink.
Been on the jump, now I tell ye. Didn't none of them Come-Outers git in,
not one. I sent 'em on the home tack abilin'. You ought to hear me give
old Zeke Bassett Hail Columby! Gosh! I was just ahopin' HE'D come."

Mrs. Coffin closed the door and tore open the envelope. Within
was another addressed, in Grace's handwriting, to Mr. Ellery. The
housekeeper entered the study, handed it to him and turned away.

The minister, who had been pacing the floor, seized the note eagerly.
It was written in pencil and by a hand that had trembled much. Yet there
was no indecision in the written words.


"Dear John," wrote Grace. "I presume Aunt Keziah has told you of uncle's
death and of my promise to Nat. It is true. I am going to marry him. I
am sure this is right and for the best. Our friendship was a mistake and
you must not see me again. Please don't try.

"GRACE VAN HORNE."


Beneath was another paragraph.


"Don't worry about me. I shall be happy, I am sure. And I shall hope
that you may be. I shall pray for that."


The note fell to the floor with a rustle that sounded loud in the
stillness. Then Keziah heard the minister's step. She turned. He was
moving slowly across the room.

"John," she cried anxiously, "you poor boy!"

He answered without looking back.

"I'm--going--up--to--my--room," he said, a pause between each word. "I
want to be alone awhile, Mrs. Coffin."

Wearily Keziah set about preparing breakfast. Not that she expected the
meal would be eaten, but it gave her something to do and occupied her
mind. The sun had risen and the light streamed in at the parsonage
windows. The breeze blew fresh and cool from the ocean. It was a
magnificent morning.

She called to him that breakfast was ready, but he did not answer. She
could eat nothing herself, and, when the table was cleared, prepared
to do the week's washing, for Monday is always washday in Trumet. Noon
came, dinner time, but still he did not come down. At last Keziah could
stand it no longer. She determined to go to him. She climbed the steep
stairs and rapped on the door of his room.

"Yes?" she heard him say.

"It's me," was the reply. "Mr. Ellery, can I come in? I know you want
to be alone, but I don't think you'd ought to be, too much. I'd like to
talk with you a few minutes; may I?"

A moment passed before he told her to enter. He was sitting in a chair
by the window, dressed just as he had been when she returned from the
tavern. She looked sharply at his face as it was turned toward her. His
eyes were dry and in them was an expression so hopeless and dreary that
the tears started to her own.

"John," she said, "I couldn't bear to think of your facin' it alone up
here. I just had to come."

He smiled, and the smile was as hopeless as the look in his eyes.

"Face it?" he repeated. "Well, Mrs. Coffin, I must face it, I suppose.
I've been facing it ever since--since I knew. And I find it no easier."

"John, what are you goin' to do?"

He shook his head. "I don't know," he said. "Go away somewhere, first
of all, I guess. Go somewhere and--and try to live it down. I can't, of
course, but I must try."

"Go away? Leave Trumet and your church and your congregation?"

"Did you suppose I could stay here?"

"I hoped you would."

"And see the same people and the same places? And do the same things?
See--see HER! Did you"--he moved impatiently--"did you expect me to
attend the wedding?"

She put out her hand. "I know it'll be hard," she said, "stayin' here, I
mean. But your duty to others--"

"Don't you think we've heard enough about duty to others? How about my
duty to myself?"

"I guess that's the last thing we ought to think about in the world, if
we do try to be fair and square. Your church thinks a heap of you, John.
They build on you. You've done more in the little while you've been here
than Mr. Langley did in his last fifteen years. We've grown and we're
doin' good--doin' it, not talkin' it in prayer meetin'. The parish
committee likes you and the poor folks in the society love you. Old Mrs.
Prince was tellin' me, only a little spell ago, that she didn't know how
she'd have pulled through this dreadful time if 'twa'n't for you. And
there's lots of others. Are you goin' to leave them? And what reason
will you give for leavin'?"

He shook his head. "I don't know," he answered. "I may not give any. But
I shall go."

"I don't believe you will. I don't believe you're that kind. I've
watched you pretty sharp since you and I have been livin' together and I
have more faith in you than that comes to. You haven't acted to me like
a coward and I don't think you'll run away."

"Mrs. Coffin, it is so easy for you to talk. Perhaps if I were in your
place I should be giving good advice about duty and not running away and
so on. But suppose you were in mine."

"Well, suppose I was."

"Suppose--Oh, but there! it's past supposing."

"I don't know's 'tis. My life hasn't been all sunshine and fair winds,
by no means."

"That's true. I beg your pardon. You have had troubles and, from what
I hear, you've borne them bravely. But you haven't had to face anything
like this."

"Haven't I? Well, what is it you're asked to face? Disappointment? I've
faced that. Sorrow and heartbreak? I've faced them."

"You've never been asked to sit quietly by and see the one you love more
than all the world marry some one else."

"How do you know I ain't? How do you know I ain't doin' just that now?"

"Mrs. Coffin!"

"John Ellery, you listen to me. You think I'm a homely old woman,
probably, set in my ways as an eight-day clock. I guess I look like it
and act like it. But I ain't so awful old--on the edge of forty, that's
all. And when I was your age I wa'n't so awful homely, either. I had
fellers aplenty hangin' round and I could have married any one of a
dozen. This ain't boastin'; land knows I'm fur from that. I was brought
up in this town and even when I was a girl at school there was only one
boy I cared two straws about. He and I went to picnics together and
to parties and everywhere. Folks used to laugh and say we was keepin'
comp'ny, even then.

"Well, when I was eighteen, after father died, I went up to New Bedford
to work in a store there. Wanted to earn my own way. And this young
feller I'm tellin' you about went away to sea, but every time he come
home from a voyage he come to see me and things went on that way till we
was promised to each other. The engagement wa'n't announced, but 'twas
so, just the same. We'd have been married in another year. And then we
quarreled.

"'Twas a fool quarrel, same as that kind gen'rally are. As much my fault
as his and as much his as mine, I cal'late. Anyhow, we was both proud,
or thought we was, and neither would give in. And he says to me, 'You'll
be sorry after I'm gone. You'll wish me back then.' And says I, BEIN' a
fool, 'I guess not. There's other fish in the sea.' He sailed and I did
wish him back, but I wouldn't write fust and neither would he. And then
come another man."

She paused, hesitated, and then continued.

"Never mind about the other man. He was handsome then, in a way, and he
had money to spend, and he liked me. He wanted me to marry him. If--if
the other, the one that went away, had written I never would have
thought of such a thing, but he didn't write. And, my pride bein' hurt,
and all, I finally said yes to the second chap. My folks did all they
could to stop it; they told me he was dissipated, they said he had a bad
name, they told me twa'n't a fit match. And his people, havin' money,
was just as set against his takin' a poor girl. Both sides said ruin
would come of it. But I married him.

"Well, for the first year 'twa'n't so bad. Not happiness exactly, but
not misery either. That come later. His people was well off and he'd
never worked much of any. He did for a little while after we was
married, but not for long. Then he begun to drink and carry on and lost
his place. Pretty soon he begun to neglect me and at last went off to
sea afore the mast. We was poor as poverty, but I could have stood that;
I did stand it. I took in sewin' and kept up an appearance, somehow.
Never told a soul. His folks come patronizin' around and offered me
money, so's I needn't disgrace them. I sent 'em rightabout in a hurry.
Once in a while he'd come home, get tipsy and abuse me. Still I said
nothin'. Thank God, there was no children; that's the one thing I've
been thankful for.

"You can't keep such things quiet always. People are bound to find out.
They come to me and said, 'Why don't you leave him?' but I wouldn't.
I could have divorced him easy enough, there was reasons plenty, but I
wouldn't do that. Then word came that he was dead, drowned off in the
East Indies somewheres. I come back here to keep house for Sol, my
brother, and I kept house for him till he died and they offered me this
place here at the parsonage. There! that's my story, part of it, more'n
I ever told a livin' soul afore, except Sol."

She ceased speaking. The minister, who had sat silent by the window,
apathetically listening or trying to listen, turned his head.

"I apologize, Mrs. Coffin," he said dully, "you have had trials, hard
ones. But--"

"But they ain't as hard as yours, you think? Well, I haven't quite
finished yet. After word come of my husband's death, the other man come
and wanted me to marry him. And I wanted to--oh, how I wanted to! I
cared as much for him as I ever did; more, I guess. But I wouldn't--I
wouldn't, though it wrung my heart out to say no. I give him up--why?
'cause I thought I had a duty laid on me."

Ellery sighed. "I can see but one duty," he said. "That is the duty
given us by God, to marry the one we love."

Keziah's agitation, which had grown as she told her story, suddenly
flashed into flame.

"Is that as fur as you can see?" she asked fiercely. "It's an easy duty,
then--or looks easy now. I've got a harder one; it's to stand by the
promise I gave and the man I married."

He looked at her as if he thought she had lost her wits.

"The man you married?" he replied. "Why, the man you married is dead."

"No, he ain't. You remember the letter you saw me readin' that night
when you come back from Come-Outers' meetin'? Well, that letter was from
him. He's alive."

For the first time during the interview the minister rose to his feet,
shocked out of his despair and apathy by this astounding revelation.

"Alive?" he repeated. "Your husband ALIVE? Why, Mrs. Coffin, this is--"

She waved him to silence. "Don't stop me now," she said. "I've told so
much; let me tell the rest. Yes, he's alive. Alive and knockin' round
the world somewheres. Every little while he writes me for money and, if
I have any, I send it to him. Why? Why 'cause I'm a coward, after all,
I guess, and I'm scared he'll do what he says he will and come back.
Perhaps you think I'm a fool to put up with it; that's what most folks
would say if they knew it. They'd tell me I ought to divorce him. Well,
I can't, I CAN'T. I walked into the mess blindfold; I married him in
spite of warnin's and everything. I took him for better or for worse,
and now that he's turned out worse, I must take my medicine. I can't
live with him--that I can't do--but while HE lives I'll stay his wife
and give him what money I can spare. That's the duty I told you was laid
on me, and it's a hard one, but I don't run away from it."

John Ellery was silent. What could he say? Keziah went on.

"I don't run away from it," she exclaimed, "and you mustn't run away
from yours. Your church depends on you, they trust you. Are you goin'
to show 'em their trust was misplaced? The girl you wanted is to marry
another man, that's true, and it's mighty hard. But she'll marry a good
man, and, by and by, she'll be happy."

"Happy!" he said scornfully.

"Yes, happy. I know she'll be happy because I know she's doin' what'll
be best for her and because I know him that's to be her husband. I've
known him all my life; he's that other one that--that--and I give him up
to her; yes, I give him up to her, and try to do it cheerful, because I
know it's best for him. Hard for YOU? Great Lord A'mighty! do you think
it ain't hard for ME? I--I--"

She stopped short; then covering her face with her apron, she ran from
the room. John Ellery heard her descending the stairs, sobbing as she
went.

All that afternoon he remained in his chair by the window. It was six
o'clock, supper time, when he entered the kitchen. Keziah, looking up
from the ironing board, saw him. He was white and worn and grim, but he
held out his hand to her.

"Mrs. Coffin," he said, "I'm not going away. You've shown me what
devotion to duty really means. I shall stay here and go on with my
work."

Her face lit up. "Will you?" she said. "I thought you would. I was sure
you was that kind."


CHAPTER XIV

IN WHICH THE SEA MIST SAILS


They buried Captain Eben in the little Come-Outer cemetery at the rear
of the chapel. A bleak, wind-swept spot was that cemetery, bare of trees
and with only a few graves and fewer headstones, for the Come-Outers
were a comparatively new sect and their graveyard was new in
consequence. The grave was dug in the yellow sand beside that of Mrs.
Hammond, Nat's mother, and around it gathered the fifty or sixty friends
who had come to pay their last tribute to the old sailor and tavern
keeper.

The Come-Outers were there, all of them, and some members of the Regular
society, Captain Zeb Mayo, Dr. Parker, Keziah Coffin, Mrs. Higgins, and
Ike. Mrs. Didama Rogers was there also, not as a mourner, but because,
in her capacity as gatherer of gossip, she made it a point never to
miss a funeral. The Rev. Absalom Gott, Come-Outer exhorter at Wellmouth,
preached the short sermon, and Ezekiel Bassett added a few remarks. Then
a hymn was sung and it was over. The little company filed out of the
cemetery, and Captain Eben Hammond was but a memory in Trumet.

Keziah lingered to speak a word with Grace. The girl, looking very white
and worn, leaned on the arm of Captain Nat, whose big body acted as
a buffer between her and over-sympathetic Come-Outers. Mrs. Coffin
silently held out both hands and Grace took them eagerly.

"Thank you for coming, Aunt Keziah," she said. "I was sure you would."

"Least I could do, deary," was the older woman's answer. "Your uncle
and I was good friends once; we haven't seen each other so often of
late years, but that ain't changed my feelin's. Now you must go home and
rest. Don't let any of these"--with a rather scornful glance at Josiah
Badger and Ezekiel and the Reverend Absalom--"these Job's comforters
bother you. Nat, you see that they let her alone, won't you?"

Captain Nat nodded. He, too, looked very grave and worn. "I'll tend to
them," he said shortly. "Come, Grace," he added; "let's go."

But the girl hung back. "Just a minute, Nat," she said. "I--I--would you
mind if I spoke to Aunt Keziah--alone? I only want to say a word."

Nat strode off to the cemetery gate, where Josiah Badger stood,
brandishing a red cotton handkerchief as a not too-clean emblem of
mourning. Mr. Badger eagerly sprang forward, but ran into an impossible
barrier in the form of the captain's outstretched arm. Josiah protested
and the captain replied. Grace leaned forward.

"Auntie," she whispered, "tell me: Did a letter--Did he--"

"Yes, it came. I gave it to him."

"Did--did he tell you? Do you know?"

"Yes, I know, deary."

"Did he--is he--"

"He's well, deary. He'll be all right. I'll look out for him."

"You will, won't you? You won't let him do anything--"

"Not a thing. Don't worry. We've had a long talk and he's going to
stay right here and go on with his work. And nobody else'll ever know,
Gracie."

"How--O Aunt Keziah! how he must despise me."

"Despise you! For doin' what was your duty? Nonsense! He'll respect you
for it and come to understand 'twas best for both of you, by and by.
Don't worry about him, Gracie. I tell you I'll look out for him."

"I guess it will be better if he does despise me. And hate me, too. He
can't despise and hate me more than I do myself. But it IS right--what
I'm doing; and the other was wrong and wicked. Auntie, you'll come and
see me, won't you? I shall be so lonesome."

"Yes, yes; I'll come. Perhaps not right away. There's reasons why I'd
better not come right away. But, by and by, after it's all settled and
you and Nat"--she hesitated for an instant in spite of herself--"after
you and Nat are married I'll come."

"Don't talk about that NOW. Please don't."

"All right, I won't. You be a good, brave girl and look out for Nat;
that's your duty and I'm sure you'll do it. And I'll do my best for
John."

"Do you call him John?"

"Yup. We had a sort of--of adoptin' ceremony the other mornin' and
I--Well, you see, I've got to have somebody to call by their front name
and he's about all I've got left."

"O Aunt Keziah! if I could be one half as patient and brave and sweet as
you are--"

"Sssh! here comes Nat. Be kind to him. He's sufferin', too; maybe more'n
you imagine. Here she is, Nat. Take her back home and be good to her."

The broad-shouldered skipper led his charge out of the gate and down
the "Turn-off." Josiah Badger looked after them disgustedly. As Keziah
approached, he turned to her.

"I swan to man!" he exclaimed, in offended indignation, "if I ain't
losin' my respect for that Nat Hammond. He's the f-f-fuf-for'ardest
critter ever I see. I was just agoin' to hail Gracie and ask her what
she thought about my leadin' some of the meetin's now her uncle has been
called aloft. I wanted to ask her about it fust, afore Zeke Bassett
got ahead of me, but that Nat wouldn't let me. Told me she mustn't be
b-b-b-bothered about little things now. LITTLE things! Now, what do you
think of that, Mrs. Coffin? And I spoke to Lot Taylor, one of our own
s-s-sas-sassiety, and asked what he thought of it, and he said for me to
go home set d-d-down and let my h-h-h-hah-hair grow. Of all--"

"I tell you what you do, Josiah," broke in the voice of Captain Zeb
Mayo, "you go home or somewhere else and set down and have it cut.
That'll take pretty nigh as long, and'll keep it from wearin' out your
coat collar. Keziah, I've been waitin' for you. Get in my shay and I'll
drive you back to the parsonage."

Mrs. Coffin accepted the invitation and a seat in the chaise beside
Captain Zeb. The captain spoke of the dead Come-Outer and of his respect
for him in spite of the difference in creed. He also spoke of the Rev.
John Ellery and of the affection he had come to feel for the young man.

"I like that young feller, Keziah," he said. "Like him for a lot of
reasons, same as the boy liked the hash. For one thing, his religion
ain't all starch and no sugar. He's good-hearted and kind and--and
human. He seems to get just as much satisfaction out of the promise of
heaven as he does out of the sartainty of t'other port. He ain't all the
time bangin' the bulkhead and sniffin' brimstone, like parsons I have
seen. Sulphur's all right for a spring medicine, maybe, but when June
comes I like to remember that God made roses. Elkanah, he comes to me a
while ago and he says, 'Zebedee,' he says, 'don't you think Mr. Ellery's
sermons might be more orthodox?' 'Yes,' says I, 'they might be, but what
a mercy 'tis they ain't.' He, he, he! I kind of like to poke Elkanah in
the shirt front once in a while, just to hear it crackle. Say, Keziah,
you don't think the minister and Annabel are--"

"No," was the emphatic interruption; "I know they ain't; he ain't,
anyway."

"Good! Them Danielses cal'late they own the most of this town already;
if they owned the minister they'd swell up so the rest of us would have
to go aloft or overboard; we'd be crowded off the decks, sure."

"No one owns him. Haven't you found that out?"

"Yup, I cal'late I have and I glory in his spunk."

"I'm glad to hear you say so. Of course Cap'n Elkanah is boss of the
parish committee and--"

"What? No, he ain't nuther. He's head of it, but his vote counts just
one and no more. What makes you say that?"

"Oh, nuthin'. Only I thought maybe, long as Elkanah was feelin' that Mr.
Ellery wa'n't orthodox enough, he might be goin' to make a change."

"He might? HE might! Say, Keziah Coffin, there was Mayos in this town
and in this church afore the fust Daniels ever washed ashore; and
they'll be here when the last one blows up with his own importance. I'm
on that parish committee--you understand?--and I've sailed ships and
handled crews. I ain't so old nor feeble but what I can swing a belayin'
pin. Boss! I'll have you to know that no livin' man bosses me."

"All right! I didn't mean to stir you up, Zebedee. But from things Cap'n
Daniels has said I gathered that he was runnin' the committee. And, as
I'm a friend of Mr. Ellery, it--"

"Friend! Well, so'm I, ain't I? If you ever hear of Daniels tryin' any
tricks against the minister, you send for me, that's all. I'LL show him.
Boss! Humph!"

The wily Keziah alighted at the parsonage gate with the feeling that she
had sown seed in fertile ground. She was quite aware of Captain Zeb's
jealousy of the great Daniels. And the time might come when her parson
needed an influential friend on the committee and in the Regular
society.

The news of the engagement between Captain Nat Hammond and Grace Van
Horne, told by Dr. Parker to one or two of his patients, spread through
Trumet like measles through a family of small children. Didama Rogers
learned it, so did Lavinia Pepper, and after that it might as well
have been printed on the walls for all to read. It was talked over and
gossiped about in every household from the lighthouse keeper's family to
that of George Washington Cash, who lived in the one-room hovel in the
woods near the Wellmouth line, and was a person of distinction, in his
way, being the sole negro in the county. And whenever it was discussed
it was considered a fine thing for both parties concerned. Almost
everyone said it was precisely what they expected.

Annabel Daniels and her father had not expected it. They were, however,
greatly pleased. In their discussion, which lasted far into the night,
Captain Elkanah expressed the opinion that the unexpected denouement was
the result of his interview with Eben. He had told the old Come-Outer
what would happen to his ward if she persisted in her impudent and
audacious plot to entrap a Regular clergyman. She, being discovered, had
yielded, perforce, and had accepted Nat as the next best catch.

Annabel was not satisfied with this explanation. Of course, she said,
she did not pretend to believe Grace's statement that she had found her
uncle unconscious. No doubt the pair had had an interview and all that.
But she believed the minister himself had come to his senses and had
dismissed the brazen creature. She did not blame Mr. Ellery so much. He
was a young man, with a kind heart, and no doubt the "Van Horne
person" had worked upon his sympathies and had taken advantage of his
inexperience of feminine wiles.

"I think, pa," she said, "that it's our duty, yours and mine, to treat
him just as we always have. He doesn't know that we know, and we will
keep the secret. And, as Christians, we should forget and forgive. We'll
invite him here as we always have, keep him under our good influence,
and be very kind to him, poor innocent. As for Captain Hammond, I'm
sorry for him, knowing the kind of wife he is going to have, but no
doubt Come-Outers are not particular."

Kyan Pepper was another whom the news of the engagement surprised
greatly. When Lavinia told him of it, at the dinner table, he dropped
the knife he was holding and the greasy section of fish-ball balanced
upon it.

"'Bishy," said Miss Pepper, "what do you s'pose has happened down to the
Hammond tavern?"

"Oh, I know that," was the reply. "I heard that long ago; Cap'n Eben's
dead."

"'Course he's dead; and I knew you knew it. Land sakes! don't be such a
ninny. Why, I told you myself."

"Well, I didn't know but you'd forgot. Anybody's li'ble to forget who
they've told things to. Why, I've forgot more things--"

"Yes, there ain't no doubt about that. I've told you a million times,
if I have once, to tuck your napkin round your neck when you've got
your Sunday clothes on. And there you be this minute without a sign of a
napkin."

"Why, Laviny! I MUST have it round my neck. I know I--"

"Don't be so foolish! Think I'm blind? Can't I see you ain't got it? Now
where is it?"

Kyan began a futile hunt for the missing napkin, in his lap, on the
table, and finally under it.

"I don't understand," he stammered, "where that napkin can be. I'm just
as sure I had it and now I'm just as sure I ain't got it. What do you
s'pose I done with it?"

"Goodness knows! 'Twouldn't surprise me if you'd et it, you're that
absent-minded. Here! what's that stickin' out of your breast pocket?"

Her brother put his hand to the pocket indicated and produced the
missing napkin, much crumpled.

"There!" he exclaimed, in a tone of relief. "Now I remember. It must
have dropped on the floor and I thought 'twas my handkerchief and picked
it up and--"

"What did you think you'd be carryin' a white handkerchief for, on a
week day?"

"Well, I had on my Sunday suit and--"

"Yes, and for the dear mercy sakes WHY have you got it on?"

Kyan saw an opportunity for self-justification.

"You TOLD me to put it on," he declared triumphantly. "You said yourself
I'd better rig out in my Sunday clothes 'cause we might go to Eben's
funeral. You know you did."

"Hear the man! And then, after you've dressed up to go to his funeral,
you pretend to believe I'm goin' to tell you he's dead. I never--"

"Well, what IS it, then? He ain't come to life, has he?"

"Grace Van Horne's engaged to be married, that's what it is. Look out!
Oh, you--"

Just here occurred the accident already described. Knife and fish ball
descended upon the waistcoat belonging to the "Sunday suit." Lavinia
flew for warm water, ammonia, and a cloth, and the soiled waistcoat
was industriously scrubbed. The cleansing process was accompanied by a
lively tongue lashing, to which Kyan paid little attention.

"Engaged?" he kept repeating. "Gracie Van Horne engaged? Engaged? En--"

"Be still, you poll parrot! Dear! dear! dear! look at them spots. Yes,
yes; don't say it again; she's engaged."

"Who--who--who--"

"Now you've turned to an owl, I do believe. 'Hoo! hoo!' She's engaged to
Nat Hammond, that's who. Nothin' very surprisin' about that, is there?"

Kyan made no answer. He rubbed his forehead, while his sister rubbed the
grease spots. In jerky sentences she told of the engagement and how the
news had reached her.

"I can't believe it," faltered Abishai. "She goin' to marry Nat! Why, I
can't understand. I thought--"

"What did you think? See here! you ain't keepin' anything from me, be
you?"

The answer was enthusiastically emphatic.

"No, no, no, no!" declared Kyan. "Only I didn't know they was--was--"

"Neither did anybody else, but what of it? Folks don't usually advertise
when they're keepin' comp'ny, do they?"

"No--o. But it's gen'rally found out. I know if I was keepin'
comp'ny--or you was, La-viny--"

His sister started.

"What makes you say that?" she demanded, looking quickly up from her
rubbing.

"Why, nothin'. Only if I was--or you was, somebody'd see somethin'
suspicious and kind of drop a hint, and--"

"Better for them if they 'tended to their own affairs," was the sharp
answer. "I ain't got any patience with folks that's always talkin' about
their neighbor's doin's. There! now you go out and stand alongside the
cook stove till that wet place dries. Don't you move till 'TIS dry,
neither."

So to the kitchen went Kyan, to stand, a sort of living clotheshorse,
beside the hot range. But during the drying process he rubbed his
forehead many times. Remembering what he had seen in the grove he could
not understand; but he also remembered, even more vividly, what Keziah
Coffin had promised to do if he ever breathed a word. And he vowed again
that that word should not be breathed.

The death and funeral of Captain Eben furnished Trumet with a subject of
conversation for a week or more. Then, at the sewing circle and at the
store and after prayer meeting, both at the Regular meeting house and
the Come-Outer chapel, speculation centered on the marriage of Nat and
Grace. When was it to take place? Would the couple live at the old house
and "keep packet tavern" or would the captain go to sea again, taking
his bride with him? Various opinions, pro and con, were expressed by the
speculators, but no one could answer authoritatively, because none knew
except those most interested, and the latter would not tell.

John Ellery heard the discussions at the sewing circle when, in company
with some of the men of his congregation, he dropped in at these
gatherings for tea after the sewing was over. He heard them at church,
before and after the morning service, and when he made pastoral calls.
People even asked his opinion, and when he changed the subject inferred,
some of them, that he did not care about the doings of Come-Outers. Then
they switched to inquiries concerning his health.

"You look awful peaked lately, Mr. Ellery," said Didama Rogers. "Ain't
you feelin' well?"

The minister answered that he was as well as usual, or thought he was.

"No, no, you ain't nuther," declared Didama. "You look's if you was
comin' down with a spell of somethin'. I ain't the only one that's
noticed it. Why, Thankful Payne says to me only yesterday, 'Didama,'
says she, 'the minister's got somethin' on his mind and it's wearin' of
him out.' You ain't got nothin' on your mind, have you, Mr. Ellery?"

"I guess not, Mrs. Rogers. It's a beautiful afternoon, isn't it?

"There! I knew you wa'n't well. A beautiful afternoon, and it hotter'n
furyation and gettin' ready to rain at that! Don't tell me! 'Tain't your
mind, Mr. Ellery, it's your blood that's gettin' thin. My husband had a
spell just like it a year or two afore he died, and the doctor said
he needed rest and a change. Said he'd ought to go away somewheres by
himself. I put my foot down on THAT in a hurry. 'The idea!' I
says. 'You, a sick man, goin' off all alone by yourself to die of
lonesomeness. If you go, I go with you.' So him and me went up to Boston
and it rained the whole week we was there, and we set in a little box of
a hotel room with a window that looked out at a brick wall, and set and
set and set, and that's all. I kept talkin' to him to cheer him up, but
he never cheered. I'd talk to him for an hour steady and when I'd
stop and ask a question he'd only groan and say yes, when he meant no.
Finally, I got disgusted, after I'd asked him somethin' four or five
times and he'd never answered, and I told him, I believed he was gettin'
deef. 'Lordy!' he says, 'I wish I was!' Well, that was enough for ME.
Says I, 'If your mind's goin' to give out we'd better be home.' So home
we come. And that's all the good change and rest done HIM. Hey? What did
you say, Mr. Ellery?"

"Er--oh, nothing, nothing, Mrs. Rogers."

"Yes. So home we come and I'd had enough of doctors to last. I figgered
out that his blood was thinnin' and I knew what was good for that. My
great Aunt Hepsy, that lived over to East Wellmouth, she was a great
hand for herbs and such and she'd give me a receipt for thickenin' the
blood that was somethin' wonderful. It had more kind of healin' herbs in
it than you could shake a stick at. I cooked a kittleful and got him to
take a dose four times a day. He made more fuss than a young one about
takin' it. Said it tasted like the Evil One, and such profane talk, and
that it stuck to his mouth so's he couldn't relish his vittles; but I
never let up a mite. He had to take it and it done him a world of good.
Now I've got that receipt yet, Mr. Ellery, and I'll make some of that
medicine for you. I'll fetch it down to-morrow. Yes, yes, I will. I'm
agoin' to, so you needn't say no. And perhaps I'll have heard somethin'
about Cap'n Nat and Grace by that time."

She brought the medicine, and the minister promptly, on her departure,
handed it over to Keziah, who disposed of it just as promptly.

"What did I do with it?" repeated the housekeeper. "Well, I'll tell you.
I was kind of curious to see what 'twas like, so I took a teaspoonful.
I did intend to pour the rest of it out in the henyard, but after that
taste I had too much regard for the hens. So I carried it way down
to the pond and threw it in, jug and all. B-r-r-r! Of all the messes
that--I used to wonder what made Josh Rogers go moonin' round makin' his
lips go as if he was crazy. I thought he was talkin' to himself, but now
I know better, he was TASTIN'. B-r-r-r!"

Keziah was the life of the gloomy parsonage. Without her the minister
would have broken down. Time and time again he was tempted to give up,
in spite of his promise, and leave Trumet, but her pluck and courage
made him ashamed of himself and he stayed to fight it out. She watched
him and tended him and "babied" him as if he was a spoiled child,
pretending to laugh at herself for doing it and at him for permitting
it. She cooked the dishes he liked best, she mended his clothes, she
acted as a buffer between him and callers who came at inopportune
times. She was cheerful always when he was about, and no one would have
surmised that she had a sorrow in the world. But Ellery knew and
she knew he knew, so the affection and mutual esteem between the two
deepened. He called her "Aunt Keziah" at her request and she continued
to call him "John." This was in private, of course; in public he was
"Mr. Ellery" and she "Mrs. Coffin."

In his walks about town he saw nothing of Grace. She and Mrs. Poundberry
and Captain Nat were still at the old home and no one save themselves
knew what their plans might be. Yet, oddly enough, Ellery was the first
outsider to learn these plans and that from Nat himself.

He met the captain at the corner of the "Turnoff" one day late in
August. He tried to make his bow seem cordial, but was painfully aware
that it was not. Nat, however, seemed not to notice, but crossed the
road and held out his hand.

"How are you, Mr. Ellery?" he said. "I haven't run across you for
sometime. What's the matter? Seems to me you look rather under the
weather."

Ellery answered that he was all right and, remembering that he had
not met the captain since old Hammond's death, briefly expressed his
sympathy. His words were perfunctory and his manner cold. His reason
told him that this man was not to blame--was rather to be pitied, if
Keziah's tale was true. Yet it is hard to pity the one who is to marry
the girl you love. Reason has little to do with such matters.

"Well, Mr. Ellery," said Captain Nat, "I won't keep you. I see you're in
a hurry. Just thought I'd run alongside a minute and say good-by. Don't
know's I'll see you again afore I sail."

"Before you sail? You--you are going away?"

"Yup. My owners have been after me for a good while, but I wouldn't
leave home on account of dad's health. Now he's gone, I've got to
be gettin' back on salt water again. My ship's been drydocked and
overhauled and she's in New York now loadin' for Manila. It's a long
vy'age, even if I come back direct, which ain't likely. So I may not see
the old town again for a couple of years. Take care of yourself, won't
you? Good men, especially ministers, are scurse, and from what I hear
about you I cal'late Trumet needs you."

"When are you going?"

"Last of next week, most likely."

"Will you--shall you go alone? Are you to be--to be--"

"Married? No. Grace and I have talked it over and we've agreed it's best
to wait till I come back. You see, dad's been dead such a little while,
and all, that--well, we're goin' to wait, anyhow. She'll stay in the old
house with Hannah, and I've fixed things so she'll be provided for while
I'm gone. I left it pretty much to her. If she'd thought it best for
us to marry now, I cal'late I should have--have--well, done what she
wanted. But she didn't. Ah, hum!" he added with a sigh; "she's a good
girl, a mighty good girl. Well, so long and good luck."

"Good-by, captain."

"Good-by. Er--I say, Mr. Ellery, how things at the parsonage? All well
there, are you?"

"Yes."

"Er--Keziah--Mrs. Coffin, your housekeeper, is she smart?"

"Yes. She's well."

"That's good. Say, you might tell her good-by for me, if you want to.
Tell her I wished her all the luck there was. And--and--just say that
there ain't any--well, that her friend--say just that, will you?--her
FRIEND said 'twas all right. She'll understand; it's a--a sort of joke
between us."

"Very good, captain; I'll tell her."

"Much obliged. And just ask her to keep an eye on Grace while I'm gone.
Tell her I leave Gracie under her wing. Keziah and me are old chums, in
a way, you see."

"Yes. I'll tell her that, too."

"And don't forget the 'friend' part. Well, so long."

They shook hands and parted.

Didama and her fellow news-venders distributed the tale of Captain Nat's
sailing broadcast during the next few days. There was much wonderment
at the delayed marriage, but the general verdict was that Captain Eben's
recent death and the proper respect due to it furnished sufficient
excuse. Hannah Poundberry, delighted at being so close to the center of
interest, talked and talked, and thus Grace was spared the interviews
which would have been a trouble to her. Nat left town, via the packet,
on the following Wednesday. Within another week came the news that his
ship, the Sea Mist, had sailed from New York, bound for Manila. Her
topsails sank beneath the horizon, and she vanished upon the wild waste
of tumbling waves and out of Trumet's knowledge, as many another vessel,
manned and officered by Cape Cod men, had done. The village talked of
her and her commander for a few days and then forgot them both. Only at
the old home by the landing and at the parsonage were they remembered.


CHAPTER XV

IN WHICH TRUMET TALKS OF CAPTAIN NAT


Summer was over, autumn came, passed, and it was winter--John Ellery's
first winter in Trumet. Fish weirs were taken up, the bay filled with
ice, the packet ceased to run, and the village settled down to hibernate
until spring. The stage came through on its regular trips, except when
snow or slush rendered the roads impassable, but passengers were very
few. Occasionally there were northeast gales, with shrieking winds,
driving gusts of sleet and hail and a surf along the ocean side that
bellowed and roared and tore the sandy beach into new shapes, washing
away shoals and building others, blocking the mouth of the little inlet
where the fish boats anchored and opening a new channel a hundred yards
farther down. Twice there were wrecks, one of a fishing schooner, the
crew of which were fortunate enough to escape by taking to the dories,
and another, a British bark, which struck on the farthest bar and
was beaten to pieces by the great waves, while the townspeople stood
helplessly watching from the shore, for launching a boat in that surf
was impossible.

The minister was one of those who watched. News of the disaster had been
brought to the village by the lightkeeper's assistant, and Ellery and
most of the able-bodied men in town had tramped the three miles to the
beach, facing the screaming wind and the cutting blasts of flying sand.
As they came over the dunes there were times when they had to dig their
heels into the ground and bend forward to stand against the freezing
gale. And, as they drew nearer, the thunder of the mighty surf grew ever
louder, until they saw the white clouds of spray leap high above the
crazily tossing, flapping bunches of beach grass that topped the last
knoll.

Three masts and a broken bowsprit sticking slantwise up from a whirl of
creamy white, that was all they could see of the bark, at first glance.
But occasionally, as the breakers drew back for another cruel blow, they
caught glimpses of the tilted deck, smashed bare of houses and rail.

"Those black things on the masts?" asked Ellery, bending to scream the
question into the ear of Gaius Winslow, his companion. "Are they--it
can't be possible that they're--"

"Yup," shrieked Gaius in reply, "they're men. Crew lashed in the
riggin'. Poor fellers! it'll soon be over for 'em. And they're most
likely frozen stiff a'ready and won't sense drownin', that's a comfort."

"Men!" repeated the minister in horror. "Men! Great God! and are we
to stand by here and see them die without lifting a hand? Why, it's
barbarous! It's--"

Winslow seized his arm and pointed.

"Look!" he shouted. "Look at them! How much good would our liftin' hands
do against them?"

Ellery looked. The undertow, that second, was sucking the beach dry,
sucking with such force that gravel and small stones pattered down the
slope in showers. And behind it a wave, its ragged top raveled by the
wind into white streamers, was piling up, up, up, sheer and green and
mighty, curling over now and descending with a hammer blow that shook
the land beneath their feet. And back of it reared another, and
another, and another, an eighth of a mile of whirling, surging, terrific
breakers, with a yelling hurricane whipping them on.

It was soon over, as Gaius had said it would be. A mighty leap of spray,
a section of hull broken off and tossed into view for an instant, then
two of the masts went down. The other followed almost at once. Then
the watchers, most of them, went back to the village, saying little or
nothing and dispersing silently to their homes.

During the next fortnight John Ellery conducted six funeral services,
brief prayers beside the graves of unknown men from that wreck. The
bodies, as they were washed ashore, were put into plain coffins paid
for by the board of selectmen, and buried in the corner of the Regular
cemetery beside other waifs thrown up by the sea in other years. It was
a sad experience for him, but it was an experience and tended to make
him forget his own sorrow just a little. Or, if not to forget, at least
to think of and sympathize more keenly with the sorrows of others.
Somewhere, in England or Ireland or scattered over the wide world, there
were women and children waiting for these men, waiting anxiously for
news of their safe arrival in port, praying for them. When he mentioned
this thought to the townspeople they nodded philosophically and said
yes, they "presumed likely." As Captain Zeb put it, "Most sailors are
fools enough to get married, prob'ly this lot wa'n't any exception." It
was no new thought to him or to any other dweller in that region. It was
almost a fixed certainty that, if you went to sea long enough, you
were bound to be wrecked sometime or other. The chances were that, with
ordinary luck and good management, you would escape with your life.
Luck, good or bad, was the risk of the trade; good management was
expected, as a matter of course.

Mr. Pepper made no more calls at the parsonage, and when the minister
met him, at church or elsewhere, seemed anxious to avoid an interview.

"Well, Abishai," asked Ellery, on one of these occasions, "how are you
getting on at home? Has your sister locked you up again?"

"No, sir, she ain't," replied Kyan. "Laviny, she's sort of diff'rent
lately. She ain't nigh so--so down on a feller as she used to be. I can
get out once in a while by myself nowadays, when she wants to write a
letter or somethin'."

"Oh, she's writing letters, is she?"

"Um--hm. Writes one about every once in a week. I don't know who they're
to, nuther, but I have my suspicions. You see, we've got a cousin out
West--out Pennsylvany way--and he ain't very well and has got a turrible
lot of money. I'm sort of surmisin' that Laviny's writin' to him. We're
about his only relations that's left alive and--and so--"

"I see." The minister smiled.

"Yup. Laviny's a pretty good navigator, fur's keepin' an eye to wind'ard
is concerned. She was awful down on Phineas--that's his name--'cause he
married a Philadelphy woman, but he's a widower man now, so I s'pose she
feels better toward him. She's talkin' of goin' up to Sandwich pretty
soon."

"She IS? Alone?"

"So she says."

"To leave you here? Why! well, I'm surprised."

"Godfreys mighty! so be I. But she says she b'lieves she needs a change
and there's church conference up there, you know, and she figgers that
she ain't been to conference she don't know when. I s'pose you'll go,
won't you, Mr. Ellery?"

"Probably."

"Um--hm. I kind of wisht I was goin' myself. 'Twill be kind of lonesome
round home without her."

Considering that that variety of lonesomeness had been Abishai's dream
of paradise for years, Ellery thought his change of heart a good joke
and told Keziah of it when he returned to the parsonage. The housekeeper
was greatly surprised.

"Well! well! well!" she exclaimed. "Miracles'll never cease. I don't
wonder so much at Laviny wantin' to go to conference, but her darin' to
go and leave Kyan at home is past belief. Why, every time she's had
a cold her one fear was that she'd die and leave 'Bish behind to be
kidnaped by some woman. Kyan himself was sick once, and the story was
that his sister set side of the bed night and day and read him over and
over again that chapter in the Bible that says there's no marryin' or
givin' in marriage in heaven. Dr. Parker told me that he didn't believe
'Bish got ha'f the comfort out of that passage that she did. And now
she's goin' to Sandwich and leave him. I can't think it's true."

But it was true, and Lavinia got herself elected a delegate and went, in
company with Captain Elkanah, Mrs. Mayo, and others, to the conference.
She was a faithful attendant at the meetings and seemed to be having
a very good time. She introduced the minister to one Caleb Pratt, a
resident of Sandwich, whom she said she had known ever since she was a
girl.

"Mr. Pratt's a cousin to Thankful Payne over to home," volunteered
Lavinia. "You know Thankful, Mr. Ellery."

Ellery did know Mrs. Payne and said so. Mr. Pratt, who was dressed in a
new suit of black which appeared to hurt him, imparted the information
that he'd heard tell consider'ble of Mr. Ellery.

"I enjoyed your sermon to-night fust--rate," he added solemnly.
"Fust--rate, sir--yes."

"Did you, indeed? I'm glad."

"Yes, sir. You used words in that sermon that I never heard afore in my
life. 'Twas grand."

Lavinia confided to her pastor that Mr. Pratt made the best shoes in
Ostable County. He could fit ANY kind of feet, she declared, and the
minister ought to try him sometime. She added that he had money in the
bank.

The Reverend John rode home in the stage beside Miss Annabel, not from
choice, but because the young lady's father insisted upon it. Miss
Daniels gushed and enthused as she always did. As they drove by the
Corners the minister, who had been replying absently to Annabel's
questions, suddenly stopped short in the middle of a sentence. His
companion, leaning forward to look out of the window, saw Grace Van
Horne entering the store. For an instant Annabel's face wore a very
unpleasant expression. Then she smiled and said, in her sweetest manner:

"Why, there's the tavern girl! I haven't seen her for sometime. How old
she looks! I suppose her uncle's death has aged her. Well, she'll
be married soon, just as soon as Cap'n Nat gets back. They perfectly
worship each other, those two. They say she writes him the longest
letters. Hannah Poundberry told me. Hannah's a queer creature and
common, but devoted to the Hammonds, Mr. Ellery. However, you're not
interested in Come-Outers, are you? Ha, ha!"

Ellery made some sort of an answer, but he could not have told what it
was. The sight of Grace had brought back all that he was trying so
hard to forget. Why couldn't one forget, when it was so painful--and so
useless--to remember?

Spring once more; then summer. And now people were again speaking of
Captain Nat Hammond. His ship was overdue, long overdue. Even in those
days, when there were no cables and the telegraph was still something of
a novelty, word of his arrival should have reached Trumet months before
this. But it had not come, and did not. Before the summer was over, the
wise heads of the retired skippers were shaking dubiously. Something had
happened to the Sea Mist, something serious.

As the weeks and months went by without news of the missing vessel,
this belief became almost a certainty. At the Come-Outer chapel, where
Ezekiel Bassett now presided, prayers were offered for the son of their
former leader. These prayers were not as fervent as they might have
been, for Grace's nonattendance at meetings was causing much comment
and a good deal of resentment. She came occasionally, but not often. "I
always said she was stuck-up and thought she was too good for the rest
of us," remarked "Sukey B." spitefully. "'And, between you and me, pa
says he thinks Nat Hammond would be one to uphold her in it. He wa'n't a
bit spirituous and never experienced religion. If anything HAS happened
to him, it's a punishment sent, that's what pa thinks."

Those were gloomy days at the parsonage. Keziah said little concerning
the topic of which all the village was talking, and John Ellery
forebore to mention it. The housekeeper was as faithful as ever in the
performance of her household duties, but her smile had gone and she
was worn and anxious. The minister longed to express his sympathy, but
Keziah had not mentioned Nat's name for months, not since he, Ellery,
gave her the message intrusted to him by the captain before sailing. He
would have liked to ask about Grace, for he knew Mrs. Coffin visited the
Hammond home occasionally, but this, too, he hesitated to do. He heard
from others that the girl was bearing the suspense bravely, that she
refused to give up hope, and was winning the respect of all the thinking
class in Trumet by her courage and patience. Even the most bigoted of
the Regulars, Captain Daniels and his daughter excepted of course, had
come to speak highly of her. "She's a spunky girl," declared Captain
Zeb, with emphasis. "There's nothing of the milk-sop and cry-baby about
her. She's fit to be a sailor's wife, and I only hope Nat's alive to
come back and marry her. He was a durn good feller, too--savin' your
presence, Mr. Ellery--and if he was forty times a Come-Outer I'd say the
same thing. I'm 'fraid he's gone, though, poor chap. As good a seaman
as he was would have fetched port afore this if he was atop of water.
As for Gracie, she's a brick, and a lady, every inch of her. My old
girl went down t'other day to call on her and that's the fust Come-Outer
she's been to see sence there was any. Why don't you go see her, too,
Mr. Ellery? 'Twould be a welcome change from Zeke Bassett and his tribe.
Go ahead! it would be the Almighty's own work and the society'd stand
back of you, all them that's wuth considerin', anyhow."

This was surprising advice from a member of the Regular and was
indicative of the changed feeling in the community, but the minister, of
course, could not take it. He had plunged headlong into his church work,
hoping that it and time would dull the pain of his terrible shock and
disappointment. It had been dulled somewhat, but it was still there, and
every mention of her name revived it.

One afternoon Keziah came into his study, where he was laboring with his
next Sunday sermon, and sat down in the rocking-chair. She had been out
and still wore her bonnet and shawl.

"John," she said, "I ask your pardon for disturbin' you. I know you're
busy."

Ellery laid down his pen. "Never too busy to talk with you, Aunt
Keziah," he observed. "What is it?"

"I wanted to ask if you knew Mrs. Prince was sick?"

"No. Is she? I'm awfully sorry. Nothing serious, I hope?"

"No, I guess not. Only she's got a cold and is kind of under the
weather. I thought p'r'aps you'd like to run up and see her. She thinks
the world and all of you, 'cause you was so good when she was distressed
about her son. Poor old thing! she's had a hard time of it."

"I will go. I ought to go, of course. I'm glad you reminded me of it."

"Yes. I told her you hadn't meant to neglect her, but you'd been busy
fussin' with the fair and the like of that."

"That was all. I'll go right away. Have you been there to-day?"

"No. I just heard that she was ailin' from Didama Rogers. Didama said
she was all but dyin', so I knew she prob'ly had a little cold, or
somethin'. If she was really very bad, Di would have had her buried by
this time, so's to be sure her news was ahead of anybody else's. I ain't
been up there, but I met her t'other mornin'."

"Didama?"

"No; Mrs. Prince. She'd come down to see Grace."

"Oh."

"Yes. The old lady's been awful kind and sympathizin' since--since
this new trouble. It reminds her of the loss of her own boy, I presume
likely, and so she feels for Grace. John, what do they say around town
about--about HIM?"

"Captain Hammond?"

"Yes."

The minister hesitated. Keziah did not wait for him to answer.

"I see," she said slowly. "Do they all feel that way?"

"Why, if you mean that they've all given up hope, I should hardly say
that. Captain Mayo and Captain Daniels were speaking of it in my hearing
the other day and they agreed that there was still a chance."

"A pretty slim one, though, they cal'lated, didn't they?"

"Well, they were--were doubtful, of course. There was the possibility
that he had been wrecked somewhere and hadn't been picked up. They cited
several such cases. The South Pacific is full of islands where vessels
seldom touch, and he and his crew may be on one of these."

"Yes. They might, but I'm afraid not. Ah, hum!"

She rose and was turning away. Ellery rose also and laid his hand on her
arm.

"Aunt Keziah," he said, "I'm very sorry. I respected Captain Hammond, in
spite of--of--in spite of everything. I've tried to realize that he was
not to blame. He was a good man and I haven't forgotten that he saved my
life that morning on the flats. And I'm so sorry for YOU."

She did not look at him.

"John," she answered, with a sigh, "sometimes I think you'd better get
another housekeeper."

"What? Are you going to leave me? YOU?"

"Oh, 'twouldn't be because I wanted to. But it seems almost as if there
was a kind of fate hangin' over me and that," she smiled faintly, "as if
'twas sort of catchin', as you might say. Everybody I ever cared for has
had somethin' happen to 'em. My brother died; my--the man I married went
to the dogs; then you and Grace had to be miserable and I had to help
make you so; I sent Nat away and he blamed me and--"

"No, no. He didn't blame you. He sent you word that he didn't."

"Yes, but he did, all the same. He must have. I should if I'd been in
his place. And now he's dead, and won't ever understand--on this earth,
anyhow. I guess I'd better clear out and leave you afore I spoil your
life."

"Aunt Keziah, you're my anchor to windward, as they say down here. If
I lost you, goodness knows where I should drift. Don't you ever talk of
leaving me again."

"Thank you, John. I'm glad you want me to stay. I won't leave yet
awhile; never--unless I have to."

"Why should you ever have to?"

"Well, I don't know. Yes, I do know, too. John, I had another letter
t'other day."

"You did? From--from that man?"

"Yup, from--" For a moment it seemed as if she were about to pronounce
her husband's name, something she had never done in his presence; but if
she thought of it, she changed her mind.

"From him," she said. "He wanted money, of course; he always does. But
that wa'n't the worst. The letter was from England, and in it he wrote
that he was gettin' sick of knockin' around and guessed he'd be for
comin' to the States pretty soon and huntin' me up. Said what was the
use of havin' an able-bodied wife if she couldn't give her husband a
home."

"The scoundrel!"

"Yes, I know what he is, maybe full as well as you do. That's why I
spoke of leavin' you. If that man comes to Trumet, I'll go, sure as
death."

"No, no. Aunt Keziah, you must free yourself from him. No power on earth
can compel you to longer support such a--"

"None on earth, no. But it's my punishment and I've got to put up with
it. I married him with my eyes wide open, done it to spite the--the
other, as much as anything, and I must bear the burden. But I tell you
this, John: if he comes here, to this town, where I've been respected
and considered a decent woman, if he comes here, I go--somewhere,
anywhere that'll be out of the sight of them that know me. And wherever
I go he shan't be with me. THAT I won't stand! I'd rather die, and I
hope I do. Don't talk to me any more now--don't! I can't stand it."

She hurried out of the room. Later, as the minister passed through the
dining room on his way to the door, she spoke to him again.

"John," she said, "I didn't say what I meant to when I broke in on you
just now. I meant to tell you about Grace. I knew you'd like to know and
wouldn't ask. She's bearin' up well, poor girl. She thought the world of
Nat, even though she might not have loved him in the way that--"

"What's that? What are you saying, Aunt Keziah?"

"I mean--well, I mean that he'd always been like an own brother to her
and she cared a lot for him."

"But you said she didn't love him."

"Did I? That was a slip of the tongue, maybe. But she bears it well and
I don't think she gives up hope. I try not to, for her sake, and I try
not to show her how I feel."

She sewed vigorously for a few moments. Then she said:

"She's goin' away, Gracie is."

"Going away?"

"Yup. She's goin' to stay with a relation of the Hammonds over in
Connecticut for a spell. I coaxed her into it. Stayin' here at home
with all this suspense and with Hannah Poundberry's tongue droppin'
lamentations like kernels out of a corn sheller, is enough to kill a
healthy batch of kittens with nine lives apiece. She didn't want to go;
felt that she must stay here and wait for news; but I told her we'd get
news to her as soon as it come, and she's goin'."

Ellery took his hat from the peg and opened the door. His foot was on
the step when Keziah spoke again.

"She--it don't mean nothin', John, except that she ain't so hard-hearted
as maybe you might think--she's asked me about you 'most every time I've
been there. She told me to take good care of you."

The door closed. Keziah put down her sewing and listened as the
minister's step sounded on the walk. She rose, went to the window
and looked after him. She was wondering if she had made a mistake in
mentioning Grace's name. She had meant to cheer him with the thought
that he was not entirely forgotten, that he was, at least, pitied; but
perhaps it would have been better to have remained silent. Her gaze
shifted and she looked out over the bay, blue and white in the sun and
wind. When she was a girl the sea had been kind to her, it had brought
her father home safe, and those homecomings were her pleasantest
memories. But she now hated it. It was cruel and cold and wicked. It had
taken the man she loved and would have loved till she died, even though
he could never have been hers, and she had given him to another; it had
taken him, killed him cruelly, perhaps. And now it might be bringing to
her the one who was responsible for all her sorrow, the one she could
not think of without a shudder. She clung to the window sash and prayed
aloud.

"Lord! Lord!" she pleaded, "don't put any more on me now. I couldn't
stand it! I couldn't!"

Ellery, too, was thinking deeply as he walked up the main road on his
way to Mrs. Prince's. Keziah's words were repeating themselves over and
over in his brain. She had asked about him. She had not forgotten him
altogether. And what did the housekeeper mean by saying that she had
not loved Captain Hammond in the way that--Not that it could make any
difference. Nothing could give him back his happiness. But what did it
mean?

Mrs. Prince was very glad to see him. He found her in the big armchair
with the quilted back and the projecting "wings" at each side of her
head. She was wrapped in a "Rising Sun" quilt which was a patchwork
glory of red and crimson. A young girl, a neighbor, who was apparently
acting in the dual capacity of nurse and housekeeper, admitted him to
the old lady's presence.

"Well, well!" she exclaimed delightedly. "Then you ain't forgot me
altogether. I'm awful glad to see you. You'll excuse me for not gettin'
up; my back's got more pains in it than there is bones, a good sight.
Dr. Parker says it's nothin' serious, and all I had to do was set still
and take his medicine. I told him that either the aches or the medicine
made settin' still serious enough, and when your only amusement is
listenin' to Emeline Berry--she's the girl that's takin' care of
me--when your only fun is listenin' to Emeline drop your best dishes in
the kitchen sink, it's pretty nigh tragic. There! there! don't mind an
old woman, Mr. Ellery. Set down and let's talk. It's a comfort to be
able to say somethin' besides 'Don't, Emeline!' and 'Be sure you pick up
all the pieces!'"

Mrs. Prince's good spirits were of short duration. Her conversation soon
shifted to the loss of her son and she wept, using the corner of the
quilt to wipe away her tears. "Eddie" had been her idol and, as she
said, it was hard to believe what folks kept tellin' her, that it was
God's will, and therefore all for the best.

"That's so easy to say," she sobbed. "Maybe it is best for the Lord,
but how about me? I needed him more than they did up there, or I think I
did. O Mr. Ellery, I don't mean to be irreverent, but WHY was it all for
the best?"

Questions like this are hard to answer. The young minister tried, but
the answers were unsatisfactory, even to him.

"And there's Nat Hammond," continued Mrs. Prince. "A fine man--no better
anywhere, even though his father was a Come-Outer--just goin' to
be married and all, now they say he's drowned--why? Why was that
necessary?"

Ellery could not reply. The old lady did not wait for him to do so. The
mention of Captain Nat's name reminded her of other things.

"Poor Gracie!" she said. "It's turrible hard on her. I went down to see
her two or three times afore I was took with this backache. She's an
awful nice girl. And pretty as a pink, too. Don't you think so? Hey?
don't you?"

"Yes."

"Yes. I've been kind of expectin' she might get up to see me. Hannah
Poundberry told the Berrys that she said she was comin'. I don't care
about her bein' a Come-Outer. I ain't proud, Mr. Ellery. And there's
Come-Outers and COME-Outers. Proud! Lord 'a' mercy! what has an old
woman, next door to the poorhouse, got to be proud over? Yes, she told
Hannah she was comin', and the Berry folks thought it might be to-day.
So I've been watchin' for her. What! you ain't agoin', Mr. Ellery?"

"I think I must, Mrs. Prince."

"Oh, don't! Do stay a spell longer. Gracie might come and I'd like
for you to meet her. She needs sympathy and comfort an awful lot, and
there's no tellin', you might convert her to bein' a Reg'lar. Oh, yes,
you might. You've got the most persuadin' way, everybody says so. And
you don't know her very well, do you? Land sakes alive! talk about
angels! I snum if she ain't comin' up the road this blessed minute."

John Ellery had risen. Now he seized his hat and moved hastily toward
the door. Mrs. Prince called to him to remain, but he would not.
However, her good-bys delayed him for a minute, and before he reached
the yard gate Grace was opening it. They were face to face for the first
time since they had parted in the grove, so many months before.

She was thinner and paler, he saw that. And dressed very quietly in
black. She looked at him, as he stood before her in the path, and her
cheeks flushed and her eyes fell. He stepped aside and raised his hat.

She bowed gravely and murmured a "Good afternoon." Then she passed on up
the path toward the door. He watched her for an instant and then stepped
quickly after her. The black gown and the tired look in her eyes touched
him to the heart. He could not let her go without a word.

She turned at the sound of his step behind her.

"Er--Miss Van Horne," he stammered, "I merely wanted to tell you how
deeply I--we all feel for you in your trouble. I--I--I am so sorry."

"Thank you," she said simply, and after a moment's hesitation.

"I mean it sincerely. I--I did not know Captain Hammond very well, but
I respected and liked him the first time we met. I shall hope
that--that--it is not so serious as they fear."

"Thank you," she said again. "We are all hoping."

"Yes. I--I--" It was dreadfully hard to get words together. "I have
heard so much of the captain from--"

"From Aunt Keziah? Yes, she was Nat's warmest friend."

"I know. Er--Mrs. Coffin tells me you are going away. I hope you may
hear good news and soon. I shall think of you--of him--I want you to
understand that I shall."

The door opened and Emeline Berry appeared on the threshold.

"Come right in, Grace," she called. "Mrs. Prince wants you to. She's
ahollerin' for you to hurry up."

"Good-by," said the minister.

"Good-by. Thank you again. It was very kind of you to say this."

"No, no. I mean it."

"I know; that was why it was so kind. Good-by."

She held out her hand and he took it. He knew that his was trembling,
but so, too, was hers. The hands fell apart. Grace entered the house and
John Ellery went out at the gate.

That night Keziah, in the sitting room, trying to read, but finding
it hard to keep her mind on the book, heard her parson pacing back and
forth over the straw-matted floor of his chamber. She looked at
the clock; it was nearly twelve. She shut the book and sighed. Her
well-meant words of consolation had been a mistake, after all. She
should not have spoken Grace Van Horne's name.


CHAPTER XVI

IN WHICH THE MINISTER BOARDS THE SAN JOSE


"Hey, Mr. Ellery!"

It was Captain Zeb Mayo who was calling. The captain sat in his antique
chaise, drawn by the antique white horse, and was hailing the parsonage
through a speaking trumpet formed by holding both his big hands before
his mouth. The reins he had tucked between the edge of the dashboard and
the whip socket. If he had thrown them on the ground he would still have
been perfectly safe, with that horse.

"Mr. Ellery, ahoy!" roared Captain Zeb through his hands.

The window of Zoeth Peters's house, next door to the Regular church,
was thrown up and Mrs. Peters's head, bound with a blue-and-white
handkerchief in lieu of a sweeping cap, was thrust forth into the crisp
March air.

"What is it, Cap'n Mayo?" screamed Mrs. Peters. "Hey?"

"Hey?" repeated Captain Zeb, peering round the chaise curtain. "Who's
that?"

"It's me. Is somebody dead?"

"Who's me? Oh! No, Hettie, nobody's dead, though I'm likely to bust a
blood vessel if I keep on yellin' much longer. Is the parson to home?"

"Hey?"

"Oh, heavens alive! I say is--Ha, there you be, Mr. Ellery. Mornin',
Keziah."

The minister and Mrs. Coffin, the former with a napkin in his hand, had
emerged from the side door of the parsonage and now came hurrying down
to the gate.

"Land of Goshen!" exclaimed the captain, "you don't mean to tell me
you ain't done breakfast yet, and it after seven o'clock. Why, we're
thinkin' about dinner up to our house."

Keziah answered. "Yes," she said, "I shouldn't wonder. Your wife tells
me, Zeb, that the only time you ain't thinkin' about dinner is when you
think of breakfast or supper. We ain't so hungry here that we get up
to eat in the middle of the night. What's the matter? Hettie Peters is
hollerin' at you; did you know it?"

"Did I know it? Tut! tut! tut! I'd known it if I was a mile away, 'less
I was paralyzed in my ears. Let her holler; 'twill do her good and keep
her in practice for Come-Outer meetin'. Why, Mr. Ellery, I tell you:
Em'lous Sparrow, the fish peddler, stepped up to our house a few minutes
ago. He's just come down from the shanties over on the shore by the
light--where the wreck was, you know--and he says there's a 'morphrodite
brig anchored three or four mile off and she's flyin' colors ha'f mast
and union down. They're gettin' a boat's crew together to go off to
her and see what's the row. I'm goin' to drive over and I thought maybe
you'd like to go along. I told the old lady--my wife, I mean--that I
thought of pickin' you up and she said 'twas a good idee. Said my likin'
to cruise with a parson in my old age was either a sign that I was
hopeful or fearful, she didn't know which; and either way it ought to be
encouraged. He, he, he! What do you say, Mr. Ellery? Want to go?"

The minister hesitated. "I'd like to," he said. "I'd like to very much.
But I ought to work on my sermon this morning."

Keziah cut in here. "Cat's foot!" she sniffed. "Let your sermon go for
this once, do. If it ain't long enough as it is, you can begin again
when you've got to the end and preach it over again. Didama Rogers said,
last circle day, that she could set still and hear you preach right over
n' over. I'd give her a chance, 'specially if it did keep her still.
Keepin' Didama still is good Christian work, ain't it, Zeb?"

Captain Mayo slapped his knee. "He, he, he!" he chuckled. "Cal'late
you're right, Keziah."

"Indeed, I am. I believe it would be Christianity and I KNOW 'twould be
work. There! there! run in and get your coat and hat, Mr. Ellery. I'll
step across and ease Hettie's mind and--and lungs."

She went across the road to impart the news of the vessel in distress to
the curious Mrs. Peters. A moment later the minister, having donned
his hat and coat, ran down the walk and climbed into the chaise beside
Captain Zeb. The white horse, stimulated into a creaky jog trot by
repeated slappings of the reins and roars to "Get under way!" and "Cast
off!" moved along the sandy lane.

During the drive the captain and his passenger discussed various topics
of local interest, among them Captain Nat Hammond and the manner in
which he might have lost his ship and his life. It was now taken for
granted, in Trumet and elsewhere, that Nat was dead and would never be
heard from again. The owners had given up, so Captain Zeb said, and
went on to enumerate the various accidents which might have
happened--typhoons, waterspouts, fires, and even attacks by Malay
pirates--though, added the captain, "Gen'rally speakin', I'd ruther not
bet on any pirate gettin' away with Nat Hammond's ship, if the skipper
was alive and healthy. Then there's mutiny and fevers and collisions,
and land knows what all. And, speakin' of trouble, what do you cal'late
ails that craft we're goin' to look at now?"

They found a group on the beach discussing that very question. A few
fishermen, one or two lobstermen and wreckers, and the lightkeeper were
gathered on the knoll by the lighthouse. They had a spyglass, and a
good-sized dory was ready for launching.

"Where is she, Noah?" asked Captain Zeb of the lightkeeper. "That her
off back of the spar buoy? Let me have a squint through that glass;
my eyes ain't what they used to be, when I could see a whale spout two
miles t'other side of the sky line and tell how many barrels of ile he'd
try out, fust look. Takes practice to keep your eyesight so's you can
see round a curve like that," he added, winking at Ellery.

"She's a brigantine, Zeb," observed the keeper, handing up the spyglass.
"And flyin' the British colors. Look's if she might be one of them salt
boats from Turk's Islands. But what she's doin' out there, anchored,
with canvas lowered and showin' distress signals in fair weather like
this, is more'n any of us can make out. She wa'n't there last evenin',
though, and she is there now."

"She ain't the only funny thing along shore this mornin', nuther,"
announced Theophilus Black, one of the fishermen. "Charlie Burgess just
come down along and he says there's a ship's longboat hauled up on the
beach, 'bout a mile 'n a half t'other side the mouth of the herrin'
crick yonder. Oars in her and all. And she ain't no boat that b'longs
round here, is she, Charlie?"

"No, Thoph, she ain't," was the reply. "Make anything out of her,
cap'n?"

Captain Zeb, who had been inspecting the anchored vessel through
the spyglass, lowered the latter and seemed puzzled. "Not much," he
answered. "Blessed if she don't look abandoned to me. Can't see a sign
of life aboard her."

"We couldn't neither," said Thoph. "We was just cal'latin' to go off to
her when Charlie come and told us about the longboat. I guess likely we
can go now; it's pretty nigh smooth as a pond. You'll take an oar, won't
you, Noah?"

"I can't leave the light very well. My wife went over to the village
last night. You and Charlie and Bill go. Want to go, too, Zeb?"

"No, I'll stay here, I guess. The old lady made me promise to keep my
feet dry afore I left the house."

"You want to go, Mr. Ellery? Lots of room."

The minister was tempted. The sea always had a fascination for him and
the mystery of the strange ship was appealing.

"Sure I won't be in the way?"

"No, no! 'course you won't," said Burgess. "Come right along. You set in
the bow, if you don't mind gettin' sprinkled once in a while. I'll steer
and Thoph and Bill'll row. That'll be enough for one dory. If we need
more, we'll signal. Heave ahead."

The surf, though low for that season of the year, looked dangerous to
Ellery, but his companions launched the dory with the ease which comes
of experience. Burgess took the steering oar and Thoph and "Bill," the
latter a lobsterman from Wellmouth Neck, bent their broad backs for the
long pull. The statement concerning the pondlike smoothness of the sea
was something of an exaggeration. The dory climbed wave after wave, long
and green and oily, at the top of each she poised, tipped and slid down
the slope. The minister, curled up in the bow on a rather uncomfortable
cushion of anchor and roding, caught glimpses of the receding shore over
the crests behind. One minute he looked down into the face of Burgess,
holding the steering oar in place, the next the stern was high above him
and he felt that he was reclining on the back of his neck. But always
the shoulders of the rowers moved steadily in the short, deep strokes
of the rough water oarsman, and the beach, with the white light and
red-roofed house of the keeper, the group beside it, and Captain Zeb's
horse and chaise, grew smaller and less distinct.

"Humph!" grunted Charlie.

"What's the matter?" asked Thoph.

The steersman, who was staring hard in the direction they were going,
scowled.

"Humph!" he grunted again. "I swan to man, fellers, I believe she IS
abandoned!"

"Rubbish!" panted Bill, twisting his neck to look over his shoulder.
"'Course she ain't! Who'd abandon a craft such weather's this, and
Province-town harbor only three hours' run or so?"

"When it comes to that," commented Burgess, "why should they anchor off
here, 'stead of takin' her in by the inlet? If there's anybody aboard
they ain't showed themselves yet. She might have been leakin', but she
don't look it. Sets up out of water pretty well. Well, we'll know in a
few minutes. Hit her up, boys!"

The rowers "hit her up" and the dory moved faster. Then Burgess, putting
his hand to his mouth, hailed.

"Ship ahoy!" he roared. "Ahoy!"

No reply.

"Ahoy the brig!" bellowed Burgess. "What's the matter aboard there? All
hands asleep?"

Still no answer. Thoph and Bill pulled more slowly now. Burgess nodded
to them.

"Stand by!" he ordered. "Easy! Way enough! Let her run."

The dory slackened speed, turned in obedience to the steering oar, and
slid under the forequarter of the anchored vessel. Ellery, looking up,
saw her name in battered gilt letters above his head--the San Jose.

"Stand by, Thoph!" shouted Charlie. "S'pose you can jump and grab her
forechains? Hold her steady, Bill. Now, Thoph! That's the time!"

Thoph had jumped, seized the chains, and was scrambling aboard. A moment
later he appeared at the rail amidships, a rope in his hand. The dory
was brought alongside and made fast; then one after the other the men in
the boat climbed to the brig's deck.

"Ahoy!" yelled Burgess. "All hands on deck! tumble up, you lubbers!
Humph! She is abandoned, sure and sartin."

"Yup," assented Bill. "Her boats are gone. See? Guess that explains the
longboat on the beach, Charlie."

"Cal'late it does; but it don't explain why they left her. She ain't
leakin' none to speak of, that's sure. Rides's light's a feather.
Christmas! look at them decks; dirty hogs, whoever they was."

The decks were dirty, and the sails, sloppily furled, were dirty
likewise. The brig, as she rolled and jerked at her anchor rope, was
dirty--and unkempt from stem to stern. To Ellery's mind she made a
lonesome picture, even under the clear, winter sky and bright sunshine.

Thoph led the way aft. The cabin companion door was open and they peered
down.

"Phew!" sniffed Burgess. "She ain't no cologne bottle, is she? Well,
come on below and let's see what'll we see."

The cabin was a "mess," as Bill expressed it. The floor was covered
with scattered heaps of riff-raff, oilskins, coats, empty bottles, and
papers. On the table a box stood, its hinged lid thrown back.

"Medicine chest," said Burgess, examining it. "And rum bottles aplenty.
Somebody's been sick, I shouldn't wonder."

The minister opened the door of one of the little staterooms. The light
which shone through the dirty and tightly closed "bull's-eye" window
showed a tumbled bunk, the blankets soiled and streaked. The smell was
stifling.

"Say, fellers," whispered Thoph, "I don't like this much myself. I'm for
gettin' on deck where the air's better. Somethin's happened aboard this
craft, somethin' serious."

Charlie and Bill nodded an emphatic affirmative.

"Hadn't we better look about a little more?" asked Ellery. "There's
another stateroom there."

He opened the door of it as he spoke. It was, if possible, in a worse
condition than the first. And the odor was even more overpowering.

"Skipper's room," observed Burgess, peeping in. "And that bunk ain't
been slept in for weeks. See the mildew on them clothes. Phew! I'm fair
sick to my stomach. Come out of this."

On deck, in the sunlight, they held another consultation.

"Queerest business ever I see," observed Charlie. "I never--"

"I see somethin' like it once," interrupted Bill. "Down in the Gulf
'twas. I was on the old Fishhawk. Eben Salters's dad from over to
Bayport skippered her. We picked up a West Injy schooner, derelict,
abandoned same as this one, but not anchored, of course. Yeller jack was
the trouble aboard her and--Where you bound, Thoph?"

"Goin' to take a squint at the fo'castle," replied Theophilus, moving
forward. The minister followed him.

The fo'castle hatchway was black and grim. Ellery knelt and peered down.
Here there was practically no light at all and the air was fouler than
that in the cabin.

"See anything, Mr. Ellery?" asked Thoph, looking over his shoulder.

"No, I don't see anything. But I thought--"

He seemed to be listening.

"What did you think?"

"Nothing. I--"

"Hold on! you ain't goin' down there, be you? I wouldn't. No tellin'
what you might find. Well, all right. I ain't curious. I'll stay up here
and you can report."

He stepped over and leaned against the rail. Bill came across the deck
and joined him.

"Where's Charlie?" asked Thoph.

"Gone back to the cabin," was the answer. "Thought likely he might find
some of her papers or somethin' to put us on the track. I told him to
heave ahead; I didn't want no part of it. Too much like that yeller-jack
schooner to suit me. What's become of the parson?"

Thoph pointed to the open hatch.

"Down yonder, explorin' the fo'castle," he replied. "He can have the
job, for all me. Phew! Say, Bill, what IS this we've struck, anyhow?"

Ellery descended the almost perpendicular ladder gingerly, holding on
with both hands. At its foot he stopped and tried to accustom his eyes
to the darkness.

A room perhaps ten feet long, so much he could make out. The floor
strewn, like that of the cabin, with heaps of clothing and odds and
ends. More shapes of clothes hanging up and swaying with the roll of the
brig. A little window high up at the end, black with dirt. And cavities,
bunks in rows, along the walls. A horrible hole.

He took a step toward the center of the room, bending his head to
avoid hitting the fo'castle lantern. Then in one of the bunks something
stirred, something alive. He started violently, controlled himself with
an effort, and stumbled toward the sound.

"What is it?" he whispered. "Who is it? Is anyone there?"

A groan answered him. Then a voice, weak and quavering, said:

"Gimme a drink! Gimme a drink! Can't none of you God-forsaken devils
give me a drink?"

He stooped over the bunk. A man was lying in it, crumpled into a
dreadful heap. He stooped lower, looked, and saw the man's face.

There was a shout from the deck, or, rather, a yell. Then more yells and
the sound of running feet.

"Mr. Ellery!" screamed Burgess, at the hatchway. "Mr. Ellery, for the
Almighty's sake, come up here! Come out of that this minute. Quick!"

The minister knew what was coming, was sure of it as he stepped to the
foot of the ladder, had known it the instant he saw that face.

"Mr. Ellery!" shrieked Burgess. "Mr. Ellery, are you there?"

"Yes, I'm here," answered the minister, slowly. He was fighting with all
his might to keep his nerves under control. His impulse was to leap
up those steps, rush across that deck, spring into the dory and row,
anywhere to get away from the horror of that forecastle.

"Come up!" called Burgess. "Hurry! It's the smallpox! The darned
hooker's rotten with it. For God sakes, come quick!"

He ran to the rail, yelling order to Bill and Thoph, who were
frantically busy with the dory. Ellery began to climb the ladder. His
head emerged into the clean, sweet air blowing across the deck. He drew
a breath to the very bottom of his lungs.

Then from behind and below him came the voice again.

"Gimme a drink!" it wailed. "Gimme a drink of water. Ain't one of you
cussed swabs got decency enough to fetch me a drink? I'm dyin' for a
drink, I tell you. I'm dyin'!"

The minister stood still, his feet on the ladder. The three men by the
rail were working like mad, their faces livid under the sunburn and
their hands trembling. They pushed each other about and swore. They were
not cowards, either. Ellery knew them well enough to know that. Burgess
had, that very winter, pulled a skiff through broken ice in the face
of a wicked no'theaster to rescue an old neighbor whose dory had been
capsized in the bay while he was hauling lobster pots. But now Burgess
was as scared as the rest.

Thoph and Bill sprang over the rail into the boat. Burgess turned and
beckoned to Ellery.

"Come on!" he called. "What are you waitin' for?"

The minister remained where he was.

"Are you sure--" he faltered.

"Sure! Blast it all! I found the log. It ain't been kept for a fortni't,
but there's enough. It's smallpox, I tell you. Two men died of it three
weeks ago. The skipper died right afterwards. The mate--No wonder them
that was left run away as soon as they sighted land. Come on! Do you
want to die, too?"

From the poison pit at the foot of the ladder the man in the bunk called
once more.

"Water!" he screeched. "Water! Are you goin' to leave me, you d--n
cowards?"

"For Heaven sakes!" cried Burgess, clutching the rail, "what's that?"

Ellery answered him. "It's one of them," he said, and his voice sounded
odd in his own ears. "It's one of the crew."

"One of the--Down THERE? Has he--"

"Yes, he has."

"Help! help!" screamed the voice shrilly. "Are you goin' to leave me to
die all alone? He-elp!"

The minister turned. "Hush!" he called, in answer to the voice, "hush!
I'll bring you water in a minute. Burgess," he added, "you and the rest
go ashore. I shall stay."

"You'll stay? You'll STAY? With THAT? You're crazy as a loon. Don't be
a fool, man! Come on! We'll send the doctor and somebody else--some one
that's had it, maybe, or ain't afraid. I am and I'm goin'. Don't be a
fool."

Thoph, from the dory, shouted to know what was the matter. Ellery
climbed the ladder to the deck and walked over to the rail. As he
approached, Burgess fell back a few feet.

"Thoph," said the minister, addressing the pair in the dory, "there is
a sick man down in the forecastle. He has been alone there for hours,
I suppose, certainly since his shipmates ran away. If he is left longer
without help, he will surely die. Some one must stay with him. You and
the rest row ashore and get the doctor and whoever else you can. I'll
stay here till they come."

Thoph and his companions set up a storm of protest. It was foolish, it
was crazy, the man would die anyhow, and so on. They begged the minister
to come with them. But he was firm.

"Don't stop to argue," he urged. "Hurry and get the doctor."

"Come on, Charlie," ordered Bill. "No use talkin' to him, he's set. Come
on! I won't stay alongside this craft another minute for nobody. If you
be comin', come."

Burgess, still protesting, clambered over the rail. The dory swung clear
of the brig. The rowers settled themselves for the stroke.

"Better change your mind, Mr. Ellery," pleaded Charlie. "I hate to leave
you this way. It seems mean, but I'm a married man with children, like
the rest of us here, and I can't take no risks. Better come, too. No?
Well, we'll send help quick as the Lord'll let us. By the Almighty!" he
added, in a sudden burst, "you've got more spunk than I have--yes, or
anybody I ever come across. I'll say that for you, if you are a parson.
Give way, fellers."

The oars dipped, bent, and the dory moved off. The sound of the creaking
thole pins shot a chill through Ellery's veins. His knees shook, and
involuntarily a cry for them to come back rose to his lips. But he
choked it down and waved his hand in farewell. Then, not trusting
himself to look longer at the receding boat, he turned on his heel and
walked toward the forecastle.

The water butts stood amidships, not far from the open door of the
galley. Entering the latter he found an empty saucepan. This he filled
from the cask, and then, with it in his hand, turned toward the black
hatchway. Here was the greatest test of his courage. To descend that
ladder, approach that bunk, and touch the terrible creature in it, these
were the tasks he had set himself to do, but could he?

Vaccination in those days was by no means the universal custom that it
now is. And smallpox, even now, is a disease the name of which strikes
panic to a community. The minister had been vaccinated when he was a
child, but that was--so it seemed to him--a very long time ago. And
that forecastle was so saturated with the plague that to enter it meant
almost certain infection. He had stayed aboard the brig because the
pitiful call for help had made leaving a cowardly impossibility. Now,
face to face, and in cold blood, with the alternative, it seemed neither
so cowardly or impossible. The man would die anyhow, so Thoph had said;
was there any good reason why he should risk dying, too, and dying in
that way?

He thought of a great many things and of many people as he stood by the
hatchway, waiting; among others, he thought of his housekeeper,
Keziah Coffin. And, somehow, the thought of her, of her pluck, and her
self-sacrifice, were the very inspirations he needed. "It's the duty
that's been laid on me," Keziah had said, "and it's a hard one, but I
don't run away from it." He began to descend the ladder.

The sick man was raving in delirium when he reached him, but the sound
of the water lapping the sides of the saucepan brought him to himself.
He seized Ellery by the arm and drank and drank. When at last he
desisted, the pan was half empty.

The minister laid him gently back in the bunk and stepped to the foot of
the ladder for breath. This made him think of the necessity for air in
the place and he remembered the little window. It was tightly closed
and rusted fast. He went up to the deck, found a marlin spike, and,
returning, broke the glass. A sharp, cold draught swept through the
forecastle, stirring the garments hanging on the nails.

An hour later, two dories bumped against the side of the San Jose. Men,
talking in low tones, climbed over the rail. Burgess was one of them;
ashamed of his panic, he had returned to assist the others in bringing
the brigantine into a safer anchorage by the inlet.

Dr. Parker, very grave but businesslike, reached the deck among the
first.

"Mr. Ellery," he shouted, "where are you?"

The minister's head and shoulders appeared at the forecastle companion.
"Here I am, doctor," he said. "Will you come down?"

The doctor made no answer in words, but he hurried briskly across the
deck. One man, Ebenezer Capen, an old fisherman and ex-whaler from
East Trumet, started to follow him, but he was the only one. The others
waited, with scared faces, by the rail.

"Get her under way and inshore as soon as you can," ordered Dr. Parker.
"Ebenezer, you can help. If I need you below, I'll call."

The minister backed down the ladder and the doctor followed him. Parker
bent over the bunk for a few moments in silence.

"He's pretty bad," he muttered. "Mighty little chance. Heavens, what a
den! Who broke that window?"

"I did," replied Ellery. "The air down here was dreadful."

The doctor nodded approvingly. "I guess so," he said. "It's bad enough
now. We've got to get this poor fellow out of here as soon as we can or
he'll die before to-morrow. Mr. Ellery," he added sharply, "what made
you do this? Don't you realize the risk you've run?"

"Some one had to do it. You are running the same risk."

"Not just the same, and, besides, it's my business. Why didn't you let
some one else, some one we could spare--Humph! Confound it, man! didn't
you know any better? Weren't you afraid?"

His tone rasped Ellery's shaken nerves.

"Of course I was," he snapped irritably. "I'm not an idiot."

"Humph! Well, all right; I beg your pardon. But you oughtn't to have
done it. Now you'll have to be quarantined. And who in thunder I can get
to stay with me in this case is more than I know. Just say smallpox to
this town and it goes to pieces like a smashed egg. Old Eb Capen will
help, for he's had it, but it needs more than one."

"Where are you going to take--him?" pointing to the moaning occupant of
the bunk.

"To one of the empty fish shanties on the beach. There are beds there,
such as they are, and the place is secluded. We can burn it down when
the fuss is over."

"Then why can't I stay? I shall have to be quarantined, I know that. Let
me be the other nurse. Why should anyone else run the risk? I HAVE run
it. I'll stay."

Dr. Parker looked at him. "Well!" he exclaimed. "Well! I must say, young
man, that you've got--Humph! All right, Mr. Ellery; I'm much obliged."


CHAPTER XVII

IN WHICH EBENEZER CAPEN IS SURPRISED


Before sunset that afternoon the San Jose was anchored behind the point
by the inlet. The fishing boats changed moorings and moved farther
up, for not a single one of their owners would trust himself within a
hundred yards of the stricken brigantine. As soon as the anchors were
dropped, the volunteer crew was over side and away, each of its members
to receive a scolding from his family for taking such a risk and to have
his garments sulphur-smoked or buried. Charlie Burgess, whose wife was
something of a Tartar, observed ruefully that he "didn't take no comfort
'round home nowadays; between the smell of brimstone and the jawin's
'twas the hereafter ahead of time."

The largest of the beach shanties, one which stood by itself a quarter
of a mile from the light, was hurriedly prepared for use as a pesthouse
and the sick sailor was carried there on an improvised stretcher.
Dr. Parker and Ellery lifted him from his berth and, assisted by old
Ebenezer Capen, got him up to the deck and lowered him into the dory.
Ebenezer rowed the trio to the beach and the rest of the journey was
comparatively easy.

The shanty had three rooms, one of which was given up to the patient,
one used as a living room, and, in the third, Capen and the minister
were to sleep. Mattresses were procured, kind-hearted and sympathizing
townspeople donated cast-off tables and chairs, and the building was
made as comfortable as it could be, under the circumstances. Sign
boards, warning strangers to keep away, were erected, and in addition
to them, the Trumet selectmen ordered ropes stretched across the lane on
both sides of the shanty. But ropes and signs were superfluous. Trumet
in general was in a blue funk and had no desire to approach within a
mile of the locality. Even the driver of the grocery cart, when he left
the day's supply of provisions, pushed the packages under the ropes,
yelled a hurried "Here you be!" and, whipping up his horse, departed at
a rattling gallop.

The village sat up nights to discuss the affair and every day brought
a new sensation. The survivors of the San Jose's crew, a wretched,
panic-stricken quartette of mulattos and Portuguese, were apprehended
on the outskirts of Denboro, the town below Trumet on the bay side,
and were promptly sequestered and fumigated, pending shipment to the
hospital at Boston. Their story was short but grewsome. The brigantine
was not a Turks Islands boat, but a coaster from Jamaica. She had sailed
with a small cargo for Savannah. Two days out and the smallpox made its
appearance on board. The sufferer, a negro foremast hand, died. Then
another sailor was seized and also died. The skipper, who was the owner,
was the next victim, and the vessel was in a state of demoralization
which the mate, an Englishman named Bradford, could not overcome. Then
followed days and nights of calm and terrible heat, of pestilence
and all but mutiny. The mate himself died. There was no one left who
understood navigation. At last came a southeast gale and the San Jose
drove before it. Fair weather found her abreast the Cape. The survivors
ran her in after dark, anchored, and reached shore in the longboat. The
sick man whom they had left in the forecastle was a new hand who had
shipped at Kingston. His name was Murphy, they believed. They had left
him because he was sure to die, like the others, and, besides, they knew
some one would see the distress signals and investigate. That was all,
yes. Santa Maria! was it not enough?

This tale was a delicious tidbit for Didama and the "daily advertisers,"
but, after all, it was a mere side dish compared to Mr. Ellery's
astonishing behavior. That he, the minister of the Regular church,
should risk his life, risk dying of the smallpox, to help a stranger
and a common sailor, was incomprehensible. Didama, at least, could not
understand it, and said so. "My soul and body!" she exclaimed, with
uplifted hands. "I wouldn't go nigh my own grandfather if he had the
smallpox, let alone settin' up with a strange critter that I didn't
know from Adam's cat. And a minister doin' it! He ought to consider the
congregation, if he done nothin' else. Ain't we more important than a
common water rat that, even when he's dyin', swears, so I hear tell,
like a ship's poll parrot? I never heard of such foolishness. It beats
ME!"

It "beat" a good many who, like the Widow Rogers, could not understand
self-sacrifice. But there were more, and they the majority of Trumet's
intelligent people, who understood and appreciated. Dr. Parker, a man
with a reputation for dangerously liberal views concerning religious
matters and an infrequent attendant at church, was enthusiastic and
prodigal of praise.

"By George!" vowed the doctor. "That's MY kind of Christianity. That's
the kind of parson I can tie to. I'm for John Ellery after this, first,
last, and all the time. And if he don't get the smallpox and die, and
if he does live to preach in the Regular church, you'll see me in one of
the front pews every Sunday. That's what I think of him. Everybody else
ran away and I don't blame 'em much. But he stayed. Yes, sir, by George!
he stayed. 'Somebody had to do it,' says he. I take off my hat to that
young fellow."

Captain Zeb Mayo went about cheering for his parson. Mrs. Mayo cooked
delicacies to be pushed under the ropes for the minister's consumption.
The parish committee, at a special session, voted an increase of salary
and ordered a weekly service of prayer for the safe delivery of their
young leader from danger. Even Captain Elkanah did not try to oppose
the general opinion; "although I cannot but feel," he said, "that Mr.
Ellery's course was rash and that he should have considered us and our
interest in his welfare before--"

"Dum it all!" roared Captain Zeb, jumping to his feet and interrupting,
"he didn't consider himself, did he? and ain't he as important TO
himself as you, Elkanah Daniels, or anybody else in this meetin' house?
Bah! don't let's have no more talk like that or I'll say somethin' that
won't be fit to put in the minutes."

Even at Come-Outers' meeting, when Ezekiel Bassett hinted at a "just
punishment fallin' on the head of the leader of the Pharisees," Thoph
Black rose and defended Ellery.

Keziah Coffin was, perhaps, the one person most disturbed by her
parson's heroism. She would have gone to the shanty immediately had not
Dr. Parker prevented. Even as it was, she did go as far as the ropes,
but there she was warded off by Ebenezer until Ellery came running out
and bade her come no nearer.

"But you shan't stay here, Mr. Ellery," vowed Keziah. "Or, if you do,
I'll stay, too. I ain't afraid of smallpox."

"I am," confessed the minister, "and I'm not going to let anyone I care
for expose themselves to it unnecessarily. If you try to come in here I
shall"--he smiled--"well, Capen and I will put you off the premises by
force. There!"

Keziah smiled, too, in spite of herself. "Maybe you'd have your hands
full," she said. "O John, what in the world made you do this thing? It's
dreadful. I shan't sleep a wink, thinkin' of you. I just must come here
and help."

"No, you mustn't. You can come as far as the--the dead line once in
a while, if Captain Mayo will drive you over, but that's all. I'm all
right. Don't worry about me. I'm feeling tiptop and I'm not going to be
sick. Now go home and make me some of that--some of those puddings of
yours. We can use them to advantage, can't we, Capen?"

"Bet yer!" replied Ebenezer with enthusiasm. Keziah, after more
expostulation, went back to the parsonage, where the puddings were made
and seasoned with tears and fervent prayers. She wrote to Grace and told
her the news of the San Jose, but she said nothing of the minister's
part in it. "Poor thing!" sighed Keziah, "she's bearin' enough already.
Her back ain't as strong as mine, maybe, and mine's most crackin'. Well,
let it crack for good and all; I don't know but that's the easiest way
out."

The sick sailor grew no better. Days and nights passed and he raved
and moaned or lay in a stupor. Ebenezer acted as day nurse while Ellery
slept, and, at night, the minister, being younger, went on watch. The
doctor came frequently, but said there was no hope. A question of time
only, and a short time, he said.

Capen occupied his mind with speculations concerning the patient.

"Do you know, parson," he said, "seem's if I'd seen the feller
somewheres afore. 'Course I never have, but when I used to go whalin'
v'yages I cruised from one end of creation to t'other, pretty nigh,
and I MIGHT have met him. However, his own folks wouldn't know him now,
would they? so I cal'late I'm just gettin' foolish in my old age. Said
his name's Murphy, them ha'f-breeds did, didn't they? I know better'n
that."

"How do you know?" asked Ellery, idly listening.

"'Cause when he's floppin' round on the bed, out of his head, he sings
out all kinds of stuff. A good deal of it's plain cussin', but there's
times when he talks respectable and once I heard him say 'darn' and
another time 'I cal'late.' Now no Irishman says THAT. That's Yankee,
that is."

"Well, he ought to know his own name."

"Prob'ly he does--or used to--but 'most likely he don't want nobody else
to know it. That's why he said 'twas Murphy and, bein' as he DID say it,
I know 'tain't it. See my argument, don't you, Mr. Ellery?"

"Yes, I guess so."

"Um--hm! Why, land sakes, names don't mean nothin' with seafarin' men.
I've seen the time when I had more names--Humph! Looks kind of squally
off to the east'ard, don't it?"

That night the sick man was much worse. His ravings were incessant. The
minister, sitting in his chair in the living room, by the cook stove,
could hear the steady stream of shouts, oaths, and muttered fragments of
dialogue with imaginary persons. Sympathy for the sufferer he felt,
of course, and yet he, as well as Dr. Parker and old Capen, had heard
enough to realize that the world would be none the worse for losing this
particular specimen of humanity. The fellow had undoubtedly lived a hard
life, among the roughest of companions afloat and ashore. Even Ebenezer,
who by his own confession, was far from being a saint, exclaimed
disgustedly at the close of a day's watching by the sick bed: "Phew! I
feel's if I'd been visiting state's prison. Let me set out doors a spell
and listen to the surf. It's clean, anyhow, and that critter's talk
makes me want to give my brains a bath."

The wooden clock, loaned by Mrs. Parker, the doctor's wife, ticked
steadily, although a half hour slow. Ellery, glancing at it to see if
the time had come for giving medicine, suddenly noticed how loud its
ticking sounded. Wondering at this, he was aware there was no other
sound in the house. He rose and looked in at the door of the adjoining
room. The patient had ceased to rave and was lying quiet on the bed.

The minister tiptoed over to look at him. And, as he did so, the man
opened his eyes.

"Halloo!" he said faintly. "Who are you?"

Ellery, startled, made no answer.

"Who are you?" demanded the man again. Then, with an oath, he repeated
the question, adding: "What place is this? This ain't the fo'castle.
Where am I?"

"You're ashore. You've been sick. Don't try to move."

"Sick? Humph! Sick? 'Course I been sick. Don't I know it? The d--n
cowards run off and left me; blast their eyes! I'll fix 'em for it one
of these days, you hear--"

"Sshh!"

"Hush up yourself. Where am I?"

"You're ashore. On Cape Cod. At Trumet."

"Trumet! TRUMET!"

He was struggling to raise himself on his elbow. Ellery was obliged to
use force to hold him down.

"Hush! hush!" pleaded the minister, "you mustn't try to--"

"Trumet! I ain't. You're lyin'. Trumet! Good God! Who brought me here?
Did she--Is she--"

He struggled again. Then his strength and his reason left him
simultaneously and the delirium returned. He began to shout a name, a
name that caused Ellery to stand upright and step back from the bed,
scarcely believing his ears.

All the rest of that night the man on the bed raved and muttered, but of
people and places and happenings which he had not mentioned before. And
the minister, listening intently to every word, caught himself wondering
if he also was not losing his mind.

When the morning came, Ebenezer Capen was awakened by a shake to find
John Ellery standing over him.

"Capen," whispered the minister, "Capen, get up. I must talk with you."

Ebenezer was indignant.

"Judas priest!" he exclaimed; "why don't you scare a feller to death,
comin' and yankin' him out of bed by the back hair?" Then, being more
wide awake, he added: "What's the row? Worse, is he? He ain't--"

"No. But I've got to talk with you. You used to be a whaler, I know.
Were you acquainted in New Bedford?"

"Sartin. Was a time when I could have located every stick in it, pretty
nigh, by the smell, if you'd set me down side of 'em blindfold."

"Did you ever know anyone named--" He finished the sentence.

"Sure and sartin, I did. Why?"

"Did you know him well?"

"Well's I wanted to. Pretty decent feller one time, but a fast goer, and
went downhill like a young one's sled, when he got started. His folks
had money, that was the trouble with him. Why, 'course I knew him! He
married--"

"I know. Now, listen."

Ellery went on talking rapidly and with great earnestness. Ebenezer
listened, at first silently, then breaking in with ejaculations and
grunts of astonishment. He sat up on the edge of the bed.

"Rubbish!" he cried at last, "why, 'tain't possible! The feller's dead
as Methusalem's grandmarm. I remember how it happened and--"

"It wasn't true. That much I know. I KNOW, I tell you."

He went on to explain why he knew. Capen's astonishment grew.

"Judas priest!" he exclaimed again. "That would explain why I thought
I'd seen--There! heave ahead. I've got to see. But it's a mistake. I
don't believe it."

The pair entered the sick room. The sailor lay in a stupor. His
breathing was rapid, but faint. Capen bent over him and gently moved the
bandage on his face. For a full minute he gazed steadily. Then he stood
erect, drew a big red hand across his forehead, and moved slowly back to
the living room.

"Well?" asked Ellery eagerly.

Ebenezer sat down in the rocker. "Judas priest!" he said for the third
time. "Don't talk to ME! When it comes my time they'll have to prove I'm
dead. I won't believe it till they do. Ju-das PRIEST!"

"Then you recognize him?"

The old man nodded solemnly.

"Yup," he said, "it's him. Mr. Ellery, what are you goin' to do about
it?"

"I don't know. I don't know. I must go somewhere by myself and think. I
don't know WHAT to do."

The minister declined to wait for breakfast. He said he was not hungry.
Leaving Ebenezer to put on the coffeepot and take up his duties as day
nurse, Ellery walked off along the beach. The "dead line" prevented his
going very far, but he sat down in the lee of a high dune and thought
until his head ached. What should he do? What was best for him to do?

He heard the rattle of the doctor's chaise and the voices of Ebenezer
and Parker in conversation. He did not move, but remained where he was,
thinking, thinking. By and by he heard Capen calling his name.

"Mr. Ellery!" shouted Ebenezer. "Mr. Ellery, where be you?"

"Here!" replied the minister.

The old man came scrambling over the sand. He was panting and much
excited.

"Mr. Ellery!" he cried, "Mr. Ellery! it's settled for us--one part of
it, anyhow. He's slipped his cable."

"What?" The minister sprang up.

"Yup. He must have died just a little while after you left and after I
gave him his medicine. I thought he looked kind of queer then. And when
the doctor came we went in together and he was dead. Yes, sir, dead."

"Dead!"

"Um--hm. No doubt of it; it's for good this time. Mr. Ellery, what shall
we do? Shall I tell Dr. Parker?"

Ellery considered for a moment. "No," he said slowly. "No, Capen, don't
tell anyone. I can't see why they need ever know that he hasn't been
dead for years, as they supposed. Promise me to keep it a secret. I'll
tell--her--myself, later on. Now promise me; I trust you."

"Land sakes, yes! I'll promise, if you want me to. I'm a widower man, so
there'll be nobody to coax it out of me. I guess you're right, cal'late
you be. What folks don't know they can't lie about, can they? and that's
good for your business--meanin' nothin' disreverent. I'll promise, Mr.
Ellery; I'll swear to it. Now come on back to the shanty. The doctor
wants you."

The next day the body of "Murphy," foremast hand on the San Jose, was
buried in the corner of the Regular graveyard, near those who were
drowned in the wreck of that winter. There was no funeral, of course.
The minister said a prayer at the shanty, and that was all. Ebenezer
drove the wagon which was used as hearse for the occasion, and filled in
the grave himself. So great was the fear of the terrible smallpox that
the sexton would not perform even that service for its victim.

Capen remained at the shanty another week. Then, as the minister showed
no symptoms of having contracted the disease and insisted that he needed
no companion, Ebenezer departed to take up his fishing once more. The
old man was provided with a new suit of clothes, those he had worn being
burned, and having been, to his huge disgust, fumigated until, as he
said, he couldn't smell himself without thinking of a match box, went
away. The room which the dead sailor had occupied was emptied and sealed
tight. The San Jose was to stay at her anchorage a while longer. Then,
when all danger was past, she was to be towed to Boston and sold at
auction for the benefit of the heirs of her dead skipper and owner.

Ellery himself was most urgent in the decision that he should not go
back to the parsonage and his church just yet. Better to wait until he
was sure, he said, and Dr. Parker agreed. "I'd be willing to bet that
you are all right," declared the latter, "but I know Trumet, and if I
SHOULD let you go and you did develop even the tail end of a case of
varioloid--well, 'twould be the everlasting climax for you and me in
this county."

Staying alone was not unpleasant, in a way. The "dead line" still
remained, of course, and callers did not attempt to pass it, but they
came more frequently and held lengthy conversations at a respectful
distance. Ellery did his own cooking, what little there was to do, but
so many good things were pushed under the ropes that he was in a fair
way to develop weight and indigestion. Captain Zeb Mayo drove down at
least twice a week and usually brought Mrs. Coffin with him. From them
and from the doctor the prisoner learned the village news. Once Captain
Elkanah and Annabel came, and the young lady's gushing praise of the
minister's "heroism" made its recipient almost sorry he had ever heard
of the San Jose.

Dr. Parker told him of Grace Van Horne's return to the village. She had
come back, so the doctor said, the day before, and was to live at the
tavern for a while, at least. Yes, he guessed even she had given up hope
of Captain Nat now.

"And say," went on Parker, "how are you feeling?"

"Pretty well, thank you," replied the minister. "I seem to be rather
tired and good for nothing. More so than I was during the worst of it."

"No wonder. A chap can't go through what you did and not feel some
reaction. I expected that. Don't get cold, that's all. But what I want
to know is whether you think I could leave you for a couple of days?
The Ostable County Medical Society meets at Hyannis to-morrow and I had
promised myself to take it in this year. But I don't want to leave you,
if you need me."

Ellery insisted that he did not need anyone, was getting along finely,
and would not hear of his friend's missing the medical society's
meeting. So the physician went.

"Good-by," he called as he drove off. "I guess your term is pretty
nearly over. I shall let you out of jail inside of four or five days, if
you behave yourself."

This should have been cheering news, but, somehow, John Ellery did not
feel cheerful that afternoon. The tired feeling he had spoken of so
lightly was worse than he had described it, and he was despondent, for
no particular reason. That night he slept miserably and awoke with a
chill to find a cold, pouring rain beating against the windows of the
shanty.

He could not eat and he could not keep warm, even with the cook-stove
top red hot and a blanket over his shoulders. By noon the chill had
gone and he was blazing with fever. Still the rain and the wind, and no
visitors at the ropes, not even the light-keeper.

He lay down on his bed and tried to sleep, but though he dozed a bit,
woke always with a start and either a chill or fever fit. His head began
to ache violently. And then, in the lonesomeness and misery, fear began
to take hold of him.

He remembered the symptoms the doctor had warned him against, headache,
fever, and all the rest. He felt his wrists and arms and began to
imagine that beneath the skin were the little bunches, like small shot,
that were the certain indications. Then he remembered how that other man
had looked, how he had died. Was he to look that way and die like that?
And he was all alone, they had left him alone.

Night came. The rain had ceased and stars were shining clear. Inside the
shanty the minister tossed on the bed, or staggered back and forth about
the two rooms. He wondered what the time might be; then he did not care.
He was alone. The smallpox had him in its grip. He was alone and he
was going to die. Why didn't some one come? Where was Mrs. Coffin? And
Grace? She was somewhere near him--Parker had said so--and he must see
her before he died. He called her name over and over again.

The wind felt cold on his forehead. He stumbled amidst the beach grass.
What was this thing across his path? A rope, apparently, but why should
there be ropes in that house? There had never been any before. He
climbed over it and it was a climb of hundreds of feet and the height
made him giddy. That was a house, another house, not the one he had been
living in. And there were lights all about. Perhaps one of them was the
light at the parsonage. And a big bell was booming. That was his church
bell and he would be late for the meeting.

Some one was speaking to him. He knew the voice. He had known it always
and would know it forever. It was the voice he wanted to hear. "Grace!"
he called. "Grace! I want you. Don't go! Don't go! Grace! oh, my dear!
don't go!"

Then the voice had gone. No, it had not gone. It was still there and he
heard it speaking to him, begging him to listen, pleading with him to
go somewhere, go back, back to something or other. And there was an arm
about his waist and some one was leading him, helping him. He broke down
and cried childishly and some one cried with him.


Early the next morning, just as day was breaking, a buggy, the horse
which drew it galloping, rocked and bumped down the lighthouse lane.
Dr. Parker, his brows drawn together and his lips set with anxiety, was
driving. He had been roused from sleep in the hotel at Hyannis by a boy
with a telegram. "Come quick," it read. "Mr. Ellery sick." The sender
was Noah Ellis, the lightkeeper. The doctor had hired a fast horse,
ridden at top speed to Bayport, gotten a fresh horse there and hurried
on. He stopped at his own house but a moment, merely to rouse his wife
and ask her if there was any fresh news. But she had not even heard of
the minister's seizure.

"My soul, Will!" she cried, "you don't think it's the smallpox, do you?"

"Lord knows! I'm afraid so," groaned her husband. "WHAT made me leave
him? I ought to have known better. If that boy dies, I'll never draw
another easy breath."

He rushed out, sprang into the buggy, and drove on. At the ropes, early
as it was, he found a small group waiting and gazing at the shanty.
The lightkeeper was there and two or three other men. They were talking
earnestly.

"How is he, Noah?" demanded the doctor, jumping to the ground.

"I don't know, doc," replied Ellis. "I ain't heard sence last night when
I telegraphed you."

"Haven't heard? What do you mean by that? Haven't you been with him?"

"No-o," was the rather sheepish reply. "You see, I--I wanted to, but my
wife's awful scart I'll catch it and--"

"The devil!" Dr. Parker swore impatiently. "Who is with him then? You
haven't left him alone, have you?"

"No-o," Noah hesitated once more. "No-o, he ain't alone. She's there."

"She? Who? Keziah Coffin?"

"I don't cal'late Keziah's heard it yet. We was waitin' for you 'fore we
said much to anybody. But she's there--the--the one that found him. You
see, he was out of his head and wanderin' up the lane 'most to the main
road and she'd been callin' on Keziah and when she come away from the
parsonage she heard him hollerin' and goin' on and--"

"Who did?"

"Why"--the lightkeeper glanced at his companions--"why, doc, 'twas Grace
Van Horne. And she fetched him back to the shanty and then come and got
me to telegraph you."

"Grace Van Horne! Grace Van--Do you mean to say she is there with him
NOW?"

"Yes. She wouldn't leave him. She seemed 'most as crazy's he was. My
wife and me, we--"

But Parker did not wait to hear the rest. He ran at full speed to the
door of the shanty. Grace herself opened it.

"How is he?" demanded the doctor.

"I think he seems a little easier; at any rate, he's not delirious. He's
in there. Oh, I'm so thankful you've come."

"Is that the doctor?" called Ellery weakly from the next room. "Is it?"

"Yes," replied Parker, throwing off his coat and hat. "Coming, Mr.
Ellery."

"For God's sake, doctor, send her away. Don't let her stay. Make her go.
Make her GO! I've got the smallpox and if she stays she will die. Don't
you understand? she MUST go."

"Hush, John," said Grace soothingly. "Hush, dear."

Dr. Parker stopped short and looked at her. She returned the look, but
without the slightest semblance of self-consciousness or embarrassment.
She did not realize that she had said anything unusual, which must
sound inexplicably strange to him. Her thoughts were centered in that
adjoining room and she wondered why he delayed.

"Well?" she asked impatiently. "What is it? Why do you wait?"

The doctor did not answer. However, he waited no longer, but hurried in
to his new patient.


CHAPTER XVIII

IN WHICH KEZIAH DECIDES TO FIGHT


The news was flying from house to house along the main road. Breakfasts
were interrupted as some neighbor rushed in to tell the story which
another neighbor had brought to him or her. Mr. Ellery was very sick
and it was feared he had the smallpox, that was what Mrs. Parker, the
doctor's wife, told those who lived near her. By the time the Corners
heard of it the tale had grown until the minister was said to be dying.
And when it reached Gaius Winslow's home at the upper end of the town he
was reported dead. This was denied, upon investigation, but soon another
rumor grew and spread; Grace Van Horne was with him, had taken him back
to the shanty, and insisted upon staying there until the doctor came.
Facing that dreadful disease and--It was wonderful--and queer.

At the Danielses' house the servant girl rushed into the dining room to
serve the toast and the story at one swoop. Captain Elkanah's dignity
deserted him for an instant and his egg spoon jingled to the floor.
Annabel's face turned a dull red. Her eyes flashed sparks.

"Pa!" she cried, "I--I--if you don't do something now I'll never--"

Her father shook his head warningly. "Debby," he said to the maid, "you
needn't wait."

Debby departed reluctantly. After the kitchen door had closed, Captain
Elkanah said: "My dear, we mustn't be too hasty in this matter.
Remember, Mr. Ellery is very sick. As for--for the Van Horne girl, we
haven't heard the whole truth yet. She may not be there at all, or it
may be just an accident--"

"Accident! Pa, you make me boil. Accident! Accidents like that don't
happen. If you let her stay there, or if--Oh, to think of it! And we
were calling him a hero and--and everything! Hero! he stayed there just
so she might--"

"Hush! hush, child!"

"I shan't hush. Pa, are you going to let him disgrace himself with HER?"

"No, no. Probably there ain't any idea of his marrying her. If there
is--"

"If there is you put him out of the church and out of this town. And
as for HER--O-oh! And we've been having him here at dinner and--and I
have--Oh, I shall die! I wish I WAS dead!"

Then followed hysterics and agony, greedily listened to by Debby, whose
ear was at the crack of the door. Captain Elkanah soothed and pleaded
and tried to pacify. It ended by his promising to investigate and, if
necessary, take steps 'immejitly.'

Lavinia Pepper sprung the mine on her brother. Kyan was horrified. He
had grown to be one of Ellery's most devoted worshipers.

"Smallpox!" he groaned. "The minister got the smallpox. Oh! that's
turrible."

"Ain't it?" observed his sister, also horrified, but rather relishing
the horror. "And if it hadn't been for Gracie Van Horne--"

"WHAT?"

"What's the matter with you? I say, if Gracie Van Horne hadn't happened
to meet him, wanderin' around, crazy as a coot, and toted him back--"

"Gracie--Van--Horne! Godfreys mighty! She--she met him? Where? Down to
Peters's grove, was it?"

"Peters's grove! No. What on earth made you think 'twas there? She'd
been visitin' Keziah Coffin at the parsonage, and when she come out
on the main road she heard him aravin' down the lane. Must have passed
right by this house and we never heard him. I never see such a dead man
as you be when you're asleep. You don't SOUND dead, I'll say that for
you, but nothin' wakes you up."

"Why, Laviny! you never woke up yourself."

"That's right, lay it onto me. I expected you would; it's just like
you. But why in time did you think Grace met the minister way down to
Peters's grove? That's the most loony notion ever I heard, even from
you. What made you think of it?"

"Nothin', nothin'. I guess I WAS loony, maybe. Dear! dear! dear! have
you heard how's he's gettin' on? Is he took bad?"

"I ain't heard nothin' yet, nobody has. But see here, 'Bish Pepper, you
act funny to me. I want to know more about that Peters's grove notion.
WHY did you say it?"

Kyan wriggled upon the rack and dodged and squirmed for the next twenty
minutes. He tried his best to keep the fateful secret, but he admitted
too much, or not enough, and his sister kept up the cross-examination.
At the end of the session she was still unsatisfied, but she was on
the scent and her brother knew it. He fled to the woodshed and there
punctuated his morning task of kindling chopping with groans and awful
forebodings.

One of the very first to hear of the minister's illness was Keziah
Coffin. Mrs. Parker told her and Keziah started for the beach before the
tale of Grace's part in the night's happenings reached the village. She
did not wait for a conveyance, hardly waited to throw a shawl over her
shoulders, but began to cover the three miles on foot. She had walked
nearly two thirds of the distance when Captain Zeb Mayo overtook her and
gave her a seat in his chaise.

They said little during the drive, the shock and anxiety forbidding
conversation. At the ropes was the same group, larger now, and Dr.
Parker's horse was hitched to one of the posts.

"You can't go in, Mrs. Coffin," said Thoph Black. "The doctor give us
his orders not to let nobody get by. I guess nobody wants to, but all
the same--"

Keziah paid not the slightest attention to Mr. Black. She stooped
beneath his arm, under the rope and was on her way to the shanty before
they realized her intention. Captain Zeb roared a command for her to
return, but she kept on. No one followed, not even the captain. Mrs.
Mayo had strictly forbidden his passing the dead line.

Keziah opened the door and entered the little building. The living room
was empty, but at the sound of her step some one came from the room
adjoining. That some one was Grace.

"Aunt Keziah!" she cried. "What did you come here for? Why did you?"

"Gracie!" exclaimed the housekeeper. "You?--YOU?"

Dr. Parker appeared, holding up a hand for silence.

"Hush!" he cried. "He's quiet now and I think he will sleep. Don't talk
here. Go outside, if you must talk--and I suppose you must."

Grace led the way. Fortunately, the door was on the side not visible
from the spot where Captain Zeb and the rest were standing. Keziah,
bewildered and amazed at the girl's presence, followed dumbly.

"Now, auntie," whispered Grace, turning to her, "you want to know how
he is, of course. Well, I think he is better. The doctor thinks so, too.
But why did you come here?"

"Why did I come? I? Why, because my place was here. I belonged here.
For the love of mercy's sakes what are YOU doin' here? With HIM? And the
smallpox!"

"Hush. I can't help it. I don't care. I don't care for anything any
more. I'm glad I came. I'm glad I was the one to find him and help him.
No matter what happens--to me--I'm glad. I never was so glad before. I
love him, Aunt Keziah. I can say it to you, for you know it--you must
know it. I LOVE him and he needed me and I came. He was calling my name
when I found him. He might have died there, alone in the wet and cold,
and I saved him. Think what that means to me."

The girl was in a sort of frenzy of excitement and hysterical
exaltation. All the night she had been calm and quiet, repressing her
feelings, and tending the man she loved. Now, with some one to whom she
could confide, she was calm no longer. Keziah answered her soothingly,
questioning her from time to time, until, at last, she learned the whole
story.

The door opened softly and Dr. Parker came out.

"He's asleep," he said. "And he's better, much better. And I'll tell you
something else, if you won't make too much noise about it--he hasn't got
the smallpox."

The two women looked at him.

"Fact," he said, with an emphatic nod. "Not a symptom of it. I'd have
bet my best hat that he wasn't going to have it and I won't have to go
bareheaded yet awhile. He is pretty close to brain fever, though, but I
guess he'll dodge that this time, with care. On the whole, Keziah, I'm
glad you came. This young lady," with a movement of the head toward
Grace, "has done her part. She really saved his life, if I'm not
mistaken. Now, I think she can go away and leave him to you and me. I'll
pretty nearly guarantee to have him up and out of this--this pesthole in
a fortnight."

Here was joyful tidings, the better for being so unexpected. Keziah
leaned against the boards and drew a long breath. Grace said nothing,
but, after a moment, she went into the house.

"That's a good thing, too," commented Parker, watching her as she went.
"I wanted to talk with you, Keziah Coffin, and right away. Now, then,
there's something up, something that I don't know about, and I rather
guess you do. Young women--even when they're her kind and that's as good
a kind as there is--don't risk smallpox for any young man they pick up
casually. They don't carry--I guess it was pretty nearly carrying--him
home and put him to bed and care for him and cry over him and call him
'dear.' And he doesn't beg them to run away and let him die rather than
to stay there and risk dying, too. No, not to any great extent. Now,
Keziah, you and I are fairly good friends and we ought to know each
other by this time. I see a light--a little one. Now, then, if you turn
up the lamp, so that I can see the whole blaze, maybe I can help those
two in yonder."

Keziah considered. "All right, doctor," she said, when she reached a
decision, "all right; I'll tell you the whole thing, and you can see one
of the reasons why my hair is gettin' grayer. This thing has reached the
point now where there's no keepin' it quiet. Folk'll know--I s'pose they
know already--that she's been here with him. They'll suspect a lot more
and the truth is better than suspicion--that is, it can't be worse than
the suspicions that come natural to a good many minds in this town. I
am glad I can tell you, for I guess the time's come to step out in
broad daylight and h'ist our colors. Now, you listen. Here 'tis, from
beginnin' to end."

She went on to tell all she knew of her parson's love story.

Dr. Parker listened.

"Hum!" he said thoughtfully, "I see. What made her change her mind so
suddenly? You say, or you gather from what Mr. Ellery told you, that she
had all but agreed to marry him. She cares for him, that's sure. Then,
all at once, she throws him over and accepts Nat. Of course her uncle's
sudden seizure was a shock and he wanted Nat to have her, but she isn't
the kind of girl to be easily swayed. Why did she do it?"

"Well, doctor, that's kind of a puzzle to me. All I can think is that
she come to realize what it might mean to him, the minister, if he
married a Come-Outer. I think she done it for his sake, to save him,
though what made her realize it all at once I don't know. There's the
part we ain't heard."

"I guess you're right. Something happened between the time she left
Ellery and when you and I reached the tavern. But never mind that, that
doesn't count now. Let's look at things as they are this minute. She's
here and folks know it. As they do know it they'll begin to talk, and
the more they talk the farther from the truth they'll get--most of 'em.
Nat, poor chap, is dead, so her promise to him is canceled. Ellery will
get well if he isn't troubled, and her being with him will help more
than anything else. I can understand now why he broke down."

"Yes, he ain't been himself since it happened."

"Of course, and the last few weeks of worry and night work have helped
to wreck his nerves. Well, as I see it, there's only one thing to do. If
she leaves him he'll go to pieces again, so she mustn't leave. And she
can't stay without an explanation. I say let's give the explanation;
let's come right out with the announcement that they're engaged."

"Whew! that'll stir things up."

"You bet! But let it stir. I like that parson of yours; he's a trump.
And I always liked her, although, generally speaking, I don't love
Come-Outers. And I like her more than ever now, when she risked what she
thought was smallpox to care for him. As I said, she saved his life, and
she ought to have him. She SHALL have him."

"But she's a Come-Outer and--there's the church."

"Well, I know it. But he never was so popular as he is now. And she
isn't by any means a steady-going Come-Outer. Why, Zeke Bassett and
the rest have been finding fault with her and calling her a backslider.
That'll help. Then you trust me to whoop up her heroism and the fact
that without her he would have died. We can do it, Keziah. Come on! I've
tackled a good many jobs, but matchmaking isn't one of 'em. Here goes to
tackle that."

Keziah was delighted; here was work after her own heart. But she still
hesitated.

"Doctor," she said, "you've forgot one thing, that's Gracie herself.
Would she marry him now, knowing it may mean the loss of his ministry
and all, any more than she would at first? I don't believe it."

"That's your part, Keziah. You've got to show her she MUST marry him or
he'll die; see? Call on me to back you up in any fairy yarn you spin.
You prove to her it's her duty to marry him. You'll have to stay, here
and help nurse, of course, and that's easy because his disease isn't
contagious. You convince her and I'll take care of the congregation.
He'll live to be minister here for the rest of his life, if he wants to,
and she'll be a minister's wife and sit in the front pew. I'll guarantee
the church if you'll guarantee the girl. Why, it's your duty! Come, now,
what do you say?"

Keziah's hesitation was at an end. Her face lit up.

"I say good!" she cried. "And I'll be thankful to you all the rest of
my life. But for the dear mercy sakes, don't say 'duty' to me again. Oh,
doctor, if you only knew what it means to me to be fightin' at last for
somethin' that ain't just duty, but what I really want! I do honestly
believe we can win. Glory, hallelujah! And now I want to give you a
piece of advice, your course for the first leg, as you might say: you
see Cap'n Zebedee Mayo."

"Humph! Cap'n Zeb is the first man I mean to see."

Captain Zeb listened with his mouth and eyes and ears open. Mrs. Mayo
was with him when the doctor called, and she, too, listened.

"Well!" exclaimed the captain, when the plea for support was ended.
"Well, by the flukes of Jonah's whale! Talk about surprises! Old lady,
what do you say?"

"I say go ahead, Zebedee. Go ahead! If Mr. Ellery wanted to marry
Jezebel's sister, and I knew he really wanted to, I'd--I do believe I'd
help him get her. And Grace Van Horne is a good girl. Go ahead."

"Of course," put in Parker, profiting by a hint of Mrs. Coffin's,
"of course Daniels will fight tooth and nail against us. He'll be for
discharging Ellery at once. And he really runs the parish committee."

"He does, hey? Well, I cal'late he don't. Not if I'm on deck, he don't.
All right, doctor, I'm with you. He, he, he!" he chuckled. "Say, doc, do
you know I sort of love a good lively row. That's been the only trouble
with our society sence Mr. Ellery took command of it--there ain't been
any rows. He, he, he! Well, there'll be one now."

There was, and it was lively enough to suit even Captain Zeb. Dr.
Parker, on his calls that day, was assailed with a multitude of
questions concerning Grace's presence at the shanty. He answered them
cheerfully, dilating upon the girl's bravery, her good sense, and the
fact that she had saved Mr. Ellery's life. Then he confided, as a strict
secret, the fact that the two were engaged. Before his hearers had
recovered from the shock of this explosion, he was justifying the
engagement. Why shouldn't they marry if they wanted to? It was a free
country. The girl wasn't a Come-Outer any longer, and, besides--and this
carried weight in a good many households--what a black eye the marriage
would be for that no-account crowd at the chapel.

Captain Zebedee, having shipped with the insurgents, worked for them
from sunrise to sunset and after. Zeb was something of a politician and
knew whom to "get at." He sought his fellows on the parish committee and
labored with them. Mrs. Mayo and the doctor's wife championed the cause
at sewing circle. They were lively, those sewing meetings, and the fur
flew. Didama Rogers and Lavinia Pepper were everywhere and ready to
agree with whichever side seemed likely to win. Lavinia was so deeply
interested that she forgot to catechise Abishai further about his
untimely reference to Peters's grove. And Kyan, puzzled but thankful,
kept silence.

It was by no means a one-sided struggle. Captain Elkanah, spurred on by
the furious Annabel, marshaled his forces and proclaimed that Ellery,
having disgraced the Regular Society, should no longer occupy its
pulpit.

"If he does," thundered Elkanah, "I shall never cross the threshold of
that church. And I've worshiped there for fifty years. Hum--ha! I should
like to know whose money has gone more liberal for that meeting house
than mine! But not another cent--no, sir! not one--if that licentious
young scamp continues to blaspheme there."

He hinted concerning a good-sized contribution toward a parish house,
something the society needed. If Ellery was discharged, the contribution
would probably be made, not otherwise. And this was a point worth
considering.

Daniels also wrote to his influential friends of the National Regular
Society. But Captain Zebedee had forestalled him there and both letters
were laid on the table to await further developments. As for the
Come-Outers, they were wild with rage and Grace was formally read out of
their communion.

"I wonder," shrieked Ezekiel Bassett, in prayer meeting, "what the
sperrit of the good and great man who used to lead us from this 'ere
platform would say if he was here now? Hey? what would he say?"

Josiah Badger upreared his lanky person. "I dreamed about Cap'n
Eben t'other n-nin-nun-night," he stammered. "I see him just
as--p-pup-pup-plain as you hear me n-n-now. And he says to me, he says,
Josiah,' he says, 'I-I-I-I--'"

"Ki yi!" broke in Thoph Baker, from the shadow of the rear seat. Josiah
turned to berate Thoph, who, being in disgrace because of his defense of
Ellery, was reckless, and the communication from the dead leader of the
Come-Outers was lost in the squabble which followed.

Meantime Keziah, installed as head nurse at the shanty, was having her
troubles. The minister was getting better, slowly but surely getting
better. The danger of brain fever was at an end, but he was very weak
and must not be excited, so the doctor said. He knew nothing of the
struggle for and against him which was splitting Trumet in twain, and
care was taken that he should not know it. He was not allowed to talk,
and, for the most part, was quite contented to be silent, watching Grace
as she moved about the room. If he wondered why she was still with him,
he said nothing, and the thought of what his congregation might say did
not vex him in the least. She was there, he saw her every day, that was
enough.

He had expressed a wish to talk with his housekeeper. "I've got
something to tell you, Aunt Keziah," he said weakly. "Some news for you
and--and--"

"Cat's foot!" snapped Keziah briskly, "don't start in tellin' me news
now. I've got my hands full as 'tis. News'll keep and you won't, if you
talk another minute."

"But this is important."

"So are you, though you may not think so. If you don't believe it ask
Grace."

"Well," the minister sighed. "Well, perhaps I won't tell it now. I'd
rather wait until I feel stronger. You won t care, will you? It will be
hard to tell and I--"

"No, no! Care? No. If it's bad news I don't want to hear it, and if it's
good I can wait, I cal'late. You turn over and take a nap."

She could manage him; it was with Grace that she had her struggle. John
was safe now; he would be himself again before very long, and the girl
had begun to think of his future and his reputation. She knew that
gossip must be busy in the village, and, much as she wished to remain by
his side, she decided that she should not do so. And then Keziah began
to fulfill her agreement with Dr. Parker.

First, and bluntly, she told the girl that her leaving now was useless.
The secret was out; it had been made public. Everyone knew she was
in love with John and he with her. Their engagement was considered an
established certainty. Grace was greatly agitated and very indignant.

"Who dared say so?" she demanded. "Who dared say we were engaged? It's
not true. It's a wicked lie and--Who is responsible, Aunt Keziah?"

"Well, I suppose likely I am, much as anybody, deary."

"You? You, Aunt Keziah?"

"Yup; me. You are in love with him; at any rate, you said so. And you're
here with him, ain't you? If you two ain't engaged you ought to be."

"Aunt Keziah, how can you speak so? Don't you realize--"

"Look here. Don't you want to marry him?"

"WANT to? Oh, please--How can you? I--"

"S-s-sh! There! there! I am a bull-headed old thing, for sure. But I'm
like the dog that chased the rat across the shelf where they kept the
best china, my intentions are good. Don't cry, deary. Let's get to the
bottom of this thing, as the man said when he tumbled into the well.
When I first knew that you and John were in love with each other, I felt
dreadful. I knew your uncle and I knew Trumet. If you had married then,
or let people know that you thought of it, 'twould have been the end,
and ruin for John and you. But things are diff'rent now, a good deal
diff'rent. John is worshiped pretty nigh, since his pluck with that
smallpox man. He could go into church and dance a jig in the pulpit and
nobody--or precious few, at least--would find fault. And you've stood
by him. If it wa'n't for you he wouldn't be here to-day, and people know
that. Dr. Parker and Captain Zebedee and Gaius Winslow and dozens more
are fighting for him and for you. And the doctor says they are going to
win. Do you want to spoil it all?"

"Aunt Keziah, that night before uncle died I was upstairs in my room and
I heard uncle and Captain Elkanah Daniels talking."

"Elkanah? Was he there at your house?"

"Yes. Somehow or other--I don't know how--he had learned about--about
John and me. And he was furious. Aunt Keziah, I heard him say that
unless I broke off with John he would drive him from the ministry and
from Trumet and disgrace him forever. He said that if I really cared for
him I would not ruin his life. That brought me to myself. I realized how
wicked I had been and what I was doing. That was why I--I--"

"There! there! Tut! tut! tut! hum! Now I see. But, Gracie, you ain't
goin' to ruin his life. No, nor Elkanah ain't goin' to do it, either.
He can't, no matter how hard he tries. I've lived to see the day when
there's a bigger man in the Reg'lar church than Elkanah Daniels, and I
thank the good Lord for it."

"I never should have come here. I know it. But he needed me. Aunt
Keziah, he was sick and dying almost, and I couldn't leave him. I came,
and now he will be ruined and disgraced."

"He won't, I tell you; he won't. Listen to me. I ain't talkin' for my
health. Listen!"

She argued and pleaded and coaxed, and, at last, when she began to think
she had prevailed, Grace brought forward another objection. She had
given her word to her uncle. How could she break that promise made to a
dying man? She would feel like a traitor.

"Traitor to who?" demanded the housekeeper, losing patience. "Not
to poor Nat, for he's gone. And don't you suppose that he and Eben
understand things better now, where they are? Do you suppose that Nat
wouldn't want you to be happy? I know he would, for I knew him."

It was still unsettled when the long talk was over, but Grace agreed not
to leave the minister at present. She would stay where she was until he
was himself again, at least. Keziah was satisfied with the preliminary
skirmish. She felt confident of winning the victory, and in the prospect
of happiness for others, she was almost happy herself. Yet each time the
mail was brought to the shanty she dreaded to look at it, and the sight
of a stranger made her shake with fear. Ansel Coffin had threatened to
come to Trumet. If he came, she had made up her mind what to do.

The parish committee was to meet. Captain Elkanah had announced his
intention of moving that John Ellery be expelled from the Regular
church. There was to be no compromise, no asking for a resignation; he
must be discharged, thrown out in disgrace. The county papers were full
of the squabble, but they merely reported the news and did not take
sides. The fight was too even for that.

Captain Zeb chuckled. "It's all right, Keziah," he said. "We know what's
what and who's who. The Rev. Mr. Ellery can preach here for the next
hundred year, if he lives that long and wants to, and he can marry
whoever he darn pleases, besides. Elkanah's licked and he knows it. He
ain't got enough backers to man a lobster dory. Let him holler; noise
don't scare grown folks."

One afternoon a few days before the date set for the meeting Elkanah
and two or three of his henchmen were on the piazza of the Daniels home,
discussing the situation. They were blue and downcast. Annabel was in
the sitting room, shedding tears of humiliation and jealous rage on the
haircloth sofa.

"Well," observed her father, "there's one thing we can do. If the
vote in committee goes against us, I shall insist on the calling of a
congregational meeting. Hum--ha! Yes, I shall insist on that."

"Won't be no good, cap'n," sniffed Beriah Salters dolefully. "The
biggest part of the congregation's for Ellery, and you know it. They're
as sot on him as if he was the angel Gabriel. If you'd only told what
you knew afore this smallpox business, we'd have been able to give him
and his Come-Outer woman what b'longs to 'em. But not now."

Captain Daniels shifted uneasily in his chair.

"Hum--ha!" he barked, to cover confusion. "Hum--ha! It seemed to me
more--er--charitable to give the misguided young man another chance, and
I did it. But--What's that?"

Some one was talking excitedly on the sidewalk beyond the lilac bushes
at the border of the Daniels property. Voices answered. Didama Rogers
darted out of her yard and past the house in the direction of the
sounds. Salters rose and walked down to the gate.

"Hey!" he shouted. "Halloo! Ahoy there! You, Em'lous, what is it?"

Emulous Sparrow, the fish peddler, was seated in his cart, which was
surrounded by men and women, neighbors of the Danielses. There was a
perfect storm of questionings and ejaculations. Salters opened the gate
and joined the group. A moment later he came running back, up the walk
toward the piazza.

"Cap'n," he shouted. "Cap'n Elkanah, here's news! What do you think? A
telegram's just come from Nat Hammond. He's safe and sound in New York,
and he'll be here day after to-morrow."

They could not believe it and rushed out to hear more. Emulous, glowing
with importance, affirmed that it was so. He had seen the telegram at
the store. It was for Grace Van Horne and they were just going to send a
boy over to the shanty with it.

"No details nor nothin'," he declared. "Just said 'Am all right.
Arrived to-day. Will be in Trumet Thursday.' And 'twas signed 'Nathaniel
Hammond.' There!"

"Well, by thunder!" exclaimed Salters. "If that don't beat all. I
wonder what's happened to him? Two year gone and give up for dead, and
now--What do you cal'late it means?"

Captain Elkanah seized him by the arm and led him out of the group.
The old man's face was alight with savage joy and his voice shook with
exultation.

"I'll tell you one thing it means," he whispered. "It means the end of
Ellery, so far as his marrying her is concerned. She gave her word to
Hammond and she'll keep it. She's no liar, whatever else she is. He may
be minister of the Regular church, though I'LL never set under him, but
he'll never marry her, now."


CHAPTER XIX

IN WHICH A RECEPTION IS CALLED OFF


Far out on the Pacific coast there are two small islands, perhaps
a hundred miles distant from one another. The first of these is
uninhabited. On the other is a little colony of English-speaking people,
half-breed descendants of native women and the survivors of a crew from
a British vessel cast away there in the latter part of the eighteenth
century.

On the first of these islands, the smaller one, the Sea Mist had been
wrecked. Driven out of her course by a typhoon, she staggered through
day after day and night after night of terrific wind and storm until,
at last, there was promise of fair weather. Captain Nat, nearly worn out
from anxiety, care, and the loss of sleep, had gone to his stateroom
and the first mate was in charge. It was three o'clock, the wind still
blowing and the darkness pitchy, when the forward lookout shrieked a
warning, "Breakers under the lee!" Almost the next instant the ship was
on a coral reef, full of water, and the seas breaking over her from stem
to stern.

Morning came and showed a little patch of land, with palm trees and
tropical vegetation waving in the gusts and green in the sunshine.
Captain Nat ordered the boats to be lowered. Much as he hated the
thought, he saw that the Sea Mist had made her last voyage and must
be abandoned. He went to the cabin, collected papers and charts and
prepared to leave. The ship's money, over ten thousand dollars in gold
belonging to the owner and to be used in trade and speculation among the
East Indies, he took with him. Then the difficult and dangerous passage
through the opening in the reef was begun.

Only the captain's boat reached the shore. The mate's was caught by a
huge breaker, dashed against the reef and sunk. Captain Nat, his second
mate and five of his men were all that was left of the Sea Mist's
company. And on that island they remained for nearly two weeks.
Provisions they had brought ashore with them. Water they found by
digging. Nat hid the gold at night, burying it on the beach below
high-water mark.

Then, having made sure of his location by consulting the chart, he
determined to attempt a voyage to the second island, where he knew
the English colony to be. Provisions were getting short, and to remain
longer where they were was to risk starvation and all its horrors. So,
in the longboat, which was provided with a sail, they started. Charts
and papers and the gold the skipper took with them. None of the crew
knew of the existence of the money; it was a secret which the captain
kept to himself.

A hundred miles they sailed in the longboat and, at last, the second
island was sighted. They landed and found, to their consternation and
surprise, that it, too, was uninhabited. The former residents had grown
tired of their isolation and, a trading vessel having touched there, had
seized the opportunity to depart for Tahiti. Their houses were empty,
their cattle, sheep, goats, and fowl roamed wild in the woods, and the
fruit was rotting on the trees. In its way the little island was
an Eyeless Eden, flowing with milk and honey; but to Captain Nat, a
conscientious skipper with responsibilities to his owners, it was a
prison from which he determined to escape. Then, as if to make escape
impossible, a sudden gale came up and the longboat was smashed by the
surf.

"I guess that settles it," ruefully observed the second mate, "another
Cape Codder, from Hyannis. Cal'late we'll stay here for a spell now,
hey, Cap'n."

"For a spell, yes," replied Nat. "We'll stay here until we get another
craft to set sail in, and no longer."

"Another craft? ANOTHER one? Where in time you goin' to get her?"

"Build her," said Captain Nat cheerfully. Then, pointing to the row of
empty houses and the little deserted church, he added, "There's timber
and nails--yes, and cloth, such as 'tis. If I can't build a boat out of
them I'll agree to eat the whole settlement."

He did not have to eat it, for the boat was built. It took them six
months to build her, and she was a curious-looking vessel when done,
but, as the skipper said, "She may not be a clipper, but she'll sail
anywhere, if you give her time enough." He had been the guiding
spirit of the whole enterprise, planning it, laying the keel, burning
buildings, to obtain nails and iron, hewing trees for the largest beams,
showing them how to spin ropes from cocoa-nut fiber, improvising sails
from the longboat's canvas pieced out with blankets and odd bits of
cloth from the abandoned houses. Even a strip of carpet from the church
floor went into the making of those sails.

At last she was done, but Nat was not satisfied.

"I never commanded a ship where I couldn't h'ist Yankee colors," he
said, "and, by the everlastin'! I won't now. We've got to have a flag."

So, from an old pair of blue overalls, a white cotton shirt, and the
red hangings of the church pulpit, he made a flag and hoisted it to the
truck of his queer command. They provisioned her, gave her a liberal
supply of fresh water, and, one morning, she passed through the opening
of the lagoon out to the deep blue of the Pacific. And, hidden in her
captain's stateroom under the head of his bunk, was the ten thousand
dollars in gold. For Nat had sworn to himself, by "the everlasting"
and other oaths, to deliver that money to his New York owners safe and,
necessary expenses deducted of course, untouched.

For seven weeks the crazy nondescript slopped across the ocean. Fair
winds helped her and, at last, she entered the harbor of Nukahiva, over
twelve hundred miles away. And there--"Hammond's luck," the sailors
called it--was a United States man-of-war lying at anchor, the first
American vessel to touch at that little French settlement for five
years. The boat they built was abandoned and the survivors of the Sea
Mist were taken on board the man-of-war and carried to Tahiti.

From Tahiti Captain Nat took passage on a French bark for Honolulu.
Here, after a month's wait, he found opportunity to leave for New York
on an American ship, the Stars and Stripes. And finally, after being
away from home for two years, he walked into the office of his New York
owners, deposited their gold on a table, and cheerfully observed, "Well,
here I am."

That was the yarn which Trumet was to hear later on. It filled columns
of the city papers at the time, and those interested may read it, in all
its details, in a book written by an eminent author. The tale of a Cape
Cod sea captain, plucky and resourceful and adequate, as Yankee sea
captains were expected to be, and were, in those days.

But Trumet did not hear the yarn immediately. All that it heard and all
that it knew was contained in Captain Nat's brief telegram. "Arrived
to-day. Will be home Thursday." That was all, but it was enough, for
in that dispatch was explosive sufficient to blow to atoms the doctor's
plans and Keziah's, the great scheme which was to bring happiness to
John Ellery and Grace Van Horne.

Dr. Parker heard it, while on his way to Mrs. Prince's, and, neglecting
that old lady for the once, he turned his horse and drove as fast as
possible to the shanty on the beach. Fast as he drove, Captain Zebedee
Mayo got there ahead of him. Captain Zeb was hitching his white and
ancient steed to the post as the doctor hove in sight.

"By mighty!" the captain exclaimed, with a sigh of relief, "I'm glad
enough you've come, doctor. I hated to go in there alone. You've heard,
of course."

"Yes, I've heard."

"Say, ain't it wonderful! I'm tickled all up one side and sorry all down
t'other. Nat's a true-blue feller, and I'm glad enough that he ain't
shark bait; but what about the minister and her? She's promised to Nat,
you know, and--"

"I know. Don't I know! I've been going over the affair and trying to see
a way out ever since I heard of the telegram. Tut! tut! I'm like you,
mighty glad Hammond is safe, but it would have spared complications if
he had stayed wherever he's been for a few months longer. We would have
married those two in there by that time."

"Sartin we would. But he didn't stay. Are you goin' to tell Mr. Ellery?"

"Certainly not. And I hope he hasn't been told. He's getting well fast
now, but he mustn't be worried, or back he'll go again. We must see Mrs.
Coffin. Keziah is our main hold. That woman has got more sense than all
the rest of us put together."

But it was Grace, not Keziah, who opened the shanty door in answer to
their knock. She was pale and greeted them calmly, but it was evident
that her calmness was the result of sheer will power.

"Won't you come in, doctor?" she asked. "Good afternoon, Captain Mayo."

Dr. Parker entered the building, but Captain Zeb remained outside,
stammering that he cal'lated he'd better stay where he could keep an eye
on his horse. This was such a transparent excuse that it would have been
funny at any other time. No one smiled now, however.

"Is--is Mrs. Coffin--er--Keziah aboard?" the captain asked.

"No, she isn't. She went to the parsonage a few hours ago. Mr. Ellis
brought the mail and there was a letter in it for her. She said it was
important and that she must go home to see about some things. She'll be
back pretty soon, I suppose."

The doctor whispered her name then and she went inside, closing the door
after her. Captain Zebedee sat down on the step to ponder over the new
and apparently insurmountable difficulty which had arisen. As he said
afterwards, "The more I tried to get an observation, the thicker it got.
Blamed if I could see anything but fog, but I could hear--I could hear
Elkanah and his gang gigglin', ahead, astern and off both bows."

Parker found his patient sleeping soundly and had not disturbed him.
Returning to the living room he spoke to Grace.

"Humph!" he grunted, watching her from under his brows, "everything
seems to be all right in there. He hasn't been excited or anything like
that?"

"No."

"That's good. He mustn't be. You understand that? He mustn't be told
anything that will upset him. He's getting well fast and I want it to
continue."

"Yes, I understand."

"Hum! Er--have you heard--Has anyone been here?"

"Yes. I have heard. The telegram came and I answered it."

"You did? Well, it's a miracle and we're all thankful, of course. Did
you--er--er--"

"Doctor, I must go home. I mustn't stay here any longer."

"Why not?"

"You know why not. I must be at home when he comes. You must get some
one to take my place. Aunt Keziah will stay, of course, and perhaps Mrs.
Higgins would come, or Hannah Poundberry. She--"

"Not if I know it. I'd as soon have a hay-cutter running in here as
Hannah's tongue. I could stop a hay-cutter when it got too noisy. Well,
if you must go, you must, I suppose. But stay through tomorrow, at
any rate. Nat won't get here until Thursday, and I may be able to find
another nurse by that time. And what I shall say to him," motioning
toward the other room, "I don't know."

"Must you say anything? Just say that I have been called away for a few
days on--on some business. Don't tell him. Don't tell him the truth,
doctor, now. He is too weak and I am afraid--"

She stopped and turned away. The doctor watched her pityingly.

"Cheer up," he said. "At any rate, this is only for a little while. When
the captain knows, if he's the man I take him for, he'll--"

She whirled like a flash. "You're not going to tell him?" she cried.
"No, no! You mustn't. You must promise me you won't. Promise."

"Somebody'll tell him. Telling things is Trumet's specialty."

"Then you must stop it. No one must tell him--no one except me. I shall
tell him, of course. He must hear it from me and not from anyone else.
He would think I was disloyal and ungrateful--and I am! I have been! But
I was--I COULDN'T help it. You know, doctor, you know--"

"Yes, yes, I know. Well, I'll promise, but it will all come out right,
you see. You mustn't think I--we--have been interfering in your affairs,
Grace. But we've all come to think a whole lot of that parson of ours
and what he wanted we wanted him to have, that's all."

"I know. Thank you very much for all your kindness, and for your
promise."

He would have liked to say much more, but he could not, under the
circumstances. He stammered a good-by and, with a question concerning
Mrs. Coffin's whereabouts, went out to join Captain Zeb.

"Well?" queried the latter anxiously. "How is it? What's up? What's the
next tack?"

"We'll go to the parsonage," was the gloomy answer. "If anybody can see
a glimmer in this cussed muddle Keziah Coffin can."

Keziah was on her knees in her room, beside a trunk, the same trunk she
had been packing the day of the minister's arrival in Trumet. She was
working frantically, sorting garments from a pile, rejecting some and
keeping others. She heard voices on the walk below and went down to
admit the callers.

"What's the matter, Keziah?" asked Dr. Parker sharply, after a look at
her face. "You look as if you'd been through the war. Humph! I suppose
you've heard the news?"

Keziah brushed back the hair from her forehead. "Yes," she answered
slowly. "I've heard it."

"Well, it's great news, and if it wasn't for--if things weren't as they
are, I'd be crowing hallelujahs this minute. Trumet has got a good man
safe and sound again, and the Lord knows it needs all of that kind it
can get."

"Yes."

"Yes. But there's the other matter. I've been to see Grace. She didn't
say so, but it was easy enough to see; the man she promised to marry and
thought was dead, is alive. She's a girl of her word--she promised him
and she promised her dying uncle--and she'll marry him. And then what
will become of John Ellery? He'll go downhill so fast that a ship's
anchor wouldn't hold him. If he doesn't die I'll have to send him away
somewhere, and the Regular church will lose the minister we've fought so
hard for."

"Yes," concurred Zebedee, "and them blasted Danielses'll run the shebang
and the rest of us'll have to sing small, I tell you."

"So we've come to you, Keziah," went on the doctor. "Do you see any
salvation?"

"Yes, I do."

"You do? Where?"

"In Nat Hammond. If he knows Grace doesn't want to marry him, do you
suppose he'll hold her to her promise?"

"I don't know. I'm not so sure. Men don't give up girls like that so
easy. I wouldn't--by George, I wouldn't! And she won't tell him the
whole truth, I'm afraid. She'll pretend to be glad--hang it! she IS
glad--to have him home again and--"

"Of course she's glad. Ain't we all glad and happy and thankful? We
ought to be. But"--she hesitated--"doctor, you leave this to me. So
far as John and Grace are concerned you needn't worry. I'll take it on
myself to see that they have each other, as the Almighty meant 'em to.
Leave it to me. Just leave it to me. I KNOW I can do it."

She would not say more, nor tell on what grounds she based her optimism.
She would go back to the shanty that evening, she said, and stay until
the following afternoon. Grace would undoubtedly go to the old tavern to
prepare for the homecoming. Let Mrs. Higgins take her place as nurse.

"I shall have to leave, myself," she added, "for a little while; so
perhaps you'd better try to get somebody else to help the Higgins woman.
Don't ask me any questions, please don't, and be sure not to say a word
to anybody--most of all to Grace. Just do as I tell you and leave it to
me. And don't come and see me again until after--after he comes home.
Good-by, doctor. Good-by, Cap'n Zeb."

She shook hands with each of them, a rather unusual proceeding as they
thought of it afterwards. Then they went away and left her.

"Humph!" mused Parker, as they came out at the gate. "Humph! She seems
sure, doesn't she. And yet she doesn't act like herself. Did you notice
that?"

"Yup. I noticed it. But I expect Nat's droppin' out of the clouds shook
her up, same as it done the rest of us. Well, never mind. She's a bully
good, capable woman and what she says she'll do she gen'rally does. I'm
bettin' on her. By time! I feel better."

Captain Elkanah Daniels and his friends were feeling better also, and
they were busy. Trumet had a new hero now. On Wednesday the Boston
papers printed excerpts from Captain Hammond's story, and these brief
preliminary accounts aroused the admiration of every citizen. It was
proposed to give him a reception. Elkanah was the moving spirit in the
preparations. Captain Nat, so they learned by telegraphing, would arrive
on the noon train Thursday. His was not to be a prosaic progress by
stage all the way from Sandwich. A special carriage, drawn by the
Daniels span and escorted by other vehicles, was to meet the coach at
Bayport and bring him to Trumet in triumphant procession. All this was
to be a surprise, of course.

Wednesday afternoon the Daniels following was cheered by the tidings
that Grace Van Horne had left the beach and was at her old home, the
Hammond tavern. And Mrs. Poundberry reported her busy as a bee "gettin'
things ready." This was encouraging and indicated that the minister
had been thrown over, as he deserved to be, and that Nat would find his
fiancee waiting and ready to fulfill her contract. "Reg'lar whirligig,
that girl," sniffed Didama Rogers. "If she can't have one man she'll
take the next, and then switch back soon's the wind changes. However,
most likely she never was engaged to Mr. Ellery, anyhow. He's been out
of his head and might have said some fool things that let Dr. Parker and
the rest b'lieve he was in love with her. As for pickin' of him up and
totin' him back to the shanty that night, that wa'n't nothin' but common
humanity. She couldn't let him die in the middle of the lighthouse lane,
could she?"

Thursday was a perfect day, and the reception committee was on hand and
waiting in front of the Bayport post office. The special carriage, the
span brushed and curried until their coats glistened in the sunshine,
was drawn up beside the platform. The horses had little flags fastened
to their bridles, and there were other and larger flags on each side
of the dashboard. Captain Daniels, imposing in his Sunday raiment,
high-collared coat, stock, silk hat and gold-headed cane, sat stiffly
erect on the seat in the rear. The other carriages were alongside, among
them Captain Zebedee Mayo's ancient chaise, the white horse sound asleep
between the shafts. Captain Zeb had not been invited to join the escort,
but had joined it without an invitation.

"I guess likely I'd better be on hand," the captain confided to Dr.
Parker. "Maybe I can stop Elkanah from talkin' too much about--well,
about what we don't want him to talk about, and besides, I'm just as
anxious to give Nat a welcome home as the next feller. He's a brick and
we're all proud of him. By mighty! I'd like to have seen that craft he
built out of cocoanuts and churches--I would so."

Kyan Pepper was there also, not yet fully recovered from the surprise
which Lavinia's gracious permission had given him. Abishai had been
leaning disconsolately over his front gate early that morning when Noah
Ellis, the lightkeeper, jogged down the lane.

"'Mornin', 'Bish," hailed Noah, pulling up his horse. "What's the
matter? You look bluer'n a spiled mack'rel. What's the row? Breakfast
disagree with you?"

"Naw," replied Kyan shortly. "Where you bound, all rigged up in your
shore duds?"

"Bound to Bayport, to see Nat Hammond land," was the cheerful answer.
"I ain't had a day off I don't know when, and I thought I'd take one. Be
great doin's over there, they tell me. Elkanah's goin' to make a speech
and there's eighteen teams of folks goin'."

"I know it. I wisht I was goin', too, but I never have no fun. Have
to stay to home and work and slave over them consarned tax papers.
Sometimes I wish there wa'n't no taxes."

"Humph! I've wished that, myself, more'n once. Why don't you go, if you
want to? Climb right aboard here with me. Plenty of room."

"Hey? You mean that? By godfreys mighty! I'd like to."

"Sartin, I mean it. Come ahead."

Mr. Pepper sadly shook his head. "I guess likely I'd better not," he
sighed. "Laviny might not like to have me leave her."

"Oh, fiddlesticks! she won't mind. I'll take care of you. It's perfectly
safe. There ain't goin' to be no women around. Haw! haw! haw!"

He was still laughing at his own joke when through the slats of the
closed blinds shading the Pepper house parlor a shrill voice was heard
speaking.

"Go ahead, 'Bishy dear," called Lavinia. "Go ahead and go. A change of
air'll do you good."

Kyan whirled and clutched at the gate.

"HEY?" he shouted in amazement.

"Are you deef? Or is Mr. Ellis laughin' so hard that you can't hear?
What is it that's so funny, Mr. Ellis?"

The light-keeper shut off his laughter by a sudden and rather frightened
gulp.

"Oh, nothin', nothin', Miss Pepper. Nice day, ain't it?"

"I guess so. I ain't had time to look at it yet. I have to work. I can't
let my wife do it for me, like some folks, and take 'days off.' What was
it you was laughin' at, Mr. Ellis?"

"Nothin', nothin' at all."

"Hum! They used to tell me there was only one kind of person who laughed
at nothin'. Well, 'Bish Pepper, what are you standin' there for? If
you're goin', come right into the house and change your clothes this
minute."

Kyan obeyed. Shortly he reappeared, clothed like a lily of the field,
one that had long since gone to seed. He clambered up beside Noah and
they drove off.

"Jerushy!" exclaimed the lightkeeper. "This is kind of unexpected, ain't
it? What's got into her to make her so accommodatin'?"

"Godfreys mighty!" was the dazed reply, "I don't know. This as fast as
you can drive? Hurry up, afore she changes her mind."

So it happened that Mr. Pepper was in Bayport with the rest, awaiting
the stage which was bringing Trumet's latest celebrity from Sandwich.

"Here she comes!" shouted Ezra Simmons, the postmaster. "Right on time,
too."

Sure enough! A cloud of dust in the distance, rising on the spring
wind, and the rattle of rapidly turning wheels. The reception committee
prepared for action. Captain Elkanah descended from the carriage and
moved in stately dignity to the front of the post-office platform.

"Hum--ha!" he barked, turning to his followers. "Be ready now. Give him
a good cheer, when I say the word. Let it be hearty--hearty, yes."

The stage, its four horses at a trot, swung up to the platform.

"Whoa!" roared the driver.

"Now!" ordered Elkanah. "One--two--Hurrah!"

"Hurrah!" shouted the committee, its uninvited guests and the
accompanying crowd of Bayport men and boys which had gathered to assist
in the welcome. "Hurrah!"

"Hooray!" yelled Kyan, a little behind, as usual.

A passenger or two peered from the coach window. The stage driver
ironically touched his cap.

"Thank ye," he said. "Thank ye very much. I've been hopin' for this
for a long time, though I'd about given up expectin' it. I'm very much
obliged. Won't somebody please ask me to make a speech?"

Captain Elkanah frowned his disapproval.

"We are cheering Cap'n Nathaniel Hammond of Trumet," he explained
haughtily. "We are here to meet him and escort him home."

The driver sighed. "You don't say," he said. "And I thought my merits
had been recognized at last. And 'twas all for Cap'n Hammond? Dear!
dear!"

He winked at Simmons, who wanted to laugh, but did not dare.

"Come! come!" said Captain Elkanah. "Where is he? Where's Cap'n
Hammond?"

"Well, now, I'll tell ye; I don't know where he is."

"You DON'T? Isn't he with you?"

"No, he ain't. And he didn't come on the train, nuther. He WAS on it.
The conductor told me he see him and set along with him between stations
as fur as Cohasset Narrows. But after that he never see hide nor hair of
him. Oh, that's so! Here's the mail bag, Ezry."

Captain Elkanah looked at the reception committee and it looked at him.
Here was a most disconcerting setback for all the plans. The committee,
after asking more, and fruitless questions, went into executive session.

Captain Zeb stepped beside the stage and put one foot on the wheel.

"Say, Thad," he whispered, "is that all you know? Where did he go to?"

"Can't tell you, cap'n. The conductor says he see him afore they got to
Cohasset Narrows and not after. Naturally, we s'pose he got off there.
Pretty good joke on old Daniels, I call it. Serve him right, figgerin'
to take a passenger away from me. He, he!"

"But you do know more, now don't you? Tell a feller--come! I don't like
Elkanah any better'n you do."

"Well," the driver's voice dropped still lower. "Well," he whispered,
"I did hear this much, though don't you tell none of them: A chap I know
was on the train and he said he see Cap'n Nat get off the cars at the
Cohasset Narrows depot and there was a woman with him."

"A woman? A WOMAN? What woman?"

"Blessed if I know! And he didn't nuther. So long! Git dap!"

The reception committee and its escort drove slowly back to Trumet. The
Daniels following was disgusted and disappointed. Captain Elkanah had
figured upon keeping Hammond under his own wing until he was safely
deposited at the old tavern. Grace was there and Elkanah meant that
these two should meet before any inkling of Ellery's story reached Nat's
ears. Incidentally, he could drop a few damaging hints concerning the
minister's character. To hurt Ellery all he could and prejudice Hammond
against him--that was the plan, and now it was frustrated. The captain
had not put in an appearance and no one knew where he was or when he
would come home. Obviously, there was nothing to do except give up the
reception and await further news from the missing man.

Some of those present wished to remain in Bayport until night. Another
train was due in Sandwich and, possibly, Nat might come on that. They
could telegraph and find out whether or not he did come, and if he did,
could send a carriage for him. But this suggestion was overruled. The
reception was off.

The homeward journey had some unpleasant incidents. Several Come-Outers
had driven over. Nat belonged to them, so they felt--he was the son of
their dead founder and leader--and they determined the Regulars should
not have him all to themselves. They had come to bid him welcome on
behalf of the worshipers at the chapel. Now they took advantage of the
general disappointment to make sarcastic and would-be-humorous remarks
loud enough for the majestic occupant of the decorated carriage to hear.

"Seems to me," said Thoph Black, "that them flags ought to be ha'f mast.
That craft's in distress."

"S-sh-h!" counciled his companion, another Come-Outer. "Don't be
irreverent. Look who's cruisin' under 'em. That's the King of Trumet.
Let's you and me go ahead and fire salutes, Thoph."

Captain Elkanah wrathfully ordered the flags to be removed from the
horses' heads and from the dashboard.

As Noah Ellis and his passenger turned into the lighthouse lane another
vehicle turned out of it.

"Who was that?" queried Kyan. "Looked like one of the livery stable
horses to me."

"'Twa'n't. 'Twas Thankful Payne's and that was her carriage, too. It's
gettin' so dark I couldn't see who was drivin' it, but 'twas a man,
anyhow."

Kyan seemed to be pondering. "I wonder," he said slowly, "I wonder if
that cousin of hers from Sandwich is here visitin'. That Caleb Pratt,
seems to me his name is."

"Don't know. Why?"

"Nothin', nothin'. I just wondered, that was all. That might explain why
she let me--"

"Hey?"

"Nothin'. Good night, Noah. I'm much obliged to you for takin' me over,
even if there wa'n't no reception."

Trumet spent that evening wondering what had become of Nat Hammond.
Captain Zeb Mayo wondered most of all. Yet his wonderment was
accompanied by vague suspicions of the truth. And, at eleven o'clock,
when the village was in bed, a horse and buggy moved down the Turn-off
and stopped before the Hammond gate. A man alighted from the buggy and
walked briskly up to the side door. There he knocked and then whistled
shrilly.

A window overhead was opened.

"Who is it?" asked a feminine voice.

"Don't be frightened, Gracie," replied the man at the door. "It's
me--Nat. I've come home again."


CHAPTER XX

IN WHICH THE MINISTER RECEIVES A LETTER


John Ellery was uneasy. Physically he was very much better, so much
better that he was permitted to sit up a while each day. But mentally he
was disturbed and excited, exactly the condition which the doctor said
he must not be in. Keziah and Grace had gone away and left him, and he
could not understand why.

Mrs. Higgins, Ike's mother, was at the shanty and she did her best to
soothe and quiet him. She was a kind soul and capable, in her way, but
she could not answer his questions satisfactorily.

"Where are they?" he demanded. "Why did they go? Has anything happened?
When are they coming back?"

"I can't tell you just when, Mr. Ellery," replied Mrs. Higgins. "Grace
had to go home for a--a day or so and Keziah had things to attend to at
the parsonage. Don't you fret yourself about them."

"I'm not fretting, but it does seem strange. I could understand why one
should go, perhaps, but not both. Didn't Gra--Miss Van Horne tell you
why she went?"

"Well, now, Mr. Ellery, don't let's worry about Gracie. She's a good
girl with lots of common sense and--"

"I know that. But that doesn't answer me. Why did she go?"

"Keziah hadn't been to the parsonage sence that day when you was fust
took sick, and I expect likely she felt that she'd ought to--"

"Please, Mrs. Higgins, tell me the truth. I'm not asking about Mrs.
Coffin. Didn't Miss Van Horne tell you her reason for leaving?"

"No, she didn't."

"But you know the reason? You're keeping something from me. Did she say
when she would come back?"

"No, not exactly, but, of course--"

"I know you're keeping something from me. What has happened?"

"Happened? Land sakes! does anything ever happen in Trumet?"

"I think a good many things have happened lately. And the longer you
keep the truth from me the more I shall suspect."

"Mr. Ellery, you set still in that chair, or, when the doctor comes,
he'll put you to bed. I've got some cookin' to do and I can't set here
gossipin' no longer. You behave yourself and stop frettin'. I'm skipper
here now--er--for a while, anyhow--and you've got to take orders from
me. There! now I cal'late you're scared, ain't you?"

He did not seem greatly frightened, nor in awe of his new skipper.
Instead, he was evidently preparing to ask more questions. Mrs. Higgins
hurriedly fled to the living room and closed the door behind her.

The minister heard her rattling pans and dishes at a great rate. The
noise made him nervous and he wished she might be more quiet. He moved
to the chair nearest the window and looked out over the dunes and the
wide stretch of tumbling blue sea. The surf was rolling up the shore,
the mackerel gulls were swooping and dipping along the strand, the beach
grass was waving in the wind. A solitary fish boat was beating out past
the spar buoy. She was almost over the spot when the San Jose had first
anchored.

The view was a familiar one. He had seen it in all weathers, during a
storm, at morning when the sun was rising, at evening when the moon
came up to tip the watery ridges with frosted silver. He had liked
it, tolerated it, hated it, and then, after she came, loved it. He had
thought it the most beautiful scene in all the world and one never to be
forgotten. The dingy old building, with its bare wooden walls, had been
first a horror, then a prison, and at last a palace of contentment. With
the two women, one a second mother to him, and the other dearest of
all on earth, he could have lived there forever. But now the old prison
feeling was coming back. He was tired of the view and of the mean little
room. He felt lonely and deserted and despairing.

His nerves were still weak and it was easy, in his childish condition,
to become despondent. He went over the whole situation and felt more and
more sure that his hopes had been false ones and that he had builded a
fool's paradise. After all, he remembered, she had given him no promise;
she had found him ill and delirious and had brought him there. She had
been kind and thoughtful and gracious, but that she would be to anyone,
it was her nature. And he had been content, weak as he was, to have her
near him, where he would see her and hear her speak. Her mere presence
was so wonderful that he had been satisfied with that and had not asked
for more. And now she had gone. Mrs. Higgins had said "for a day or
two," but that was indefinite, and she had not said she would return
when those two days had passed. He was better now, almost well. Would
she come back to him? After all, conditions in the village had not
changed. He was still pastor of the Regular church and she was a
Come-Outer. The man she had promised to marry was dead--yes. But the
other conditions were the same. And Mrs. Higgins had refused to tell
him the whole truth; he was certain of that. She had run away when he
questioned her.

He rose from the chair and started toward the living room. He would not
be put off again. He would be answered. His hand was on the latch of the
door when that door was opened. Dr. Parker came in.

The doctor was smiling broadly. His ruddy face was actually beaming. He
held out his hand, seized the minister's, and shook it.

"Good morning, Mr. Ellery," he said. "It's a glorious day. Yes, sir, a
bully day. Hey? isn't it?"

Ellery's answer was a question.

"Doctor," he said, "why have Mrs. Coffin and--and Miss Van Horne gone?
Has anything happened? I know something has, and you must tell me what.
Don't try to put me off or give me evasive answers. I want to know why
they have gone."

Parker looked at him keenly. "Humph!" he grunted. "I'll have to get
into Mrs. Higgins's wig. I told her not to let you worry, and you have
worried. You're all of a shake."

"Never mind that. I asked you a question."

"I know you did. Now, Mr. Ellery, I'm disappointed in you. I thought you
were a sensible man who would take care of his health, now that he'd got
the most of it back again. I've got news for you--good news--but I'm not
sure that I shall tell it to you."

"Good news! Dr. Parker, if you've got news for me that is good, for
Heaven's sake tell it. I've been imagining everything bad that could
possibly happen. Tell me, quick. My health can stand that."

"Ye-es, yes, I guess it can. They say joy doesn't kill, and that's one
of the few medical proverbs made by unmedical men that are true. You
come with me and sit down in that chair. Yes, you will. Sit down."

He led his patient back to the chair by the window and forced him into
it.

"There!" he said. "Now, Mr. Ellery, if you think you are a man, a
sensible man, who won't go to pieces like a ten-year-old youngster,
I'll--I'll let you sit here for a while."

"Doctor?"

"You sit still. No, I'm not going to tell you anything. You sit where
you are and maybe the news'll come to you. If you move it won't. Going
to obey orders? Good! I'll see you by and by, Mr. Ellery."

He walked out of the room. It seemed to Ellery that he sat in that chair
for ten thousand years before the door again opened. And then--

--"Grace!" he cried. "O Grace! you--you've come back."

She was blushing red, her face was radiant with quiet happiness, but her
eyes were moist. She crossed the room, bent over and kissed him on the
forehead.

"Yes, John," she said; "I've come back. Yes, dear, I've come back to--to
you."


Outside the shanty, on the side farthest from the light and its group
of buildings, the doctor and Captain Nat Hammond were talking with Mrs.
Higgins. The latter was wildly excited and bubbling with joy.

"It's splendid!" she exclaimed. "It's almost too fine to believe. Now
we'll keep our minister, won't we?"

"I don't see why not," observed the doctor, with quiet satisfaction.
"Zeb and I had the Daniels crowd licked to a shoestring and now they'll
stay licked. The parish committee is three to one for Mr. Ellery and the
congregation more than that. Keep him? You bet we'll keep him! And
I'll dance at his wedding--that is, unless he's got religious scruples
against it."

Mrs. Higgins turned to Captain Nat.

"It's kind of hard for you, Nat," she said. "But it's awful noble and
self-sacrificin' and everybody'll say so. Of course there wouldn't be
much satisfaction in havin' a wife you knew cared more for another man.
But still it's awful noble of you to give her up."

The captain looked at the doctor and laughed quietly.

"Don't let my nobility weigh on your mind, Mrs. Higgins," he said. "I'd
made up my mind to do this very thing afore ever I got back to Trumet.
That is, if Gracie was willin'. And when I found she was not only
willin' but joyful, I--well, I decided to offer up the sacrifice right
off."

"You did? You DID? Why, how you talk! I never heard of such a thing in
my born days."

"Nor I neither, not exactly. But there!" with a wink at Parker, "you see
I've been off amongst all them Kanaka women and how do you know but I've
fell in love?"

"Nat HAMMOND!"

"Oh, well, I--What is it, Grace?"

She was standing in the doorway and beckoning to him. Her cheeks were
crimson, the breeze was tossing her hair about her forehead, and she
made a picture that even the practical, unromantic doctor appreciated.

"By George, Nat!" he muttered, "you've got more courage than I have. If
'twas my job to give her up to somebody else I'd think twice, I'll bet."

The captain went to meet her.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Nat," she whispered, "will you come in? He wants to see you."

John Ellery was still seated in the chair by the window, but he no
longer looked like an invalid. There was no worry or care in his
countenance now, merely a wondrous joy and serene happiness.

He held out his hands and the captain shook them heartily.

"Mr. Ellery," he said, "as they used to say at the circus, 'Here we are
again.' And you and I have been doing all kinds of circus acrobatics
since we shook last, hey? I'm glad you're pretty nigh out of the sick
bay--and the doctor says you are."

"Captain," began Ellery. Hammond interrupted him.

"Hold on!" he said. "Belay right there. If you and I are to cruise in
the same family--and that's what I hear is likely to happen--I
cal'late we'll heave overboard the cap'ns and Misters. My name's
'Nathaniel'--'Nat' for short."

"All right. And mine is 'John.' Captain--Nat, I mean--how can I ever
thank you?"

"Thank me? What do you want to thank me for? I only handed over
somethin' that wasn't mine in the first place and belonged to you all
along. I didn't know it, that was the only trouble."

"But your promise to your father. I feel--"

"You needn't. I told dad that it was just as Grace said. She says she's
got a better man, or words to that effect. And--I don't know how you
feel about such things, John--but I b'lieve there's a broader outlook up
aloft than there is down here and that dad would want me to do just what
I have done. Don't worry about me. I'm doin' the right thing and I
know it. And don't pity me, neither. I made up my mind not to marry
Grace--unless, of course, she was set on it--months ago. I'm tickled to
death to know she's goin' to have as good a man as you are. She'll tell
you so. Grace! Hello! she's gone."

"Yes. I told her I wanted to talk with you alone, for a few minutes.
Nat, Grace tells me that Aunt Keziah was the one who--"

"She was. She met me at the Cohasset Narrows depot. I was settin' in the
car, lookin' out of the window at the sand and sniffin' the Cape air. By
the everlastin'! there ain't any air or sand like 'em anywheres else.
I feel as if I never wanted to see a palm tree again as long as I live.
I'd swap the whole of the South Pacific for one Trumet sandhill with a
huckleberry bush on it. Well, as I started to say, I was settin' there
lookin' out of the window when somebody tapped me on the shoulder. I
looked up and 'twas her.

"You could have blown me over with a fan. By the jumpin' Moses, you
could! You see, I'd been thinkin' about her--that is, I was--"

He hesitated, turned red, coughed, and went on.

"I was surprised enough to see her, I tell you. Way up there at the
Narrows! I couldn't have said a word, anyway, and she never gave me a
chance. 'Nat,' she says, 'don't talk now. Come with me, quick, afore the
train starts.'

"Still I didn't say anything, nothin' sane anyhow. 'Keziah!' I managed
to stutter. 'KEZIAH!'

"'Come!' says she. 'Hurry! I want you to get off here. I've come here on
purpose to meet you. I must talk with you; it's important. You can go
to Trumet on the next train, to-night. But now I must talk with you. I
MUST. Won't you please come, Nat?'

"Well, I went. The engine bell was beginnin' to ring and we had to move
lively, I tell you. I swung her off the step just as the car begun to
move. After the smoke had faded away around the next bend I realized
that my hat had faded away along with it. Yes, sir! I'd left it on the
seat. Ha! ha! ha!"

He laughed uproariously. Ellery laughed in sympathy.

"However, I wa'n't worryin' about hats, just then. All I wanted to do
was stand still, like a frozen image, and stare at her. You see, John,
I hadn't laid eyes on a friend, one of the real homemade kind, for more
days than I wanted to count; and here was one of 'em, one of the best,
passed out to me unexpected and ahead of time, like a surprise party
present. So I just pumped her hand up and down and stared. I didn't have
any exclusive mortgage on the starin' by no means, for the depot master
and a dozen or so loafers was lookin' at us with their mouths wide open.

"I guess she noticed it, for she says, 'Don't stay here, Nat. Come in
the waitin' room or somewheres where we can talk.'

"So into the waitin' room we went and come to anchor on the settee. Six
or eight of the loafers settled themselves handy to the door, so's they
could peek in occasionally. I remember I told one of them not to stretch
his neck that way 'cause he might never get it back into shape again and
in the gunnin' season that would be dangerous. 'Some nearsighted feller
might take you for a goose,' I says. Ho! ho!

"And then, John, we had our talk. Seems she left Trumet Wednesday
afternoon. Got the livery stable man to drive her as fur as Bayport,
hired another team there and come on to Sandwich. Stayed overnight there
and took the mornin' train which got to Cohasset Narrows just ahead of
the one I was comin' on. She'd been so afraid of bein' late, she said.
She must see me afore I got to Trumet.

"Well, she saw me and told me the whole yarn about you and Grace. She
tried to break it to me gently, so I wouldn't feel too bad. She knew it
would be a shock to me, she said. It was a shock, in a way, but as for
feelin' bad, I didn't. I think the world of Grace. I'd do anything she
wanted me to do; but most the way down on the train--yes, and long afore
that--I'd been dreadin' my comin' home on one account. I dreaded tellin'
her that, unless she was real set on it, she'd better not marry me.

"You see, John, I've thought a lot sence I've been away. Had
consider'ble time to do it in. And the more I thought the less that
promise to dad seemed right. I'd have bet my sou-wester Gracie never
cared for me in the way a girl ought to care for a chap she's goin' to
ship as pilot for the rest of her days. And, as for me--well, I--I had
my reasons for not wantin' to marry her."

He paused again, sighed, started to speak, and then sat silent, looking
out of the window. Ellery laid a hand on his knee.

"Nat," said the minister, "you saved my life once, do you remember that?
I do, if you don't."

"Saved your life? What are you talkin' about? Oh! that time on the
flats? That wasn't savin' your life, 'twas savin' your clothes from
gettin' a wettin'."

"No, it was more than that. And now I guess you've saved it again, you
and Grace between you. Yes, and Aunt Keziah. Bless her! to think of her
going way up there to meet you and help us!"

"Yes. 'Twas like her, wasn't it? She said she knew I'd hear the yarn
when I got to Trumet, but she wanted me to hear it just as it was, and
nobody but she and Grace and you knew the whole truth about it. So she
come. I'm glad she did; not that I shouldn't have done the same, whoever
told me, but--"

"Nat, I want to tell you something. Something that only one other person
knows. Grace doesn't know it yet. Neither does Aunt Keziah--the whole of
it. And if she knew I told you even a part I'm afraid she would, as she
would say, 'skin me alive.' But I owe her--and you--more than I could
repay if I lived a thousand years. So I'm going to tell and take the
consequences."

The captain looked at him. "Well!" he exclaimed. "What's comin' now?
More secrets? Blessed if this ain't gettin' more excitin' than the South
Seas. I used to think excitement in Trumet was scurcer than cream in
poorhouse coffee, but I'll have to change my mind."

"Nat, when--that morning after your father died and after you and Grace
had agreed to--to--"

"To do somethin' neither of us wanted to do? Yes, I know. Go ahead."

"That morning Aunt Keziah came home to the parsonage and broke the
news to me. She did it as only she could do such a thing, kindly and
pityingly and--"

"Of course. That's Keziah."

"Yes. Well, as you can imagine, I was almost crazy. I made a fool of
myself, I expect; refused to believe her, behaved disgracefully, and at
last, when I had to believe it, threatened to run away and leave my work
and Trumet forever, like a coward. She made me stay."

"Did, hey?"

"Yes. She showed me it was my duty to face the music. When I whimpered
about my troubles she told me her own story. Then I learned what trouble
was and what pluck was, too. She told me about her marriage and--excuse
me for speaking of what isn't my business; yet it is mine, in a way--she
told me about you."

Captain Hammond did not answer. His good natured face clouded and he
shifted in his chair.

"She told me of you, Nat, all about you--and herself. And she told me
something else, which explains why she felt she must send you away, why
she thought your marriage to Grace would be a good thing."

"I know. She told you that that darn scamp Anse Coffin was alive."

The minister started violently. He gasped in surprise.

"You knew it? You KNEW it?" he stammered.

"I know it now. Have known it for over a year. My findin' it out was one
of the special Providences that's been helpin' along this last voyage of
mine. My second mate was a Hyannis man, name of Cahoon. One day, on
that pesky island, when we was eatin' dinner together, he says to me,
'Cap'n,' he says, 'you're from Trumet, ain't you?' I owned up. 'Know
anybody named Coffin there?' says he. I owned up to that, too. 'Well,'
he says, 'I met her husband last trip I was in the Glory of the Wave.'
I stared at him. 'Met his ghost, you mean,' I says. 'He's been dead
for years, and a good thing, too. Fell overboard and, not bein' used to
water, it killed him.'

"But he wouldn't have it so. 'I used to know Anse Coffin in New
Bedford,' he says. 'Knew him well's I know you. And when we was in port
at Havre I dropped in at a gin mill down by the water front and he come
up and touched me on the arm. I thought same as you, that he was dead,
but he wa'n't. He was three sheets in the wind and a reg'lar dock rat to
look at, but 'twas him sure enough. We had a long talk. He said he was
comin' back to Trumet some day. Had a wife there, he said. I told him,
sarcastic, that she'd be glad to see him. He laughed and said maybe not,
but that she knew he was alive and sent him money when he was hard up.
Wanted me to promise not to tell any Cape folks that I'd seen him, and I
ain't till now.'

"Well, you can imagine how I felt when Cahoon spun me that yarn. First
I wouldn't b'lieve it and then I did. It explained things, just as you
say, John. I could see now why Keziah gave me my walkin' papers. I could
see how she'd been sacrificin' her life for that scum."

"Yes. She wouldn't divorce him. She said she had taken him for better or
worse, and must stand by him. I tried to show her she was wrong, but it
was no use. She did say she would never live with him again."

"I should say not. LIVE with him! By the everlastin'! if he ever comes
within reach of my hands then--there's times when good honest murder is
justifiable and righteous, and it'll be done. It'll be done, you hear
me!"

He looked as if he meant it. Ellery asked another question.

"Did you tell her--Aunt Keziah--when you met her at the Narrows?" he
asked.

"No. But I shall tell her when I see her again. She shan't spoil her
life--a woman like that! by the Lord! WHAT a woman!--for any such crazy
notion. I swore it when I heard the story and I've sworn it every day
since. That's what settled my mind about Grace. Keziah Coffin belongs
to me. She always has belonged to me, even though my own pig-headedness
lost her in the old days."

"She cares for you, Nat. I know that. She as much as told me so."

"Thank you, John. Thank you. Well, I can wait now. I can wait, for
I've got something sure to wait for. I tell you, Ellery, I ain't a
church-goin' man--not as dad was, anyway--but I truly believe that this
thing is goin' to come out right. God won't let that cussed rascal live
much longer. He won't! I know it. But if he does, if he lives a thousand
years, I'll take her from him."

He was pacing the floor now, his face set like granite. Ellery rose, his
own face beaming. Here was his chance. At last he could pay to this man
and Keziah a part of the debt he owed.

Nat stopped in his stride. "Well!" he exclaimed. "I almost forgot, after
all. Keziah sent a note to you. I've got it in my pocket. She gave it to
me when she left me at Cohasset."

"Left you? Why! didn't she come back with you on the night train?"

"No. That's funny, too, and I don't understand it yet. We was together
all the afternoon. 'I was feelin' so good at seein' her that I took her
under my wing and we cruised all over that town together. Got dinner at
the tavern and she went with me to buy myself a new hat, and all that.
At first she didn't seem to want to, but then, after I'd coaxed a while,
she did. She was lookin' pretty sad and worn out, when I first met her,
I thought; but she seemed to get over it and we had a fine time. It
reminded me of the days when I used to get home from a voyage and we
were together. Then, when 'twas time for the night train we went down to
the depot. She gave me this note and told me to hand it to you to-day.

"'Good-by, Nat,' she says. 'We've had a nice day, haven't we?'

"'We have, for a fact,' I says. 'But what are you sayin' good-by for?'

"'Because I'm not goin' to Trumet with you,' says she. 'I'm goin' to the
city. I've got some business to see to there. Good-by.'

"I was set back, with all my canvas flappin'. I told her I'd go to
Boston with her and we'd come home to Trumet together to-morrow,
that's to-day. But she said no. I must come here and ease your mind and
Grace's. I must do it. So at last I agreed to, sayin' I'd see her in a
little while. She went on the up train and I took the down one. Hired
a team in Sandwich and another in Bayport and got to the tavern about
eleven. That's the yarn. And here's your note. Maybe it tells where
she's gone and why."

The minister took the note and tore open the envelope. Within was a
single sheet of paper. He read a few lines, stopped, and uttered an
exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked the captain.

Ellery did not answer. He read the note through and then, without a
word, handed it to his friend.

The note was as follows:


"DEAR JOHN:

"I am going away, as I told you I would if he came. He is coming.
Tuesday I got a letter from him. It was written at Kingston, Jamaica,
almost three months ago. I can't think why I haven't got it sooner, but
suppose it was given to some one to mail and forgotten. In it he said
he was tired of going to sea and was coming home to me. I had money,
he said, and we could get along. He had shipped aboard a brig bound
for Savannah, and from there he was going to try for a berth on a
Boston-bound vessel. So I am going away and not coming back. I could not
stand the disgrace and I could not see him. You and Grace won't need me
any more now. Don't worry about me. I can always earn a living while I
have my strength. Please don't worry. If he comes tell him I have gone
you do not know where. That will be true, for you don't. I hope you will
be very happy. I do hope so. Oh, John, you don't know how I hate to do
this, but I must. Don't tell Nat. He would do something terrible to him
if he came, and Nat knew. Just say I have been called away and may be
back some time. Perhaps I may. Love to you all. Good-by.

"Yours truly,

"KEZIAH COFFIN."


The captain stared at the note. Then he threw it to the floor and
started for the door. The minister sprang from his chair and called to
him.

"Nat," he cried. "Nat! Stop! where are you going?"

Hammond turned.

"Goin'?" he growled. "Goin'? I'm goin' to find her, first of all. Then
I'm comin' back to wait for him."

"But you won't have to wait. He'll never come. He's dead."

"Dead? DEAD? By the everlastin'! this has been too much for you, I ought
to have known it. I'll send the doctor here right off. I can't stay
myself. I've got to go. But--"

"Listen! listen to me! Ansel Coffin is dead, I tell you. I know it. I
know all about it. That was what I wanted to see you about. Did Keziah
tell you of the San Jose and the sailor who died of smallpox in this
very building? In that room there?"

"Yes. John, you--"

"I'm not raving. It's the truth. That sailor was Ansel Coffin. I watched
with him and one night, the night before he died, he spoke Keziah's
name. He spoke of New Bedford and of Trumet and of her, over and over
again. I was sure who he was then, but I called in Ebenezer Capen, who
used to know Coffin in New Bedford. And he recognized him. Nat, as sure
as you and I are here this minute, Ansel Coffin, Aunt Keziah's husband,
is buried in the Trumet cemetery."


CHAPTER XXI

IN WHICH MR. STONE WASHES HIS HANDS


Mr. Abner Stone, of Stone & Barker, marine outfitters and ship
chandlers, with a place of business on Commercial Street in Boston, and
a bank account which commanded respect throughout the city, was feeling
rather irritable and out of sorts. Poor relations are always a nuisance.
They are forever expecting something, either money--in Mr. Stone's case
this particular expectation was usually fruitless--or employment or
influence or something. Mr. Stone was rich, he had become so by his own
ability and unaided effort. He was sure of that--often mentioned it,
with more or less modesty, in the speeches which he delivered to his
Sunday-school class and at the dinners of various societies to which he
belonged. He was a self-made man and was conscious that he had done a
good job.

Therefore, being self-made, he saw no particular reason why he should
aid in the making of others. If people were poor they ought to get over
it. Poverty was a disease and he was no doctor. He had been poor once
himself, and no one had helped him. "I helped myself," he was wont to
say, with pride. Some of his rivals in business, repeating this remark,
smiled and added that he had been "helping himself" ever since.

Mr. Stone had "washed his hands" of his cousin, Keziah Coffin, or
thought he had. After her brother Solomon died she had written to him,
asking him to find her a position of some kind in Boston. "I don't want
money, I don't want charity," wrote Keziah. "What I want is work. Can
you get it for me, Abner? I write to you because father used to tell of
what you said to him about gratitude and how you would never rest until
you had done something in return for what he did for you."

Captain Ben Hall's kindness was the one thing Mr. Stone forgot when he
said no one had ever helped him. He disliked to be reminded of it. It
was a long while ago and the captain was dead. However, being reminded,
he had called upon a friend in the tailoring line and had obtained for
Keziah the place of sewing woman. She decided to become housekeeper at
the Trumet parsonage and so notified him. Then he washed his hands of
her.

But now he was compelled to soil them again. Keziah had appeared at
his office, without warning, and demanded that he find her a position.
"Demanded" was the proper word. Certainly she had not begged. She seemed
to feel that her demand was right and proper, and his acceding to it the
least he could do.

"What a fine place you've got here, Abner!" she said, inspecting the
office and the store. "I declare it's finer than the one you had when
you first went into business, afore you failed. I wish father could have
lived to see it. He'd have realized that his judgment was good, even
though his investment wasn't."

Captain Hall had invested largely in that first business, the one which
failed. Mr. Stone changed the subject. Later in the day he again sought
his friend, the tailor, and Keziah was installed in the loft of the
latter's Washington Street shop, beside the other women and girls who
sewed and sewed from seven in the morning until six at night. Mr. Stone
had left her there and come away, feeling that an unpleasant matter
was disposed of. He had made some inquiries as to where she intended
staying, even added a half-hearted invitation to dinner that evening at
his home. But she declined.

"No, thank you, Abner," she said, "I'm goin' to find a boardin' place
and I'd just as soon nobody knew where I was stayin', for the present.
And there's one thing I want to ask you: don't tell a soul I am here.
Not a soul. If anyone should come askin' for me, don't give 'em any
satisfaction. I'll tell you why some day, perhaps. I can't now."

This was what troubled Mr. Stone as he sat in his office. Why should
this woman wish to have her whereabouts kept a secret? There was a
reason for this, of course. Was it a respectable reason, or the other
kind? If the latter, his own name might be associated with the scandal.
He wished, for the fiftieth time, that there were no poor relations.

A boy came into the office. "There is some one here to see you, Mr.
Stone," he said.

"Who is it?"

"I don't know, sir. Looks like a seafaring man, a sea captain, I should
say--but he won't give his name. Says it's important and nobody but
you'll do."

"Humph! All right. Tell him to wait. I'll be out in a minute."

Sea captains and ship owners were Stone & Barker's best customers. The
senior partner emerged from the office with a smile on his face.

"Ah!" he said, extending his hand. "Glad to see you, Captain--er--"

"Hammond," replied the visitor. "Same to you, Mr. Stone."

"Fine weather for this time of year."

"Fine enough, Mr. Stone."

"Well, Captain Hammond, what can we do for you? Going to sail soon?"

"Not right away. Just made port, less'n a week ago. Home looks good to
me, for a spell, anyhow."

"So? Yes, I have no doubt. Let me see--where is your home, captain? I
should remember, of course, but--"

"Don't know why you should. This is my first trip in your latitude, I
guess. My home's at Trumet."

"Trumet?" Mr. Stone's tone changed.

"Yes. Trumet, down on the Cape. Ever been there? We think it's about as
good a place as there is."

"Hu-u-m! Trumet? Well, Captain Hammond, you wished to see me, I
understand."

"Yes. Fact is, Mr. Stone, I want to ask you where I can find Mrs. Keziah
Coffin. She's a relation of yours, I b'lieve, and she's come to Boston
lately. Only yesterday or the day afore. Can you tell me where she is?"

"Why do you wish to see her?"

"Oh, for reasons, personal ones. She's a friend of mine."

"I see. No, captain, I can't tell you where she is. Good morning."

Captain Nat was greatly disappointed.

"Hold on there, just a minute," he begged. "This is important, you
understand, Mr. Stone. I'm mighty anxious to find Kezi--Mrs. Coffin. We
thought, some of her friends and I, that most likely you'd know where
she was. Can't you give us any help at all? Hasn't she been here?"

"Good morning, Captain Hammond. You must excuse me, I'm busy."

He went into the office and closed the door. Captain Nat rubbed his
forehead desperately. He had been almost sure that Abner Stone would put
him on Keziah's track. Grace had thought so, too. She remembered what
the housekeeper had told concerning her Boston cousin and how the latter
had found employment for her when she contemplated leaving Trumet, after
her brother's death. Grace believed that Keziah would go to him at once.

Nat walked to the door and stood there, trying to think what to do next.
A smart young person, wearing a conspicuous suit of clothes, aided and
abetted by a vivid waistcoat and a pair of youthful but promising side
whiskers, came briskly along the sidewalk and stopped in front of him.

"Well, sir?" observed this person, with cheerful condescension.
"Anything I can do for you?"

Captain Nat turned his gaze upon the side whiskers and the waistcoat.

"Hey?" he queried.

"I say, is there anything I can do for you?"

The captain shook his head. "No-o," he drawled dryly, "I'm afraid not,
son. I admit that don't seem scarcely possible, but I am afraid it's
so."

"Looking for something in our line, was you?"

"Well, I don't know. What might be on your line--clothes?"

The bewhiskered one drew himself up. "I am connected with Stone &
Barker," he said sharply. "And, seeing you standing in our doorway, I
thought possibly--"

"Yes, yes. Beg your pardon, I'm sure. No, I don't want to buy anything.
I come to see Mr. Stone on a personal matter."

"He's busy, I suppose."

"So he says."

The young man smiled with serene satisfaction. "I'm not surprised," he
observed complacently. "We ARE a busy house, Mr--er--"

"Hammond's my name. Are you Mr. Barker?"

"No-o, my name is Prince."

"So? Silent partner in the firm, hey?"

"No-o, not exactly." Mr. Prince was slightly embarrassed. "No, I am a--a
salesman--at present. Was the matter you wished to see Mr. Stone about a
very private one?"

"Middlin'.'"

"Well, I asked because Mr. Stone is a busy man and we like to save him
all the--the--"

"Trouble you can, hey? That's nice of you, you must save him a lot,
Mr--er--King, was it?"

"No, Prince."

"Sure and sartin', Prince, of course. I knew 'twas connected with the
royal family. Well, Mr. Prince, I'm afraid even you can't help me nor
him out this time. I'm lookin' up a friend of mine, a widow lady from
down the Cape. She's a relation of Mr. Stone's, and she's come to Boston
durin' the last day or so. I thought likely he might know where she was,
that's all. That would be a little out of your latitude, hey?"

"I don't know. Her name wasn't Coffin, was it?"

Captain Nat started. "It certainly was," he answered eagerly. "How'd you
know that?"

Mr. Prince's complacence was superb. "Oh," he answered with
condescension, "Mr. Stone trusts me with a good many of his personal
affairs."

"I should think likely he would. But about Mrs. Coffin? You was goin' to
say?"

"She is with James Hallett & Co., the tailors, on Washington Street. Mr.
Stone found a place for her there, I believe. I--er--er--superintended
the carrying of her valise and--What?"

"Nothin', nothin'. Hum! Hallett & Co., tailors? What number Washin'ton
Street did you say?"

Mr. Prince gave the number.

"Thank you a lot," said Captain Nat, with fervor. "Good-by, Mr. Prince.
Hope the next time I come you'll be in the firm. Good day, sir."

"Good day. Nothing else I can do? And you won't wait for Mr. Stone? Very
good. Is there any message for him that you would like to leave?"

"Hey?" Nat had started to go, but now he paused and turned. There was
a grim twinkle in his eye. "Message?" he repeated. "Why, ye-es, I don't
know but there is. You just give Mr. Stone Cap'n Hammond's compliments
and tell him I'm lookin' forward to interviewin' him some time. Just
tell him that, will you?"

"I'll tell him. Glad to have met you, Captain Hammond."

The captain nodded solemnly. "Say, Mr. King," he said, "you ain't half
so glad as I am."

Mr. Prince strutted into the store.

"Who was that chap you were talking with?" asked a fellow-clerk.

"Oh, a hayseed who wanted to see the old man. Poor relation, I guess.
I headed him off. Stone is always telling us that time is money, so I
saved both of 'em for him. He ought to thank me. Wouldn't be surprised
if I got the raise I've been asking for."

Mr. Prince did not get the raise, nor the thanks. But he was surprised.


In the workshop of Hallett & Co., Keziah sat sewing busily. The window
near her was closed, stuck fast, and through the dingy panes she could
see only roofs and chimneys. The other women and girls near her
chatted and laughed, but she was silent. She did not feel like talking,
certainly not like laughing. The garment she was at work on was a coat,
a wedding coat, so the foreman had told her, with a smile; therefore she
must be very particular.

She wondered idly whose coat it might be and who its future wearer was
to marry. This reminded her of the minister and Grace. They would be
happy now, her talk with Nat had assured her of that, and they, too,
would be married one of these days. But she would not attend the
wedding. She wondered what John had said when he read her note. He and
Grace would be sorry for her, of course; but there was nothing they
could do to help. No one could help her, no one. Perhaps by this time
the man she had run away from had reached Trumet and her secret was
known. How Didama and the rest would spread the tale! How Captain
Elkanah and Annabel would sneer and exult! They hated her because she
was the minister's friend. And Nat, poor fellow, what would he do? Well,
at least he would understand now.

The narrow stairway leading up to the workshop ended in a little
boxed-in room where the finished garments were hung to await the final
pressing. From behind the closed door of this room came the sound of
voices, apparently in heated argument. One of these voices was that of
Larry, the errand boy. Larry was speaking shrilly and with emphasis. The
other voice was lower in key and the words were inaudible.

"No, sir, you can't," declared Larry. "You can't, I tell you. The boss
don't let nobody in there and--Hold on! Hold on!"

The other voice made a short but evidently earnest answer. Larry again
expostulated. The workers looked up from their sewing. The door opened
and Larry appeared, flushed and excited.

"Where's Mr. Upham?" he demanded. "Mr. Upham!"

Upham was the foreman of the workroom. At the moment he was downstairs
in conversation with the head of the house. A half dozen gave this
information.

"What's the matter? Who is it?" asked several.

"I don't know who 'tis. It's a man and he's crazy, I think. I told him
he couldn't come in here, but he just keeps comin'. He wants to see
somebody named Coffin and there ain't no Coffins here."

Keziah bent lower over the wedding coat. Her hand shook and she dropped
the needle.

"I told him we didn't keep coffins," declared Larry. "This ain't no
undertaker's. Where's Mr. Upham?"

Keziah's nearest neighbor leaned toward her.

"I guess it's somebody to see you," she said. "Your name is Coffin,
ain't it?"

"No, no. That is, it can't be anybody to see me. I don't want to see
anybody. Tell him so, whoever it is. I can't see anybody. I--NAT!"

He stood in the doorway, beckoning to her.

"Keziah," he said, "come here. I want you. I'll tell you why in a
minute. Come!"

She hesitated. In a measure she was relieved, for she had feared the
man at the door might be her husband. But she was greatly agitated and
troubled. Everyone in the place was looking at her.

"Nat," she said, trying to speak firmly, "I can't see you now. I'm very
busy. Please go away."

"Come!"

"I can't come. Go away. Please!"

"Keziah, I'm waitin'. And I'm goin' to wait if I stay here all night.
Come!"

She obeyed then. She could not have a scene there, before all those
strangers. She stepped past him into the little room. He followed and
closed the door.

"Nat," she said, turning to him, "why did you come? How could you be so
cruel? I--"

He interrupted her, but not with words. The next moment his arms were
about her and she was pressed tight against the breast of his blue
jacket.

"Keziah," he whispered, "I've come to take you home. Home for good. No,
stay where you are and I'll tell you all about it. Praise be to God!
we're off the rocks at last. All that's left is to tow you into port,
and, by the everlastin', that's what I'm here for!"


When Upham came up the stairs after his long interview with "the boss,"
he found the door at the top closed. When he rattled the latch that door
was opened by a stranger.

"Are you Mr. Hallett?" asked Captain Nat briskly.

"No, I'm not. Mr. Hallett is in his office on the first floor. But
what--"

"On the main deck, hey? Well, all right; we won't trouble him. You'll
do just as well; I judge you're one of the mates of this craft. You tell
Mr. Hallett that this lady here has decided not to cruise with him any
longer. No fault to find, you understand, but she's got a better berth.
She's goin' to ship along with me. Ain't that so, Keziah?"

Keziah, pale, trembling, scarcely realizing the situation even yet,
did not speak. But Captain Nat Hammond seemed to find his answer in her
silence. A few minutes later, her arm in his, they descended the gloomy,
dusty stairs, and emerged into the sunshine together.

That afternoon Mr. Abner Stone again "washed his hands" of his poor
relation--this time, as he indignantly declared, "for good and all."


CHAPTER XXII

IN WHICH KEZIAH'S PARSON PREACHES ONCE MORE


Time has wrought many changes in Trumet. The packet long since ceased to
ply between the village and Boston, the stage has been superseded by
the locomotive, the old "square-riggers," commanded by Cape Cod men, no
longer sail the seas. Along the main road the houses have changed hands.
Didama Rogers peers no more from her parlor window; that parlor is now
profaned by the frivolous and irreverent summer boarder. But the old
residents love to talk of the days that are gone and if you happen to
catch Mr. Isaac Higgins, now postmaster and a dignified member of the
board of selectmen, in a reminiscent mood he will very likely tell you
of the meeting of the parish committee called by its chairman, Elkanah
Daniels, to oust the Rev. John Ellery from the pulpit of the Regular
church.

"I'll never forget," says Mr. Higgins, "that parish committee meetin' if
I live a thousand year. I, and two or three other young shavers, was hid
in the little room off the vestry--the room where they kept the dishes
they used for church suppers--and we heard the whole business. Of course
nobody knew that Nat was goin' to marry Keziah then, but they did know
that he wa'n't goin' to marry Grace Van Horne, and had given her up
to the minister of his own accord. So Daniels's guns was spiked and he
didn't stand no chance at all. However, you'd never have guessed it
to look at him. He marched into that meetin' and up to the platform as
stiff and dignified as if he'd swallered a peck of starch. He called
the meetin' to order--'twas a full one, for all hands and the cook was
there--and then got up to speak.

"He opened fire right off. He raked John Ellery fore and aft. The
parson, he said, had disgraced the society and his sacred profession
and should be hove overboard immediate. 'Twas an open secret, he said.
Everybody knew how he, minister of a Reg'lar church, had been carryin'
on with a Come-Outer girl, meetin' her unbeknownst to anyone, and so on.
As he got warmed up on this subject he got more bitter and, though he
didn't come out open and say slanderous things, his hints was as nigh
that as a pig's snout is to his squeal. Even through the crack of the
dish-closet door I could see the bristles risin' on the back of Cap'n
Zeb Mayo's neck.

"At last Cap'n Zeb couldn't stand it no longer.

"'Belay there!' he sings out, jumpin' to his feet. 'I want to ask you
one question, Elkanah Daniels: Are you tryin' to say somethin' against
Grace Van Horne's character?'

"Well, that was a sort of sticker, in a way, and I cal'late Daniels
realized it. He 'hum-ha'd' and barked a little and then give in that he
couldn't swear the Van Horne person's character wa'n't all right, but--"

"'Couldn't swear!' snorts Zeb. 'You better not try to, not when the
minister or Nat's around. Aw, belay! you want us to fire John Ellery
out of this society--the best minister it ever had or ever will
have--because he had the sense to get sweet on a good clean girl and the
spunk to ask her to marry him. And you're down on her because she's been
brought up in a Come-Outer family--at least, that's the reason you give
out, though some of us have suspicions 'tain't the real one. Why! she
risked what she thought was smallpox to keep him from dyin' that night
she picked him up, ravin' distracted, in the middle of the lighthouse
lane, and if he hadn't married her after that I, for one, would have
been willin' to vote to give him his walkin' papers, Come-Outer she may
have been, but, by time, she's got religion that's good enough for me
and I'll be proud to see her the wife of my minister. Don't let's have
no more chin music. We know what you want and what you called this
meetin' for; now let's vote on it.'

"Three or four sung out 'Question' and 'Vote.' But Elkanah held up his
hand.

"'Gentlemen,' says he, 'before I ask for the vote I want to say just one
word. I've worshiped in this meetin' house ever sence I was a child. I
was christened in it; my father worshiped here afore me; I've presided
over the meetin's of this body for years. But I tell you now that if you
vote to keep that rascally hypocrite in your pulpit I shall resign from
the committee and from the society. It'll be like cuttin' off my right
hand, but I shall do it. Are you ready for the vote? Those in favor of
retaining the present minister of this parish will rise. Those opposed
will remain seated.'

"Every man on the floor stood up. Daniels himself was the only one that
stayed settin' down.

"'It is a vote,' says he, white as a sheet, and his voice trembling.
'Gentlemen, I bid you good day.'

"He took up his hat and cane, give one look around the vestry, as if
he was sayin' good-by to it, and marched down the aisle as straight and
starchy as he'd come into it. Only, when he reached the door, he put up
one hand as if he was steadyin' himself. There was precious few in that
vestry that liked Elkanah Daniels, but I'm bettin' high there wa'n't a
one who didn't feel sorry for him then.

"'Twas quiet as could be for a minute or so after he'd gone. Then Cap'n
Zeb draws a big breath and flings up his hand.

"'Shipmates,' says he, 'this is the Almighty's house and we've got to do
it quiet, but I propose three whisperin' cheers for the Rev. John Ellery
and the lady that's goin' to be his wife.'

"So they give 'em--hearty, too, if they was whispered--and that's all
there is to that meetin' worth tellin' about."

Captain Daniels and his daughter moved to Boston that summer. They never
came back to Trumet to live. Annabel remained single until after her
father's death; then she married a man very much younger and poorer
than she was. It was remarked by acquaintances of the couple that the
difference in age became less and less apparent as their married life
continued.

"Humph!" observed Captain Zeb, summing up the situation, "he started
about ten year astern, but he'll beat her on the run into the cemetery,
now you mark my words. Annabel's temper's cal'lated to keep any average
chap drivin' on that course, bows under. There's a three-reef breeze
blowin' off her tongue, day and night."

On a Sunday morning, a few weeks after the committee meeting, the
Regular church was crowded. John Ellery was to preach his first sermon
since the San Jose came ashore. Every member of the congregation was
present. Even Mrs. Prince, feeble but garrulous, was there. Gaius
Winslow, having delivered his brood of children at the church door, made
a special trip in his carryall to fetch the old lady. Captain Zebedee
and Mrs. Mayo beamed from their pew. Dr Parker and his wife smiled at
them across the aisle. Didama Rogers's new bonnet was a work of art and
her neck threatened to twist itself off as she turned to see each one
who came in.

Lavinia Pepper sailed to the front. She was dressed in a new black
alpaca which rustled so very much like silk that nearsighted people
might have been deceived by it. With her was a man, apparently suffering
from strangulation because of the height and tightness of his collar.
"It's Caleb Pratt, from Sandwich," whispered Didama. "Thankful Payne's
relation, you know. Have you heard what folks are sayin'? I guess
it's true, because--Look at Kyan! you'd think he was goin' to his own
funeral."

Abishai's expression was not cheerful, certainly. He followed Mr. Pratt
and his sister to the Pepper pew and subsided sadly in the corner next
the wall. Occasionally he was observed to wipe his forehead and once--it
was during the prayer--he groaned audibly. Lavinia's dig in the ribs
prevented his repeating the sound, but, judging by his looks, he
continued to groan in spirit.

There was a stir at the door. All heads swung in that direction--all but
Mr. Pepper's, that is. The minister and Grace were coming up the aisle
and behind them came Captain Nat Hammond and Keziah Coffin. Nat was
smiling and self-possessed. Never before in his life had he entered the
Regular meeting house as a worshiper, but he seemed to be bearing the
ordeal bravely. It was Grace's first visit to the church, also, and she
was plainly embarrassed. To be stared at by eighty-odd pairs of eyes,
and to catch whispered comments from the starers' tongues, is likely to
embarrass one.

Yet the comments were all friendly.

"I declare!" whispered Mrs. Prince, "I never see her look so pretty
afore. I knew she was the best lookin' girl in this town, but I never
realized she was SUCH a beauty. Well, there's one thing sartin'--we've
got the handsomest parson and parson's wife in THIS county, by about ten
mile and four rows of apple trees. And there's the other bride that's
goin' to be. I never see Keziah look so well, neither."

Keziah did look well. Her parson had emerged triumphant from his battle
with disease and adverse fate and was more than ever the idol of his
congregation. He was to marry the girl of his choice--and hers. The
housekeeper's ears were still ringing with the thanks of John and Grace.
Both seemed to feel that to her, Keziah Coffin, more than anyone else,
they owed their great joy. Some of the things they said she would never
forget. And her own life, too, was freed forever of its burden, the
secret which had hung over her for so many years. Only a very few knew
that secret, and they would not disclose it. Toward the memory of the
man buried in the stranger's lot at the cemetery she felt almost
kindly now. While he lived she had feared and dreaded him, now she was
beginning to forgive. For he had paid his debt with his life, and with
her, beside her, was the other, the one whom she had loved, had given
up, had mourned for, and who was now to be hers always. No wonder Keziah
looked well. She was happy, and happiness is a wondrous beautifier.

The minister went up the stairs to the pulpit. He was still white and
thin, but his eyes were bright and his voice clear. He gave out the
opening hymn and the service began.

They said it was the finest sermon ever preached in that church, and
perhaps it was. When it was over, before the benediction was pronounced,
Ellery stepped out from behind the pulpit to the edge of the platform.
He looked over the friendly faces upturned to his and, for an instant,
it seemed that he could not trust himself to speak.

"My friends," he said, "I cannot let you go without a personal word. I
owe you so much, all of you, that nothing I can say will convey to you
my feeling of gratitude and love for this congregation and this church.
You have stood by me all through. You trusted me and believed in me. I
came to Trumet a stranger. I have found here the truest friends a man
could hope to find--yes, and more than friends. If I live, and while
I live, I shall hope to prove by the best effort that is in me my
realization of the great debt I owe you and my desire to repay it, even
though the payment must, of necessity, be so inadequate. God bless you
all--and thank you."

"Wa'n't it lovely!" gushed Didama. "And when he said that about true
friends he was lookin' straight at Gracie all the time."

"Didn't seem to me so," declared Gaius Winslow. "I thought he was
lookin' at Cap'n Hammond."

"Well, now, that's queer," put in Mrs. Parker, the doctor's wife. "I
would have sworn he was looking at Keziah Coffin."

Captain Zebedee grinned. "I cal'late you're all right," he observed. "I
wouldn't wonder if he was lookin' at all of 'em."

There was much hand shaking and congratulation and the church emptied
slowly. Among the last to leave were the Peppers and Mr. Pratt. Lavinia
took the minister aside.

"Mr. Ellery," she simpered, "I've--that is, Caleb and me--will prob'ly
want you to--That is, we want you to be the one--"

"Yes, Miss Pepper?"

"Oh, my sakes! you see--'Bishy dear, come here a minute, won't you?"

Kyan approached, the picture of desolation.

"What do you want?" he asked gruffly.

"Heavens to Betsy! Don't look so sour. A body'd think you was goin'
to be hung, to look at you. 'Bishy, you tell Mr. Ellery all about it,
there's a dear. He'll tell you, Mr. Ellery; and remember we count on
you. Neither me nor Caleb wont have nobody else."

She seized Mr. Pratt by the arm and led him hastily away. Kyan looked
after them.

"Hung?" he muttered. "I wish, by godfreys mighty, I had the hangin' of
SOME folks! I'd put a tighter collar on 'em than they've got now, I bet
you!"

The minister's lips twitched. He knew what was coming. Hints of a
surprising nature had been circulating about Trumet.

"What's the matter, Mr. Pepper?" he asked.

"Matter? Matter enough! You know what she's goin' to do? She's goin' to
marry THAT!"

The last word was emphasized by a furious gesticulation toward the back
of the gentleman from Sandwich.

"Who? Mr. Pratt? Is your sister to marry him? Indeed! I congratulate
them both--and you."

"Me? What in tunket--I ask your pardon, Mr. Ellery, for talkin' so in
the meetin' house--but what are you congratulatin' me for?"

"Why, because your sister is to have a good husband; at least people
speak highly of him."

"Ugh!"

"And because--well, Mr. Pepper, you have been quite confidential with
me; we have shared secrets, you know; and I thought possibly the new
arrangement might make it a bit more pleasant for you."

"Pleasant? How?"

"I suppose Mr. Pratt will take his bride home to Sandwich, and you,
being here alone, will be more free."

"Free?" Kyan repeated the word wrathfully. "Free! I'll be about as free
as a settin' hen under a barrel, I will. Is a feller free when he's
got two pickin' at him instead of one? I thought I was goin' to have a
little peace and comfort; I thought that same as you, Mr. Ellery. I've
had my suspicions as to her and him for some time. That day when I
cal'lated I'd locked her up and come back to find she'd gone buggy
ridin', I thought 'twas queer. When she went to conference and left
me alone I smelt a rat. When she took to letter writin' the smell got
stronger; until the last few weeks I've been sartin of the game she was
up to. And I never complained, no sir! Some brothers would have ripped
up the eternal foundations afore they'd have let their sister break
up their home and desert 'em for a stiff-necked, bald-headed old shoe
peddler like--"

"Hush! hush! Mr. Pepper. You forget--"

"No, I don't forget, nuther. Mr. Ellery, you don't know it all. When
Laviny come to me and told me what she was goin' to do, was I obstinate?
Did I stand on my rights as head of the family and tell her she couldn't
do it? No, sir-ee, I didn't! I was resigned. I says to her, 'Laviny,'
I says, 'I won't say that I shan't be turrible lonesome without you. I
won't say that I ain't sort of shocked and grieved at our partin' after
all these years. But what's my personal feelin's when I compare 'em with
your happiness? Nothin', nothin' at all!' I says. 'Bless you, Laviny,'
says I. 'When you goin' to go away?' And what do you s'pose she says to
me? Why, that she wa'n't goin' away at all. That--that Pratt thing
has sold out his shoe store up to Sandwich and is comin' here to live.
Comin' to live at our HOUSE, mind you, with her and with ME! ''Twill be
so nice for you, 'Bishy dear,' she says, 'to have a man in the house
to keep you comp'ny and look out for you when I ain't round.' Godfreys
mighty!"

This portion of Kyan's disclosure was surprising, if the announcement of
his sister's engagement was not.

"Mr. Pratt is coming to Trumet?" the minister repeated. "What for? What
is he going to do here?"

"Keep shoe store, I s'pose likely. Laviny says there's a good openin'
for one in this town. I told her the best openin' I could think of for
him was the well and I hoped to the nation he'd fall into it. Then she
went for me like a dogfish after a herrin' and I never had a taste of
vittles till I'd took it all back and said I was glad he was goin' to
live with us. Free! Don't talk to me about freedom! Godfreys mighty!"

Ellery smothered his desire to laugh and expressed sympathy. Abishai
listened in sullen silence.

"Well," he said, turning to go, "I ain't goin' to stand it, if I can
help it. I've been doin' some thinkin' on my own account and there's
two ways of gettin' even. That Caleb critter is marryin' into our family
'cause he knows I'm well off. I'll cheat him, by godfreys! I'll will
every cent of my fifteen hundred dollars to the poor or the heathen or
somethin'. I will, sure's taxes."

The minister was obliged to laugh, then.

"I wouldn't do that," he said. "From what I hear, Mr. Pratt is worth
several times fifteen hundred."

"I know it; but he's so dum mean that 'twould break his heart to see
even ten cents gettin' away from him. However, that ain't my only plan.
He and Laviny ain't got any mortgage on the marryin' business.
Other folks can do it as well as them. What do you think of Hannah
Poundberry?"

"What do I think of her? What do you mean?"

"Never mind what I mean. Just you keep that in your head, Mr. Ellery.
You remember that I asked you, as man to man, 'What do you think of
Hannah Poundberry?'--Yes, yes, Laviny, I'm a-comin'. They want me to
ask you to marry 'em," he added. "I s'pose you'll have to. But say, Mr.
Ellery, when you do, just tell Pratt that your usual price for the
job is ten dollars. That'll spile his honeymoon for him, or I miss my
guess."

He turned away and moved sulkily toward his beckoning sister and her
escort; but wheeled once more to add, in a mysterious whisper, "Don't
you forget now, Mr. Ellery. Remember that question I put to you: 'What
do you think of'--Yes, yes, La-viny, I hear you!--of you know who?'"


That evening, at the parsonage, Keziah was clearing the table and
Captain Nat was helping her. A happy party of four had enjoyed the meal,
John and Mrs. Coffin acting as hosts and Grace and the captain being the
invited guests. Now the younger couple had gone over to the church, the
bell of which was ringing for evening service.

"Hurry up, Keziah," urged Nat. "If you and me don't get decks cleared
pretty soon we'll be late for meetin', and I'd hate to do that,
considerin' I'm such a brand-new disciple, as you might say. What do we
do next, shorten sail? Like this, hey?"

He pulled the cloth from the table, sending the crumbs flying in all
directions, and proceeded to fold it, after a fashion.

"There!" he exclaimed with satisfaction; "there she is, canvas furled
and under bare poles. Now we can clear out, can't we? What's the
matter?"

Keziah took the cloth from his hands and refolded it.

"Nat Hammond," she said, laughing, "you may be a good sailor, but you're
an awful poor housekeeper. Look at the mess you've made of that floor."

Nat looked at the scattered crumbs and shook his head.

"By the everlastin'!" he observed, "I did make dirty weather on that
tack, didn't I? Cal'late I ain't much of a housekeeper, same as you say.
Maybe that's why I was so dreadful anxious to get a good one to cruise
along with me. Well, I've got her. I'm satisfied."

He walked to the back door of the kitchen, threw it open, and stood
looking out.

"Keziah," he said, "come here a minute."

She came from the dining room and stood at his side. He put an arm about
her.

"Look off there," he said, pointing with his free hand. "See that?"

The sun was just setting and all the west was gorgeous with crimson and
purple and yellow. The bay was spangled with fire, the high sand bluffs
along the shore looked like broken golden ingots. The fields and swamps
and salt meadows, rich in their spring glory of bud and new leaf, were
tinged with the ruddy glow. The Trumet roofs were bathed in it, the
old packet, asleep at her moorings by the breakwater, was silhouetted
against the radiance. The church bell had ceased to ring and there was
not a sound, except the low music of the distant surf.

"Look at it, Keziah," urged Captain Nat.

"I'm lookin', Nat," she answered. "It's beautiful."

"Ain't it? I love it, you know that, and I never thought I should be
anxious for the time to come when I must leave it. But I am. I want to
go."

They were to be married in another month. It would be a double wedding,
for Grace and the minister were to be married at the same time. Then Nat
and his wife were to go to New York, where a new ship, just out of
the builders' hands, was to be ready for him. She was a fine one, this
successor to the Sea Mist. She had been building for more than a year
and when Captain Hammond returned, safe and sound, and with their money
in his possession, the owners decided at once that he should command the
addition to their fleet. She was to sail for Liverpool and Keziah was to
be a passenger.

"I can't hardly wait to get to sea," went on Nat. "Think of it! No more
lonesome meals in the cabin, thinkin' about you and about home. No, sir!
you and home'll be right aboard with me. Think of the fun we'll have in
the foreign ports. London, and you and me goin' sightseein' through it!
And Havre and Gibraltar and Marseilles and Genoa and--and--by and by,
Calcutta and Hong Kong and Singapore. I've seen 'em all, of course, but
you haven't. I tell you, Keziah, that time when I first saw a real hope
of gettin' you, that time after I'd learned from John that that big
trouble of yours was out of the way forever, on my way up to Boston in
the cars I made myself a promise--I swore that if you did say yes to me
I'd do my best to make the rest of your life as smooth and pleasant as
the past so far had been rough. I ain't rich enough to give you what you
deserve, nowhere near; but I'll work hard and do my best, my girl--you
see."

Keziah was looking out over the bay, her eyes brighter than the sunset.
Now she turned to look up into his face.

"Rich!" she repeated, with a little catch in her voice. "Rich! there
never was a woman in this world so rich as I am this minute. Or so
happy, either."

========================================
